                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6125
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Armenia                            Project ID:    P133705
                            Project Name:     Second Community Agriculture Resource Management and Competitiveness
                                              Project (P133705)
                            Task Team         Nicolas Ahouissoussi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       25-Mar-2014                          Estimated   30-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: ECSAR                                 Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Animal production (80%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (5%),
                                              Agricultural extension and research (9%), Public administration- Agriculture,
                                              fishing and forestry (6%)
                            Theme(s):         Other rural development (45%), Rural services and infrastructure (45%), Rural
                                              markets (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      40.00           Total Bank Financing:                30.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                      10.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   23.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              7.00
                              Total                                                                                   40.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                                                      Page 1 of 10
                         The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to (i) improve productivity and sustainability
                         of pasture and livestock systems in targeted communities and (ii) increase the marketed production
                         from selected livestock and high value agri-food value chains.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         The Second Community Agriculture Resource Management and Competitiveness Project
                         (CARMAC Project II) will consist of four components:

                         Component 1: Community/Pasture Livestock Management System (US$ 28.09 million). This
                         component objective is to continue the implementation of an efficient and sustainable community
                         managed pasture/fodder based livestock production system in communities where livestock is a
                         primary source of livelihood and where there is a strong interest in improving their pasture
                         production. The communities will be in addition to the 55 already included in the CARMAC project.
                         The component will fund three main activities:

                         1.1 Development of Sustainable Pasture/ Livestock Management Plans (US$ 3.67 million).
                         PUCs, comprising all community pasture users, will be created in up to 100 communities in the eight
                         Marzes with significant pasture areas (out of 10 in the country). The PUCs will be responsible for
                         developing and implementing PMLDPs, with the participatory process supported by Marz Support
                         Teams (MSTs) and technical experts of APIU. The PMLDPs will identify: (a) measures to improve
                         pasture productivity, such as rotational grazing, protecting areas for regeneration, pasture
                         rehabilitation, improving access to remote pastures, and needs for supplementary fodder production;
                         (b) stock watering points for a more balanced use of grazing areas; (c) animal health requirements
                         and breed improvement measures; (d) agricultural machinery for hay and fodder production; (e)
                         measures to improve the marketability of livestock products; (f) training requirements; and (g)
                         responsibilities for implementation of the planned activities, targets and indicators. Implementation
                         of the plans will be further supported through mobilization of community veterinarians.

                         1.2 Community Fund for Implementation of Plans (US$ 24.00 million).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Grants will be provided for each PUC to implement their PMLDP. The grant amounts will average
                         about US$ 200,000 and will not exceed US$ 300,000 per community. Grant financing is intended
                         for: (a) infrastructure to access and use remote pastures, such as spot road improvements, stock
                         watering points, shelters and stock-pens; (b) milk collection points with cooling equipment; (c)
                         machinery to produce and harvest fodder; (d) costs of rehabilitation measures for degraded areas
                         such as fencing, weed and shrub control, and re-seeding; (e) fodder production; (f) community-based
                         disease control programs including for market-limiting diseases, zoonoses and parasite control; (g)
                         artificial insemination; (h) training and advisory services; and (i) PUC support, such as management
                         training, office equipment and furnishings.

                         1.3 Women/Youth Special Support Program (US$ 0.42 million).
                         A special training and mobilization activity would target women and rural youth with the aim of
                         enhancing their participation in the PUCs and communal decision-making processes around livestock
                         and pasture management and to foster engagement by the younger generation in livestock
                         production. Linked to Component 2 on Value Chain Development, training would also be provided
                         to interested women and youth on the development of food businesses, and support provided to
                         women- and youth-run food businesses to apply for grant sub-project funding available under this
                         activity.

                         Component 2: Value Chain Development (US$ 6.99 million).

                                                                     Page 2 of 10
                         The objective of this component is to increase the ability of Armenian agricultural producers and
                         processors to meet domestic demand and access international market opportunities in the food value
                         chains of fodder-based milk and meat, and in processed fruit and vegetables where Armenia has an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         advantage.

                         The project will identify bottlenecks such as knowledge gaps in market requirements and quality
                         standards, inadequate facilities and equipment to meet national and/or international food safety
                         requirements and product standards, and weak linkages between the processors and producers. To
                         address the bottlenecks, targeted funding would be provided for up to 80 sub-projects in the amount
                         from US$ 8,000 up to US$ 50,000 will be funded.

                         Component 3: Strengthening Public Sector Institutions (US$ 2.59 million).
                         The objective of this component is to increase the capacity of public sector institutions to facilitate
                         business development and enable market access in the selected value chains supported under
                         components 1 and 2. The component will provide technical assistance, as well as will finance
                         delivery of civil works and provision of goods.

                         Component 4: Project Coordination and Management (US$ 2.22 million).
                         The project would continue to be coordinated by the existing APIU of the Ministry of Agriculture.
                         The project would use the ongoing CARMAC Project structure for financial management,
                         procurement, monitoring and evaluation, and environmental and social safeguards. The project
                         would provide incremental project management costs in these areas, additional technical specialists
                         as identified during further project preparation, costs of transport and field visits, costs of impact
                         assessments including project evaluations, and audit.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Component 1 of the Project will be implemented in the selected mountainous communities in
                         Armenia where livestock is a main source of livelihood, and which are dependent on grassland and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         pasture ecosystems. Other activities supported by the project will be implemented at the national
                         level, with no geographic predetermination. The locations for the four veterinary service centers
                         (VSC) to be constructed under the Project are not yet known and will be determined during project
                         implementation. It is expected that these would be constructed on public lands which will be
                         transferred to the balance of the Ministry of Agriculture.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)
                         Sarah G. Michael (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The Project will support development and
                          BP 4.01                                              implementation of pasture/livestock management
                                                                               plans, which are likely to imply provision/
                                                                               rehabilitation of light infrastructure for pasture
                                                                               operation such as access roads, shepherd shelters,
                                                                               animal watering points, and other similar
                                                                               elements as the demand may be. Provision of
                                                                               matching grants for value chain sub-projects will



                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                                                                     be aimed at enhancing storage and processing of
                                                                     agricultural produce through the provision of
                                                                     improved premises and technologies. These
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     activities carry small to medium risks to the
                                                                     natural environment and trigger OP/BP 4.01. The
                                                                     project is classified as environmental Category B.

                                                                     According to the Project design, it is expected
                                                                     that individual activities to be supported will be
                                                                     multiple in number and will get defined/approved
                                                                     on the rolling basis. The general nature and scope
                                                                     of the potential impacts of these activities are
                                                                     similar and well predictable. An Environmental
                                                                     and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was
                                                                     developed at the Project preparation stage through
                                                                     revision of the EMF currently being used for the
                                                                     purposes of CARMAC Project implementation.
                                                                     ESMF carries environmental screening,
                                                                     assessment, management planning, and
                                                                     monitoring requirements for individual
                                                                     investments. This includes preparation of site-
                                                                     specific Environmental Management Plans
                                                                     (EMPs) for individual activities. EMP Checklist
                                                                     for Small and Medium Construction Activities
                                                                     will be used for lower risk Category B
                                                                     investments, while preparation of more
                                                                     comprehensive EMPs may be required for higher
                                                                     risk Category B sub-projects. EMPs will include
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     methodology and institutional arrangements for
                                                                     monitoring their implementation.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes           Pasture management plans may include
                                                                     enhancement of fodder production, and matching
                                                                     grants to agro-producers may support storage of
                                                                     the primary agricultural products, both of which
                                                                     could imply pesticide application. Therefore, the
                                                                     project triggers OP 4.09. The framework Pest
                                                                     Management Plan (PMP) developed for ongoing
                                                                     CARMAC Project was included into the ESMF of
                                                                     the CARMAC Project II to guide development of
                                                                     sub-project specific PMPs, as required, in the
                                                                     course of the Project implementation. The
                                                                     CARMAC Project II is expected to provide
                                                                     support to the organic agro-production and


                                                             Page 4 of 10
                                                                            product labeling. TA for this activity will include
                                                                            raising awareness of the Integrated Pest
                                                                            Management and dissemination of its techniques.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The Project is not expected to involve land
                            4.12                                            acquisition or physical displacement. However, as
                                                                            the precise sites for construction of premises for
                                                                            the four new Veterinary Service Centers (VSCs)
                                                                            are not yet known, this policy has been triggered
                                                                            and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has
                                                                            been prepared. The RPF provides detailed
                                                                            guidance and criteria for the development of
                                                                            investment-specific Resettlement Action Plans
                                                                            (RAPs), which would be prepared and
                                                                            implemented prior to commencement of works at
                                                                            a site where resettlement or land use or
                                                                            acquisition was required. The RPF will be
                                                                            included as an annex to the Project Operations
                                                                            Manual.

                                                                            Any restrictions of access to natural resources or
                                                                            agricultural lands which arise under the Project
                                                                            will only be allowed when they result from
                                                                            community decision-making processes, deemed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            satisfactory to the Bank, which provide for
                                                                            identification of appropriate measures to mitigate
                                                                            any adverse effects on vulnerable members of the
                                                                            community. The processes have been introduced
                                                                            to the ongoing CARMAC Project, in which a
                                                                            balanced representation of the diversity of Pasture
                                                                            User Association (PUA) members and a robust
                                                                            system of grievance redress mechanisms are
                                                                            observed.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues



                                                                    Page 5 of 10
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           The Project supports adoption of sustainable management of pastures, improvement of the quality
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of veterinary service provision, and adoption of productive and sustainable farming and other
                           agricultural practices. All of these are expected to have positive long-term environmental impacts
                           through arresting soil erosion and degradation under pastures, preserving biodiversity of meadows
                           and forest lands used for grazing, and cutting threats to human health from cattle disease.
                           However, while assisting farmers in increasing outputs from farming, animal growing and dairy
                           production, there is a potential risk of causing negative environmental impacts. More specifically,
                           poor planning of pasture rotation may damage vegetation along access roads and within currently
                           abandoned remote pasture lands; poor application of agrochemicals may cause increase in nutrient
                           load and pesticide pollution of water and soil; organic waste from animal farms, slaughter houses,
                           and milk processing centers may also increase nutrient pollution to the environment. Management
                           of manure, liquids, fragments of animal carcasses, and hazardous waste from animal sheds, farms,
                           processing facilities, and veterinary service provision centers will be a challenge because the
                           country lacks relevant regulatory framework and infrastructure for handling waste, especially in
                           rural areas. Therefore, targeted technical assistance will be required for finding realistic and
                           optimal case-by-case solutions for waste management. Development and implementation of
                           Pasture Management and Livestock Development Plans (PMLDPs) are expected to arrest
                           degradation of targeted pastures, reverse productivity losses, and improve biodiversity
                           conservation in the alpine zone of Armenia. However, assisting communities to better organize
                           animal husbandry and meat and dairy production implies certain environmental threats and
                           requires a cautious approach. Weed control in fodder production and some value chain sub-
                           projects may involve the use of pesticides. Animal farms, milk processing centers and community
                           slaughter houses will produce organic waste. Animal waste, biological and hazardous waste will
                           come from the Veterinarian Service Centers (VSCs). All of these require application of adequate
                           mitigation measures, including public awareness raising and education. Targeted technical
                           assistance will be provided to help with working out of the optimal and realistic solutions for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           waste management in rural areas because of lack of regulations and infrastructure. Environmental
                           impacts from small construction works planned under the project will be minor and much easier to
                           mitigate. These will likely include nuisance from the operation of construction vehicles and
                           machinery and generation of small amounts of construction waste in the course of improving
                           access roads and other infrastructure of pastures and premises of VSCs.

                          Short term modest negative environmental impacts of the Project interventions are mostly limited
                          to small construction and rehabilitation works to improve access roads and other infrastructure of
                          pastures and premises of veterinary service delivery centers. Grant-financed small agricultural and
                          agro-processing sub-projects in rural areas may also have potential adverse impacts on the natural
                          resources and environment due to generally low awareness of rural communities of the risks
                          associated with waste disposal, pesticide use and other farming practices. The project is designed
                          not only to mitigate these risks, but also to disseminate knowledge about good agricultural
                          practices for the use beyond its scope and lifetime.

                          Based on the nature and scope of the expected environmental and social impacts of CARMAC
                          Project II, OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment was triggered and the Project was classified as
                          environmental category B. Because of multiple interventions planned under the Project, majority
                          of which are not known upfront, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is
                          prepared to guide environmental and social screening, selection, approval, management, and


                                                                     Page 6 of 10
                          monitoring of individual sub-projects. Category A sub-projects will not be eligible for funding
                          from the Project proceeds.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Given the uncertainty of the scale, scope and location of civil works to be undertaken for the
                           construction of VSC premises, OP/BP 4.12 was also triggered. A Resettlement Policy Framework
                           (RPF) was prepared during project preparation to provide guidance onthe process of consultations
                           with affected communities, the establishment of grievance and redress mechanisms, and the
                           process of preparing Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), should any impact on formal or informal
                           assets occur during the Project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           It is expected that the project will impart long-term environmental and public health benefits
                           through sustainable pasture management, improved waste management from livestock farms,
                           improved food safety measures, training of community veterinarians in prevention and control of
                           farm-level animal production diseases, and improved dissemination of good farming practices
                           among rural communities.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not applicable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Because of multiple individual interventions, most of which will be defined on a rolling basis, the
                           environmental guidance for project implementation is provided through an Environmental and
                           Social Management Framework (ESMF) included in the Operation Manual. The ESMF outlines
                           the system of screening the proposed project interventions by their expected environmental and
                           social risks, defining the scope and nature of environmental work required during preparation of
                           each intervention, managing identified risks, and monitoring application of the prescribed impact
Public Disclosure Copy




                           mitigation measures. The ESMF was prepared through re-working the Environmental
                           Management Plan (EMP) used for CARMAC Project , disclosed to the public in an accessible
                           manner and discussed with stakeholders. The finalized ESMF was disclosed in-country and
                           through the World Bank InfoShop.

                          No land use, acquisition or resettlement is expected under CARMAC Project II, but a RPF has
                          been prepared to provide a framework should any of these impacts be likely to arise as a result of
                          Project activities. No civil works will be allowed to commence at any site until the respective
                          EMP (and RAP, if required) is disclosed and consulted with local stakeholders. Site specific RAPs
                          will be prepared for any cases where restriction of access to productive resources will take place,
                          including temporary land acquisition for machinery. A Project Social Assessment has been
                          commissioned and will also be used to inform Project design by identifying potential social risks
                          under the project and providing specific recommendations to minimize these risks and to enhance
                          the Project’s social impact.

                          Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Armenia will be the implementing agency for the
                          project, while its day-to-day management will be provided by an Agricultural Projects
                          Implementation Unit (APIU) under this Ministry. This arrangement is similar to the one applied to
                          the implementation of the active CARMAC Project. The APIU has extensive experience gained
                          through the implementation of the World Bank financed RESCAD (completed) and CARMAC


                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                          (ongoing) projects, including management of the environmental safeguards. APIU produces site-
                          specific EMPs for civil works to be undertaken on the pastures as part of the pasture management
                          plans. To date the Bank has reviewed and approved up to sixty such EMPs. Field visits to
Public Disclosure Copy




                          randomly selected sites revealed no environmental damage from works on the pastures. Most of
                          the pasture infrastructure is currently under construction. Once the new watering points for cattle
                          are operational, communities should adopt planned restrictions on the most degraded pastures to
                          allow for their natural regeneration. Discussions with Project beneficiary communities showed
                          their good mobilization and readiness to go for the selective use of pastures. APIU also follows
                          environmental procedures established for the Competitive Grant Program (CGMP). Environmental
                          screening of applications is being carried out and for the activities classified as environmental
                          Category B the site-specific EMPs are being developed. For one of the CGP-financed activities a
                          pest management plan has been prepared in accordance with the Operations Manual and the
                          Environmental Management Framework of CARMAC Project. Environmental performance of
                          grant recipients is generally satisfactory, one weak point being farm waste management. This is
                          mostly due to absence of relevant regulations, institutional set-up, and infrastructure across the
                          country rather than the behavior of grant recipients. Nonetheless, environmental damage from
                          CGP activities is minimal because of small scale of operations and a widespread on-farm reuse of
                          the main types of the organic waste, while the economic benefit for communities grossly surpasses
                          it.

                           The above described experience of PIU is highly relevant to CARMAC Project II, because the
                           design and implementation plan of this operation is pretty similar to what is being implemented
                           under the first CARMAC Project. Based on the experience from the past activities, APIU shall
                           apply more effort to the field environmental supervision of project activities under taken by rural
                           communities and grant recipients, including awareness raising and education on the good
                           environmental practice. For satisfactory performance under the CARMAC II Project, the APIU
                           will hire or appoint from the existing staff a person responsible for safeguards compliance.
                           Functions of this specialist will include: (i) reviewing proposals for project funding incoming from
                           the PUCs and FBOs to ensure that they fall under the Project Category B or C, comply with all
Public Disclosure Copy




                           relevant safeguards policies, and to recommend and guide preparation of EMPs, RAPs and PMPs
                           as required; (ii) assisting design companies with the preparation of EMPs and RAPs for the
                           construction and/or refurbishment ofinfrastructure; (iii) planning and organizing social and
                           environmental monitoring of all project components that imply physical works, and supervising
                           social and environmental monitoring work of other staff members that may be contributing to
                           safeguards oversight while carrying out other types of field work; (iv) producing, organizing, and
                           filing regular records of social and environmental supervision under various components of the
                           project and contributing information for the overall project progress reporting to the Bank.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The major beneficiaries and stakeholders of CARMAC Project II will be pasture users, farmer
                           cooperatives and associations, and food business operators (FBOs). At least 50,000 pasture users
                           would participate in the project through their membership of Pasture Users’ Cooperatives (PUCs).
                           Around 100 FBOs, including registered producer cooperatives, associations and small rural
                           businesses would participate in the value chain component and would be eligible to apply for sub-
                           project investments. Other relevant stakeholders include local NGOs and consultants, who will be
                           contracted for various tasks, with previous projects indicating that there are sufficient numbers
                           with adequate capacity and experience to carry out these tasks. Ministry of Agriculture, being the
                           Project implementing entity, is a key stakeholder as well.


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                           The draft final ESMF and RPF, satisfactory to the Bank, were disclosed in-country by posting
                           Armenian and English versions of the document on the web page of the Ministry of Agriculture
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and through the Bank's InfoShop. A public consultation meeting was held to discuss draft ESMF
                           and RPF with Project stakeholders on March 21, 2014. Site-specific EMPs and RAPs, as required,
                           will also be disclosed countrywide, with special emphasis on their accessibility to locally affected
                           communities, and will be consulted with interested stakeholders.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        26-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     26-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Armenia                                                            14-Mar-2014
                           Comments: After an initial disclosure of ESMF on March 14, 2014, a consutlation meeting was
                                         held on March 21, 2014. The ESMF was then finalized based on the received
                                         feedback, re-disclosed in-country on March 26, and sent to the InfoShop the same
                                         day.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        26-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     26-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Armenia                                                            14-Mar-2014
                           Comments: After an initial disclosure of RPF on March 14, 2014, a consutlation meeting was
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         held on March 21, 2014. The RPF was then finalized based on the received feedback,
                                         re-disclosed in-country on March 26, and sent to the InfoShop the same day.
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     NA
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment



                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                             Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Nicolas Ahouissoussi
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)                     Date: 31-Mar-2014



                                                                       Page 10 of 10
