                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA5661
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Afghanistan                         Project ID:    P128048
                            Project Name:      Afghanistan Access to Finance (P128048)
                            Task Team          Guillemette Sidonie Jaffr
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          13-Oct-2013                         Estimated   26-Nov-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASFP                               Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Microfinance (45%), SME Finance (45%), General finance sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (90%), Other Financial Sector
                                              Development (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      50.00           Total Bank Financing:                   50.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                   50.00
                              Total                                                                                       50.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective of the project is to build institutional capacity to
                           improve access to credit of micro, small and medium enterprises.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project consists of two (2) components:

                                                                         Page 1 of 8
                         Component 1: Improving access to financial services for micro and small enterprises [$32m]
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will include the following activities:

                         Sub-component 1.1: Strengthening of the microfinance sector through MISFA [$13m]

                         Capacity Building Fund [$10m]. This Capacity Building Fund will have two windows: (i) Innovation
                         Window and (ii) Systems Strengthening Window. The Innovation Window will allow MISFA to
                         support innovations to improve access to financial services proposed by MFIs and other institutions
                         which have a focus on access to finance. As such, this fund would cover the testing and piloting of
                         new financial products (small enterprise finance, agricultural credit, savings, sharia-compliant
                         products, insurance, etc.) as well as the use of technology to improve access to financial services.
                         The Systems Strengthening Window will support efforts from MFIs and CSPIs to strengthen their
                         systems and their human resources (MIS, internal control, risk management, etc.) based on a detailed
                         capacity strengthening plan. This fund will also support systems strengthening of MFIs aiming to
                         become Deposit taking MFI (DMFI), once the regulation is approved. The Capacity Building Fund
                         will not include on-lending funds as MISFA has currently enough resources for on-lending (which
                         could be mobilized in parallel by the applying institutions, if needed).

                         Support to Policy, Regulation and Advocacy [$3m]: this sub-component will provide support to
                         agencies in charge of policy, regulation and advocacy, namely: the Ministry of Finance, which has
                         the responsibility to set the policy direction for financial sector development in Afghanistan; the
                         Central Bank of Afghanistan (DAB) which once the Deposit taking MFIs regulation will be approved
                         will be responsible for regulating these institutions and the Afghanistan Microfinance Association
                         (AMA) which is the representative body for the microfinance sector.

                         Sub-component 1.2.: Targeting the Ultra Poor (TUP) Program [$15m]
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This sub-component will support the national scale up of the Targeting the Ultra Poor (TUP)
                         program piloted by MISFA in Bamyan and Badakshan. The TUP program aims at “graduating?
                         participants from safety nets programs to income-earning activities, linking them with microfinance
                         programs. Building on the lessons learned from the pilots and from international experience, the
                         program will provide TUP beneficiaries a two-year package of inputs which includes the transfer of
                         productive assets (such as livestock) as well as training (classroom and hands-on); a subsistence
                         support (monthly stipend, as short term income support); and basic healthcare through community-
                         based health workers. The total cost of this package (including its delivery) is estimated at US$2,000
                         per household. This Program will be replicated in 20 districts (across 5 provinces) and the program
                         will reach 7,500 beneficiaries (representing 52,500 households)

                         Sub-component 1.3: Strengthening of MISFA [$4m]

                         This sub-component will provide support to MISFA to implement its new business plan. This sub-
                         component will in particular support the establishment of a Research and Development Department
                         within MISFA to develop innovative programs, as incubator, to better serve under-served groups,
                         notably women and youth. Under its new strategic plan, MISFA intends to develop a Women
                         Empowerment Program as well as a Youth Entrepreneurship Program (combining financial and non-
                         financial services). This component will also support the establishment of a Knowledge Management
                         Department at MISFA to document best practices, lessons learned, and provide timely and relevant

                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         information to stakeholders by commissioning research and studies. This Department would also be
                         tasked to implement the Progress out of Poverty Index (based on international experience) to better
                         track microfinance impacts. MISFA will also strengthen its Client Profile database to have more
Public Disclosure Copy




                         accurate information on clients and avoid multi-lending to clients and over-indebtedness. This sub-
                         component will also strengthen project implementation capacity at MISFA (with a focus on fiduciary
                         aspects). It will in addition support coordination efforts between various initiatives with a focus on
                         access to finance supported by development partners (notably USAID, with FAIDA and ABADE)
                         and the World Bank (such as Financial Sector Strengthening Project, Financial Sector Rapid
                         Response Project, New Market Development Project, Rural Enterprise Development Project, Skills
                         Development Project, Non Formal TVET Project and Justice Service Delivery Project).

                         Component 2: Improving access to financial services for small and medium enterprises [$18m]

                         This component will include the following activities

                         Sub component 2.1: Supporting the expansion of the Afghan Credit Guarantee Foundation [$13m]
                         This component will provide [$13m] to the Afghan Credit Guarantee Foundation (the current
                         guarantee fund of US$8.6m is fully committed and will reach in the coming weeks the maximum
                         leverage). It will support the funding needs resulting from the expansion of the Credit Guarantee
                         Facility caused by its organic growth and by additional initiatives, e.g.:, (i) volume growth with
                         existing partner institutions (the Facility currently works with 3 partner institutions); (ii) cooperation
                         with additional partner institutions (an increasing number of commercial banks and MFIs have
                         expressed an interest for support to develop SME lending); (iii) regional expansion and new product
                         development.

                         Sub component 2.2: Providing technical assistance to ACGF and partner financial institutions [$5m]

                         This sub-component will finance the following activities by the Credit Guarantee Facility: (i)
                         technical assistance on SME lending to partner financial institutions (banks and MFIs), until the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Facility considers that the partner institutions no longer require the technical assistance; (ii) technical
                         assistance on new product development (such as trade finance, rural/agricultural SME lending, sharia
                         compliant SME lending, adapted products to female entrepreneurs and reverse factoring, also known
                         as supply chain financing); (iii) support to the geographical expansion of the Credit Guarantee
                         Facility, with the opening of offices in the North (e.g. Mazar-e Sharif and possibly Herat).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed activities under the project will be across Afghanistan.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Asta Olesen (SASDS)
                         Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDI)
                         Mohammad Yasin Noori (SASDS)
                         Obaidullah Hidayat (SASDI)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)




                                                                        Page 3 of 8
                            Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes
                            BP 4.01
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                The proposed interventions of the program place the overall categorization of the Access to
                              Finance project in category “FI?. The SMEs and “subprojects? that will be supported are not
                              known at Appraisal and therefore, in order to rule out any potential environmental or social
                              impacts, the client has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                              which will serve as a guide to manage any potential social and environmental impacts, including
                              an exclusion/negative list of activities that will not be eligible for financing.
                              The ESMF was prepared in accordance with definitions provided in the World Bank Operational
                              Manual and relating to the triggered operational policy on Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01).
                              The other operational policies included in the World Bank safeguards procedures were not
                              triggered by the project.

                             Social Safeguards issues
                             The Project is not expected to have any negative social impact – on the contrary, it is expected to
                             generate considerable positive social impact through provision of financial services to under-
                             served groups (MSMEs), with a focus on the poorer section of the population (including ultra-poor
                             households through the TUP Program), women and youth. These financial services include the
                             provision of guarantees on loans to MSMEs including to women-headed MSMEs, who otherwise
                             have extremely limited access to credit. The project is not expected to trigger any of the World
                             Bank social safeguards policies.



                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                          Environmental Safeguard issues
                          The Project is not expected to have any significant negative environment impact.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Microfinance supports household level income generating activities. As such income generating
                          activities have no or little environmental impacts and do not require any formal Environment
                          Assessment.

                           For SME loans, the proposed project does not envision supporting those “subprojects? which need
                           preparation of a new full Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) report or a new EIA report-table
                           (Category A or B projects). Therefore only the following two types of subprojects that do not need
                           new environmental impact assessment will be considered for support:
                           -        Subprojects that do not require full environmental Assessment;
                           -        Subprojects that only need filling out of environmental registration and screening forms;
                           Only in exceptional cases, subprojects of category B with EIA report will be screened and
                           appraisal will be based on defined mitigation measures compiled in a simplified environmental
                           and management plan.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are expected.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Not applicable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             For Financial Intermediary Lending, the World Bank operations policy (OP 4.01) requires that:
                           “For a financial intermediary (FI) operation, the Bank requires that each FI screen proposed
                           subprojects and ensure that subborrowers carry out appropriate EA for each subproject. Before
Public Disclosure Copy




                           approving a subproject, the FI verifies (through its own staff, outside experts, or existing
                           environmental institutions) that the subproject meets the environmental requirements of
                           appropriate national and local authorities and is consistent with this OP and other applicable
                           environmental policies of the Bank “The Bank policy also mentions that: “In appraising a
                           proposed FI operation, the Bank reviews the adequacy of country environmental requirements
                           relevant to the project and the proposed EA arrangements for subprojects, including the
                           mechanisms and responsibilities for environmental screening and review of EA results. When
                           necessary, the Bank ensures that the project includes components to strengthen such EA
                           arrangements. For FI operations expected to have Category A subprojects, prior to the Bank's
                           appraisal each identified participating FI provides to the Bank a written assessment of the
                           institutional mechanisms (including, as necessary, identification of measures to strengthen
                           capacity) for its subproject EA work.18 If the Bank is not satisfied that adequate capacity exists
                           for carrying out EA, all Category A subprojects and, as appropriate, Category B subprojects--
                           including EA reports--are subject to prior review and approval by the Bank?.
                           It should be noted that this requirement was not designed for microfinance projects with hundreds
                           of thousands of micro loans at the household economy level.
                           The ESMF provides all institutional procedures and mechanisms to ensure identification of
                           environmental and social risks, mitigate, monitor and reporting on implementation and capacity
                           building plans for MISFA and ACGF.



                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                         MISFA, Afghan Credit Guarantee Foundation (ACGF) and the partner institutions will assume
                         overall responsibility for compliance with pertinent Afghan laws and regulations on environmental
                         protection and with the requirements of the World Bank. Commitment to ensuring environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                         soundness would be included in the cooperation agreements between MISFA and its partner
                         institutions, as well as between ACGF and its partner institutions (participating financial
                         institutions PFIs). The main tool to be used by PFIs is the activity exclusion list to guide credit
                         officers in their loan decisions.

                         For microfinance loans, MISFA has a long track record of microfinance and a strong engagement
                         with the Afghan microfinance sector. MISFA implemented the IDA financed Expanding
                         Microfinance Outreach and Improving Sustainability Project (P104301), which closed on June 30,
                         2012. MISFA developed and implemented an Environment and Social Management Framework
                         under this Project. An environmental management system embedded in the project management
                         system has been established under this previous IDA financed project and will continue to be used.
                         The same framework and implementation arrangements will apply for the present project.

                         For SME loans, ACGF will appoint one member of their technical departments as Environmental
                         and Social Management officer (ESM) to be the focal officer in charge of social and
                         environmental issues related to the project. The initial environmental assessment (EA) screening
                         will be carried out by PFI‘s credit officers. They will exclude ineligible applications that fall into
                         the Exclusion Lists (containing a “Subprojects Exclusion List? and a “List of Environmentally
                         Sensitive Zones?), check whether the subproject has obtained the environmental approval (if
                         applicable), and make sure the sub borrowers fill out the environmental registration form (if
                         applicable).The PFI credit officers will receive the required training and will be monitored by
                         ACGF’s ESM to undertake the screening. The following will apply for each category of subproject
                         - Category A subprojects (which have high social and environmental impacts) and all activities on
                         the exclusions lists. These subprojects will be excluded.
                         - Category B subprojects (which have moderate social and environmental impacts). The ESM
                         officer will be in charge of assessing the subproject according to its environmental and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                         impacts. These subprojects will be excluded. Nonetheless, if the subproject belongs to the
                         conditional list of subprojects, the ESM will decide if the subproject can be supported based on
                         defined mitigation measures compiled in a simplified environmental and social management plan
                         (ESMP). ACGF will hire environmental and social specialists in case there is a need for this, in
                         order to prepare the mitigation plan and monitoring plan. The ESMP will be prepared at design
                         stage and will be approved and reviewed by the ESM and by ACGF. The World Bank will
                         undertake annual post review of operations, including the ESMP of category B projects.
                         - Category C subprojects (which have low or no social and environmental impacts). These
                         subprojects will be supported without restriction; however, they need to fit the Afghan legal
                         framework, exclusion lists and World bank safeguard policies.

                         The exclusion lists and conditional list will be detailed in the Operations Manual and the World
                         Bank reserves the right to adjust these lists after an assessment of the ESMF and after having
                         informed ACGF (DEG). This assessment will take place one year after project’s effectiveness.
                         During this assessment, the World Bank will also review a sample of operations – in particular any
                         category B subprojects if there are any- The World Bank will also undertake an annual post review
                         of a sample of operations (in particular those that are risky) as external monitoring. ACGF requires
                         PFIs to submit annual reports on the environmental performance of the loans that benefited from
                         the guarantee and will support the drafting of the reports and provide the PFI with an appropriate
                         report template.

                                                                    Page 6 of 8
                           In addition, in order to ensure effective implementation of the ESMF and to realize the
                           environmental and social protection objectives during project implementation, various EA
Public Disclosure Copy




                           screening and environmental and social management trainings of PFIs and within ACGF
                           (including managers and credit officers) will be carried out. The environmental and social
                           screening of subprojects will ensure compliance with Afghan laws and World bank safeguard
                           policies and will be compiled in the environmental screening form developed under the project as
                           described in the ESMF. Two types of training are generally needed:
                           -        Awareness programs: sessions for managerial grades of PFIs and ACGF
                           -        Competence development training: to cover the field experience, sharing the technical
                           capacity needs, hence mainly targeting the field offices of PFIs.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders of the project include the Ministry of Finance, MISFA, Afghan Credit
                           Guarantee Foundation (ACGF), Participating Financial Institutions (microfinance institutions,
                           commercial banks) and MSMEs throughout Afghanistan.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      13-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Oct-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Afghanistan                                                      02-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?




                                                                    Page 7 of 8
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Guillemette Sidonie Jaffr
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                       Date: 18-Oct-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Henry K Bagazonzya (SM)                        Date: 19-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
