                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA7841
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Feb-2014, 12-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                              Project ID:    P145778
                            Project Name:      Mizoram State Roads II- Regional Transport Connectivity Project (P145778)
                            Task Team          Diep Nguyen-Van Houtte
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          19-Feb-2014                        Estimated   29-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDT                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (70%), Other domestic and
                                              international trade (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Trade facilitation and market access (30%), Rural services and infrastructure
                                              (70%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     132.00           Total Bank Financing:                 107.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        25.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              107.00
                              Total                                                                                    132.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective is to increase transport connectivity along regional
                           trade corridors in Mizoram.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 13
                         1.      The Mizoram State Roads II Regional Connectivity Project aims to increase intra-state and
                         regional connectivity for the residents of landlocked Mizoram. The Government of India has
                         requested the World Bank to provide financing for about 450 km of roads that enhance connectivity
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in Mizoram. However, since the roads are of varying degrees of readiness, this proposed Project will
                         fund the 94 km of roads that are design-ready or with studies at an advanced stage, as well as funding
                         for preparation studies for the remaining 350 km of road which could be considered for a follow-on
                         project or additional financing when the designs are ready. The project has two components to
                         support the PDO:

                         Component A: Improvement of Priority Cross-border Roads and Trade-Related Infrastructure (US$
                         102 million)

                         i.       Widening and strengthening of 94km of road and preparation studies for 350km of road (US
                         $ 99.0 million). Widening and strengthening of three sections of (Group 1) road totaling 94 km
                         including (i) a 25.0 km section of Lunglei – Tlabung – Kawrpuichhuah Road on the border with
                         Bangladesh; (ii) the 27.5km Champhai-Zokhawthar Road on the border with Myanmar; and (iii) the
                         41.7km Chhumkhum-Chawngte North-South alignment connecting to the border roads with
                         Bangladesh to the west and Myanmar to the south. Concurrently, the project would fund detailed
                         studies and designs for another 350km of (Group 2) roads in the North-South Corridor and remaining
                         road sections along the Lunglei – Tlabung – Kawrpuichhuah Road. Many of these roads would be
                         greenfield, and would increase the connectivity both within the state – improving access to transport
                         infrastructure and services for isolated communities – as well as to key international trunk roads and
                         transport corridors that connect to other NE India states, Bangladesh, Chittagong Port and the rest of
                         South Asia, and to Myanmar. The Group 2 North-South alignment starts at Junction NH44A
                         (Origination) passing through Chungtlang, Darlung, Buarpui, Thenlum, Zawlpui, Phairuangkai and
                         Chawngte. Road Safety Improvement pilot projects will also be incorporated in project corridors to
                         demonstrate good practice examples of road safety engineering measures that effectively address
                         road safety hazards.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ii.      Construction or improvement of trade-related infrastructure along project roads including
                         market haat structures and truck stops (US$ 3 million). These infrastructure not only improve the
                         trade capacity of the residents of the state and of the region, they also are key benefit-sharing
                         measures as requested by the communities, and help improve road safety along project roads. Market
                         haat structures provide a safe place for local communities to market and sell their produce and goods,
                         instead of selling on the side of the road in self-made structures that may be unsound and that may be
                         located in unsafe locations from a road safety perspective. Truck stops provide a safe place for
                         drivers to stop along project corridors which would enhance safety for both truck drivers as well as
                         other traffic sharing the road and residents living along project corridors.

                         Component B: Road Sector Modernization and Performance Enhancement through Institutional
                         Strengthening (US$ 5 million). This component will support gradual transformation of PWD into a
                         modern road agency through implementation of a Road Sector Modernization Plan (RSMP) which
                         will carry forward and deepen various institutional development initiatives introduced under the
                         MSRP I. The RSMP will be periodically reviewed and modified during project implementation and
                         will focus on:

                         i.Modernization of policies, engineering practices, and business procedures. Key activities include
                         development and modification of sector policies and strategies, engineering manuals and studies, and


                                                                     Page 2 of 13
                         a procurement and contract management manual to introduce improved practices of design,
                         construction, quality monitoring, and maintenance of hill roads;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ii.Asset management and maintenance. Modification of the existing maintenance management
                         system into an Asset Management System (AMS) including development of an asset management
                         strategy and asset management information system for the strategic core road network comprising
                         key state and regional corridors; operationalization of the existing road maintenance fund; provision
                         of technical assistance to mobilize additional funds for road maintenance; and utilization of simple
                         maintenance contracts to deliver maintenance works including community – based contracts funded
                         through PWD’s maintenance budget;

                         iii.Institutional and Human Resource Development. Development and implementation of a Human
                         Resources Development Strategy to improve PWD’s institutional structure, build capacity of PWD
                         engineers and other staff, increase efficiency and staff productivity, strengthen PWD’s Design Cell,
                         and carry forward the computerization of PWD initiated under MSRP I. A separate strategy will also
                         be developed to build the capacity of the local construction industry.

                         iv.Road Safety Management. Support further refinement and implementation of PWD’s road safety
                         strategy by increasing the road safety management capacity of PWD and related agencies, implement
                         road safety audits and road safety improvement projects along priority road corridors, integrate road
                         safety measures into the Asset Management System, and implement awareness programs on road
                         safety and work zone safety.

                         v.       Improved environmental and social safeguards capacity and management. Capacity of the
                         Environment and Social Cell will be developed in PWD to improve the planning, implementation
                         and monitoring of environmental and social safeguards policies. An environmental and social
                         safeguards policy will be developed for PWD for road development projects, including a policy
                         related to forest and biodiversity conservation. Forest and biodiversity conservation measures will be
                         planned and implemented along project roads/corridors.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The roads proposed under the Project are in Aizawl, Mamit, Champhai, Serchhip and Lunglei
                         districts of Mizoram. The environmental conditions and nature vary depending on road location. The
                         Project location terrain is predominately hilly or mountainous with fragile slopes; there are a number
                         of perennial and seasonal water courses, deep gorges, streams, springs, ponds and waterfalls. Fragile
                         hill, weak soil, steep topography, high rainfall make the area susceptible to erosions and land slips
                         during the rainy season. The annual rainfall in Mizoram ranges between 1700 mm to 3300 mm. The
                         main rainy months are May to September. There are important environmentally sensitive sites in
                         Project districts. These include protected area, reserve forests, village forests and plantation areas in
                         the Project districts. None of the Group 1 Project roads passes through protected areas. Although
                         road pavement exists in most parts, current road width needs to be widened from single lane to two
                         lane (from current width of about 6 m to about 12 m wide). In several sections, new road sections or
                         re-alignment is proposed. This may lead to loss of private and community assets and land
                         acquisition. The roads at various sections pass through wooded areas and riverine forests, and along
                         rivers. Construction is likely to use blasting and heavy machines.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Mridula Singh (SASDS)


                                                                       Page 3 of 13
                         Srihari Gopalaswamy (SASDS)
                         Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (SASDI)
                         Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sangeeta Kumari (SASDS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/    Yes           Potential environmental issues include
                         BP 4.01                                       management of huge amount of excavated spoil
                                                                       materials, landslide/ slope instability risks in the
                                                                       fragile hill, impacts of blasting, construction
                                                                       nuisances including dust and noise, labor & labor
                                                                       camp issues. Potential mitigations include no
                                                                       haphazard disposal of excavated material (spoil
                                                                       management in designated sites with protection
                                                                       works), controlled blasting, slope and erosion
                                                                       control measures including bio-engineering
                                                                       works, workers and community health and safety,
                                                                       management of construction nuisances including
                                                                       dust, noise, and pressure on local water sources,
                                                                       etc.). Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
                                                                       and draft Environmental Management Plan
                                                                       (EMP) for the two road segments Champhai-
                                                                       Zokhawthar (C-Z) Road and Chhumkhum-
                                                                       Chawngte (C-C) Road, have been completed. An
                                                                       Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
                                                                       has been prepared to guide preparation of the
                                                                       remaining segments of roads that will have final
                                                                       designs prepared during implementation. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       EMF and EIAs/EMPs of the two roads have been
                                                                       disclosed on February 11, 2014.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04     Yes           The roads at various sections pass through
                                                                       wooded areas and riverine forests, and along
                                                                       rivers. There are protected areas in the Project
                                                                       districts. Although none of the Group 1 roads is
                                                                       passing through protected area or other known
                                                                       critical natural habitat, possibility of impacts on
                                                                       natural habitat from Group 2 roads needs to be
                                                                       confirmed during preparatory activities. Each
                                                                       sub-project’s EIA and EMP will assess potential
                                                                       impacts on the protected areas, bio-diversity and
                                                                       protected species and will contain necessary
                                                                       mitigation measures.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36              Yes           The roads at various sections pass through
                                                                       wooded areas and riverine forests, and along
                                                                       rivers. The C-Z Road and C-C Road, of which
                                                                       EIA and EMPs have been prepared, will not have



                                                               Page 4 of 13
                                                                         direct impact on natural forests. Impacts on
                                                                         plantation forests have been identified for which
                                                                         compensatory plantation will be carried out.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         However, there is a possibility that some sections
                                                                         of the remaining roads pass through riverine
                                                                         natural forests. There is also a limited potential
                                                                         possibility of indirect pressure on forests
                                                                         (settlement, logging, collection of medicinal
                                                                         plant, and forest degradation). Respective EIA/
                                                                         EMPs will assess potential direct and indirect
                                                                         impacts of roads on forests and will propose
                                                                         management and enforcement measures to control
                                                                         and mitigate impacts on forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The Project does not foresee use of any pesticides
                                                                         during construction or operational phases.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           There are no known physical cultural sites of
                         BP 4.11                                         national or international significance along or in
                                                                         the vicinity of proposed roads. However, there are
                                                                         cultural sites of local significance such as
                                                                         graveyards, memorial stones, churches, etc. EIA
                                                                         and EMP of the two roads (C-Z, and C-C Roads)
                                                                         have identified such sites and proposed measures
                                                                         to protect these sites. Respective EIA/ EMPs of
                                                                         the remaining roads will identify such sites,
                                                                         assess risks on them and propose mitigation
                                                                         measures. Environmental Management
                                                                         Framework (EMF) has guidance in managing any
                                                                         'Chance Find', if found during construction.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           The entire population is designated as “Scheduled
                                                                         Tribes”, as per Schedule VI of the Constitution.
                                                                         People living closer to Bangladesh border are
                                                                         actually part of one traditional tribe, the Chakma.
                                                                         A combined Resettlement Action Plan and
                                                                         Indigenous Peoples Development Plan,
                                                                         (RAP&IPDP) has been prepared for each of the
                                                                         sub-projects based on detailed social assessment.
                                                                         Public information and Free Prior Informed
                                                                         Consultations were held in all the six villages/
                                                                         towns during the social screening and census and
                                                                         socio-economic survey stages which covered
                                                                         individual consultations and public
                                                                         meeting. The outcomes of the consultations were
                                                                         positive and there was a consensus in support for
                                                                         the project. A Social Management Framework
                                                                         (SMF) has also been prepared to guide social
                                                                         impact assessment, mitigation, and consultation



                                                                 Page 5 of 13
                                                                        for the roads whose preparatory activities have
                                                                        not been completed.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           The road widening will cover 99 km out of which
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.12                                           detailed assessment has completed for 69.2km.
                                                                        The Champhai – Zokhawthar road widening of
                                                                        27.7 km will adversely affect 486 Project-
                                                                        Affected Households (PAHs) comprising 3305
                                                                        Project-Affected People (PAPs). Of these 486
                                                                        PAHs, 73.3% (356) are land owners, while 130
                                                                        include structure owners and tenants.
                                                                        Approximately 33.6 hectares (ha) will be acquired
                                                                        including 144 privately-owned structures and 19
                                                                        community/common properties. The Chhumkhum
                                                                        - Chawngte project road which is 41.5 km in
                                                                        length shall affect 373 PAHs comprising 1735
                                                                        PAPs. The project shall require land acquisition
                                                                        of 68.4 ha across the entire stretch. Of these,
                                                                        73.2% (273 PAHs) are land owners and
                                                                        remaining (100 PAHs) are structure owners
                                                                        owning 104 structures and 26 community/
                                                                        common properties.
                                                                        The Social Management Framework broadly
                                                                        includes resettlement and rehabilitation principles
                                                                        and approach to be followed in mitigating
                                                                        Project-induced adverse impacts, entitlement
                                                                        matrix, census and socio-economic survey,
                                                                        acquisition process through negotiated settlement,
                                                                        preparation of SIA and RAP&IPDP, strategies for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        mainstreaming gender, income and livelihood
                                                                        restoration, HIV/AIDS awareness and prevention,
                                                                        framework for Consultation and Participation,
                                                                        institutional arrangements at PIU and Project road
                                                                        levels and a mechanism for redressal of
                                                                        grievances. Accordingly, RAP&IPDP is prepared
                                                                        and disclosed for 69.2 km.
                                                                        Scheduled tribe communities closer to the
                                                                        international borders are marginalized and
                                                                        vulnerable and may have limited ability to
                                                                        participate in and benefit from the development.
                                                                        To address these concerns, a Bank-executed
                                                                        program on regional transport and trade
                                                                        facilitation will support a study on the
                                                                        participation and practices of indigenous peoples
                                                                        in trade across regional boundaries i.e. Mizoram,
                                                                        Bangladesh, and Nepal for informed on-going
                                                                        dialogue at policy level for improved
                                                                        infrastructural facilities that may open up



                                                                Page 6 of 13
                                                                                opportunities for tribal communities to participate
                                                                                in trade to improve their livelihood.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              Project proposal does not include construction of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                any dam or Project is not dependent on any
                                                                                existing or proposed dam.
                            Projects on International           No              Champhai-Zokhawthar road for about 5 km
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                passes within 0.5 km along the border river (Tiau
                                                                                River) with Myanmar. Another road ends at
                                                                                Karnaphuly River, which is near the border with
                                                                                Bangladesh. Road construction is unlikely to
                                                                                affect the quantity of water in these rivers. PWD/
                                                                                PIU and technical team confirmed that Project
                                                                                will not use water and materials (sand, gravel,
                                                                                Pebbles, etc.) from these rivers for construction of
                                                                                Project roads, and there will be no disposal of
                                                                                excavated materials/ spoils and other waste in the
                                                                                banks of these rivers or nearby that could pollute
                                                                                the river water. Hence, the Project is unlikely to
                                                                                affect the river water quality of those rivers.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 Project is not part of disputed territory.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Potential adverse environmental impacts, for which mitigation measures have been identified,
                              include slope stability (related to landslides & erosion and water management), management of
                              huge amount of excavated materials, disruption to natural drainage, impacts on forests and bio-
                              diversity, effects on water source/ course, impacts on physical cultural sites, and construction
                              period issues (e.g. noise, dust, health & safety, damage to crops and assets, sanitation & labor
                              camps, etc). Improvement/ upgrading of the roads with environmental mitigation measures is
                              likely to generate environmental benefits such as: (a) improved roads; (b) improved drainage; (c)
                              reduced landslides and soil erosion; (d) increased road safety; (e) recycling of debris and surplus
                              excavated material to create new sites for development and prevent the negative impacts of
                              indiscriminate dumping; (f) afforestation (10 native trees will be planted for each tree lost),
                              enhancing degraded forests; and (g) introduction of “environment sensitized” construction
                              management and machinery and landscaping of the Project’s surrounding areas, thus improving
                              the aesthetics.

                              Group 1 roads do not directly disturb any designated and/or critical Natural Habitats. However
                              potential indirect and induced impacts of road network improvement and expansion could include
                              facilitation of settlements and expansion of productive agricultural or industrial activities/
                              monoculture, facilitation of movement of forest and non-timber forest products, and increased
                              access to protected areas through the feeder road networks. With regard to minimizing/ managing
                              such indirect/ induced impacts, in particular along the influence corridors of project roads, PWD/


                                                                        Page 7 of 13
                           PIU will coordinate and collaborate with forest and wildlife agencies, non-governmental agencies
                           including community-based organizations. During the preparation of Group II roads, the Project
                           will support: (i) strategic forest studies in the project areas (including Group 1 and 2 roads) with
Public Disclosure Copy




                           conservation activities; (ii) bio-diversity baseline and detailed assessment along project roads with
                           necessary measures to minimize and mitigate impacts of Group 2 roads integrated into EMPs.
                           Such studies shall be carried out in close coordination with the Forest Department. In each road,
                           measures that will be employed to minimize/avoid pressure on adjacent forests, as detailed in the
                           road’s EA/ EMP, include establishment of barriers to control entrance to forest areas, strict
                           enforcement of environmental work code, reduction of human dependency on forest or forest
                           resources, supply of alternate energy such as kerosene, bio-gas, micro- hydropower, etc. Similarly,
                           preparation of land use plan that incorporates environmental sensitive locations of at least the
                           environmental influence corridor and strict adherence to the same can help to preserve the forest
                           and wildlife.

                           Key social issues include loss of private land and assets, common property resources, and HIV/
                           AIDS. The scheduled tribe communities living along the Project roads are likely to get exposed to
                           the risks and vulnerability associated with increased trade and transport activities. Particularly, the
                           communities closer to the international borders are marginalized and vulnerable and may have
                           limited ability to participate in and benefit from the development. Social Assessments (SA)
                           including preparation of a combined Resettlement Action Plan and Indigenous People’s
                           Development Plans (RAP&IPDP) was completed for Group 1 Project roads.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Given the nature of construction in hilly areas, the Project could lead to induced/ cumulative
                           impacts mainly due to construction activities and improved access. These include: (i) cutting of
                           slopes could lead to unstabilized slopes, especially given the unconsolidated nature of the hills and
                           could trigger landslides/ soil erosion beyond the right of way also. This in turn could lead to
                           property damages and loss of agricultural lands on valley side, alteration of drainage patterns, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           traffic safety hazard; and (ii) though limited, forest diversion could open up areas which could lead
                           to forest degradation. There is a chance, although limited, that improved access could also increase
                           indirect pressure on forests (for settlement, logging, collection of medicinal plants, etc.). This in
                           turn may indirectly lead to increase in logging, bio-diversity loss, deforestation from settlers and
                           expansion of agriculture. The indirect impacts may expand beyond the direct construction impact
                           zone. The Project proposes to work together with and strengthen the relevant government agencies
                           in monitoring and control of such activities. On the other hand, if managed well with systematic
                           environmental management plans, the Project could lead to a chain of positive impacts including
                           road safety, creation of flat land using the debris generated, better access and thereby socio-
                           economic development, etc.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           No entirely new alignment has been considered as the Project is to upgrade existing roads.
                           However, in each road, some re-alignment sections have been considered in order to make the
                           road better as well as to avoid/ minimize potential adverse social and environmental impacts of
                           widening the existing roads. Each road’s EIA contains an analysis of alternatives and their
                           comparison including “with” and “without” Project comparisons.

                           Avoiding or minimizing environmental and social impacts was the first consideration in
                           alternative analysis. As the single lane road already exists, improving the existing road within the

                                                                      Page 8 of 13
                           existing right of way is the first choice that would have minimum additional environmental and
                           social consequences. The project has, thus, tried to follow the existing road right of way to the
                           extent possible. However road widening is necessary to expand the single-lane road to double-
Public Disclosure Copy




                           lane. In places, there are settlements adjacent to the existing road. Widening in those areas will
                           lead to acquisition of houses and displacement of people. Hence, in order to upgrade the roads
                           with minimum social impacts, re-alignment has been proposed in a few sections. In the C-C Road
                           and C-Z Road, the environmental risks of the re-alignment sections remain more or less the same
                           as in the existing road right of way. The local roadside residents were concerned about access
                           limitation to settlements due to re-alignment. In response to this, the Project includes provisions
                           for maintenance/ restoration of the existing road to allow better access to existing settlements and
                           to the re-alignment sections of road. Generation of significant amount of spoils is one of the major
                           environmental concerns. Unlike the traditional method of cut and throw, the Project, to the extent
                           possible, will minimize the generation of spoils, and will try to re-use the spoils, as well as dispose
                           the remainder in designated sites with protection measures. Landslips and erosion of cut slope is
                           another environmental concern. The Project will use the bio-engineering approach of planting,
                           simple engineering and water management measures to address this.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Project Management Unit (PIU) in the Public Works Department (PWD), Government of
                           Mizoram (GoM), has prepared the draft Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and
                           Social Management Framework (SMF) for the Project. This provides detailed guidance with
                           regard to screening, carrying out EIA, SIA, EMP, RAP, IPDP, consultations, monitoring, as well
                           as institutional assessment and capacity strengthening measures. EIA, EMP, and RAP IPDP
                           have been prepared for C-C Road and C-Z Road. For the adverse impact on people and cmmunity
                           assets, the documents provide details on the financial support for loss of assets at market rate,
                           grant for relocation, subsistence allowance and additional grant to the vulnerable. The NGOs will
                           facilitate appropriate usage of financial entitlement to restore the livelihood of the affected. The
                           preventive action plan on HIV/AIDS will primarily focus on awareness programs along the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           corridors at identified locations such as toll-plazas, construction camp sites and truck-parking lay-
                           by in respective corridors.

                           The Public Works Department of the Government of Mizoram is the principal agency for the
                           construction, rehabilitation and maintenance of road. The Mizoram I Project proved to be an
                           important learning experience for the PWD in management of environmental and social issues.
                           The Project has already set up a Project Implementation Unit at Aizawl and has mobilized the key
                           staff and engaged consultants for preparing environmental safeguards documents. The EE (Env)
                           will be assisted by an Assistant Engineer (AE) and a Junior Engineer (JE) for each road.

                           Three Assistant Engineers will be designated as R&R Managers, one for each road who will be
                           supported by a Non-Government Organizations. They will be responsible for effective
                           implementation of RAP, IPDP and settle any complaints after verification at the site to the extent
                           feasible and document the same. These reports will be submitted to the Social Specialist at the PIU
                           (Special Land Acquisition Officer or SLAO) for monitoring the redressal of complaints and
                           coordinating the activities of NGOs. The Special Land Acquisition Officer will have overall
                           responsibility for land acquisition and disbursement for compensation and grants and has been on
                           board since August 2013. The SLAO and Social Specialist also be responsible for monitoring the
                           progress of land acquisition and implementation of resettlement and rehabilitation plans. Monthly
                           and quarterly progress reports will be prepared by NGOs. Overall capacity building measures


                                                                      Page 9 of 13
                          detailed out in the RAP&IPDP for institutional strengthening and of the affected community will
                          be coordinated by the Social Specialist/SLAO.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The preparation noted that the institutional arrangements for implementation of environmental and
                          social safeguards are always tied to multilateral institution- funded Projects. Once the Projects are
                          completed the designated staff are decommissioned. Given this, the following approach will be
                          used: an Environment Cell headed by Executive Engineer will be established under the Project
                          Director of the PIU, the Environmental Cell will be supported by the Environment Team of the
                          Project Preparation Consultants (PPCs) during project preparation stage and by Supervision
                          Consultant’s Environment Team during project implementation stage. The Environment Cell will
                          be responsible for enforcing and managing environmental compliance as well as monitoring
                          during implementation. The Supervision Consultant will prepare monthly monitoring reports and
                          submit to the Environment Cell, which will review and verify. The Environment Cell will produce
                          consolidated quarterly monitoring reports. On non-compliance or poor performance, depending on
                          their nature, the Environmental Cell will issue instructions, and through the Project Director, will
                          issue warning letters to the Contractor, and may also recommend withholding of payment, if
                          necessary. The Project Director, on recommendation of the Environment Cell, may award letters
                          of appreciation to the Contractor for good environmental performance. The contract documents
                          will include penalties for non-compliance with EMPs. In case of any complaints related to
                          environmental issues, the Executive Engineer (Environment) will review the complaints, hold
                          meetings with the Supervision Consultant and Contractor, and provide instructions with
                          information to the Project Director. If the issue remains unresolved, the EE will take the issue to
                          the Project Director.

                          As noted before, potential indirect and induced impacts could include facilitation of settlements
                          and expansion of productive agricultural or industrial activities/monoculture, facilitation of
                          movement of forest and non-timber forest products, and increased access to protected areas
                          through the feeder road networks. With regard to minimizing/ managing such indirect/ induced
                          impacts, in particular along the influence corridors of project roads, the PWD/PIU will coordinate
Public Disclosure Copy




                          and collaborate with forest and wildlife agencies, non-governmental agencies including
                          community-based organizations. During the preparation of Group 2 roads, the Project will support:
                          (i) strategic forest studies in the Project areas (including Group 1 and 2 roads) with conservation
                          activities; (ii) bio-diversity baseline and detailed assessments along Project roads with necessary
                          measures to minimize and mitigate impacts of Group 2 roads integrated in to EMPs. Such studies
                          shall be carried out in close coordination with the Forest Department. In each road, measures that
                          will be employed to minimize/avoid pressure on adjacent forests, as detailed in the road’s EA/
                          EMP, include establishment of barriers to control entrance to forest areas, strict enforcement of
                          environmental work code, reduction of human dependency on forest or forest resources, supply of
                          alternate energy sources such as kerosene, bio-gas, micro-hydropower, etc. Similarly, preparation
                          of land use plan that incorporates environmental sensitive locations of each road corridor as
                          identified by respective EIA and EMP and adherence to the same can help preserve the forest and
                          wildlife.

                           The Environment Cell and team of environmental specialists are expected to continue
                           environmental management as part of PWD’s long term plans. To this effect, the institutional
                           development component of the Project will dovetail their role in PWD. Various trainings and
                           capacity building needs are identified.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure


                                                                    Page 10 of 13
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Consultation has been carried out at different stages of project preparation. Consultations were
                           carried out during preparation of Environmental Management Framework and Social Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Framework, during screening of the Group 1 Roads, and during development ofEIAs, EMPs and
                           RAP& IPDPs of Group 1 Roads. These include consultation on the environmental screening of C-
                           Z Road (31 August 2012 at Aizwal), Consultation on C-C Road screening report (31 October
                           2013 at Lunglei), Stakeholder Consultation Workshop on EMF and SMF (18 November 2013 at
                           Aizawl), Focus Group Discussions at settlements along C-C Road (17 – 18 December 2013), and
                           Focus Group Discussion at settlements along C-Z Roads (27- 29 December 2013). Consultations
                           were held with a range of stakeholders including communities along the proposed road corridors,
                           various citizens groups, and Government officials from line departments including PWD, Water
                           Supply, Rural Development, Agriculture, Forest, Pollution Control, etc. The consultations were
                           primarily focus group discussions, interviews, workshops and informal discussions with
                           communities. Workshops were organized to discuss the EMF and SMF, and a public hearing was
                           organized on the C-C Road and C-Z Road. The SMF and EMF as well as draft EIAs and EMPs
                           and RAP&IPDPs were disclosed on the PWD website.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Feb-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      20-Feb-2014
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            11-Feb-2014
                           Comments: Disclosure location is mizoram.nic.in
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      31-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Feb-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            31-Jan-2014
                           Comments: Disclosure location is mizoram.nic.in
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      31-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Feb-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            31-Jan-2014
                           Comments: Disclosure location is mizoram.nic.in
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                                                   Page 11 of 13
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?


                                                                     Page 12 of 13
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Diep Nguyen-Van Houtte
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                       Date: 26-Feb-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (SM)                   Date: 12-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 13 of 13
