                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                   ADDITIONAL FINANCING

                                                                         Report No.: ISDSA1131

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:         14-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
  1. Basic Project Data
                              Lao People's          Project ID:              P152066
  Country:                    Democratic
                              Republic
                                                    Parent Project ID:       P128393
  Project Name:               Second Lao Environment and Social Project (Additional Financing to the
                              Protected Area and Wildlife Project) (P152066)
  Parent Project Name:        Protected Area and Wildlife Project (Regional APL) (P128393)
  Task Team Leader:           Jean-Michel G. Pavy
  Estimated Board Date:       27-Apr-2015
  Managing Unit:              GENDR
  GEF Focal Area:             Biodiversity
  Sector(s):                  Forestry (60%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%)
  Theme(s):                   Environmental policies and institutions (45%), Biodiversity (40%),
                              Water resource management (10%), Climate change (5%)
  Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00             No
  (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                             Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
  Total Project Cost:      16.60                    Total Bank Financing:     15.00
  Financing Gap:           0.00
      Financing Source                                                                       Amount
      BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           1.60
      International Development Association (IDA)                                               15.00
      Total                                                                                     16.60
  Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
  Is this a Repeater project? No
  Is this a Transferred       No
  project?


  2. Project Development Objective(s)
  A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
  To strengthen the management systems for national protected areas conservation and for
  enforcement of wildlife laws (The GEO is the same as the PDO)

  B. Current Project Development Objectives - Parent
  To strengthen the management systems for national protected areas conservation and for
  enforcement of wildlife laws
  C. Revised Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
  To help strengthen selected environmental protection management systems, specifically for
  protected areas conservation, enforcement of wildlife laws and environmental assessment
  management (the GEO is the same as the PDO)

3. Project Description
Additional Financing (AF) in the amount of US$15 million equivalent is proposed for the existing Lao
Protected Area and Wildlife project (PAW) and a level 1 restructuring comprising of: (a) revision of the
project name, (b) revision of the Project Development Objective (PDO), and (c) modification of the
project components and scope of work.

Because the PAW has been effective for a short period, its activities and the proposed AF activities
would be concomitant. Therefore, the PAW and the AF are consolidated in a single project renamed
Second Lao Environment and Social Project (LENS2), which is better adapted to the revised scope and
branded in Laos. LENS2 would broaden the scope of the original project by: (a) improving the
financing capacity of the Environment Protection Fund (EPF), (b) supporting capacity building of
national, provincial and district institutions to implement and monitor the Lao legislation on
environment and social impact of investment projects, (c) strengthening the environment and social
curriculum in public education institutions, and (d) broaden project support to forested
upper-watersheds of rivers important to hydro power, agriculture irrigation and flood prevention.

In PAW, only NPAs--a generic term for National Conservation Forests defined in the Forestry
Law--are eligible for financing. With the inclusion of watershed protection forests, eligible areas will
include not only National but also Provincial, District and Village Conservation Forests as well as
National, Provincial, District and Village Protection Forests (watersheds forests). For the purpose of
the LENS2, all categories are bundled under the generic term ‘Protected Areas’ (PAs).

LENS2 is implemented through 3 components. Component 1 and Component 2 will be implemented
through a sub-project mechanism administered by the Environment Protection Fund (EPF). EPF
would provide grants to sub-project delivery agencies (SDA) in line with PIM and following ESMF
and CEF provisions. Component 3 will help the EPF Office administer the Project and
expand/strengthen its own capacity.

The design of most of the sub-projects will occur during early implementation, if not later. All
sub-projects must (a) support a GoL policy and an official plan such as a sector’s 2020 action plan, (b)
contribute to at least one outcome indicator and at least one intermediary outcome indicator.
Sub-projects that support wildlife management must also contribute to a regional outcome such as cross
border cooperation, knowledge transfer or prevention of illegal wildlife trade.

Each sub-project has a set of eligible expenditures. While the detail of these expenditure is unknown
until the proposals are received, eligible expenditures include (a) modest civil works such as for
example, office building rehabilitation, construction of guard stations, laboratory, fence and sign posts,
small wooden bridges, forest management road maintenance, etc., (b) equipment including for
example, vehicles, motorcycles, computer, office, furniture, field and laboratory equipment, etc., (c)
training expenditures including for example, workshops, study tours, scholarships, language training,
short courses, research grants, etc., (d) consultant services including international and national
technical assistance (TA) to SDAs, short term consultants for advisory services (individual, firm or
NGOs), technical studies, legal advice, (e.g.to design a training module, a PA or a river basin
management plan, a PES scheme, etc.), (e) community grants to implement the Community Action
Plans (CAP), and (f) operating expenditures such as external auditors, non-consultant and non-civil
service staff and labor, utilities, equipment operation insurance and maintenance, rental, office
supplies, travel and subsistence, etc.

It is expected that some SDAs may submit subproject proposals before the Board approval of LENS2,
however, these sub-projects will not be approved before the Board approval, and their approval is
subject to confirmation of their eligibility and following all due procedures and processes.

Component 1: Institution development and capacity building (US$14.4 million of which World Bank
US$14.0 million (82% IDA and 18% GEF) )

This component seeks to improve the capacity and collaboration of national and provincial public
institutions to design and monitor national and regional natural resources, environmental, and social
policies. These sub-projects are implemented through the EPF’s window Policy Implementation and
Capacity Enhancement (PICE). The initial PICE sub-projects are (a)         Capacity building for
national environment and natural resources planning, (b) Institutional capacity building for protected
area and protection forest management, and wildlife conservation (sub-project submitted and
approved), (c) National-level capacity building in wildlife law enforcement (sub-project submitted and
approved), (d) Human Resources Development for Protected Area and Wildlife Management
(sub-project submitted and approved) , (e) Constituency building of high level officials on biodiversity
and wildlife, and (f) Constituency building of public administration on environment, biodiversity and
wildlife issues.

The following additional PICE sub-projects were pre-identified for potential funding under the AF: (a)
Capacity building for enforcement of environment and social impact legislations, (b) Capacity building
for environment promotion and scaling up integrated spatial planning (ISP) in selected provinces, (c)
Capacity and institution building for pollution reduction especially from industries and small and
medium enterprises, (d) Capacity building and strengthening of the environmental science and
environment impact assessment curriculum, (e) Capacity building and strengthening of the
environmental economic curriculum with focus on Payment for Ecological Services (PES) and valuing
offsets, (f) Capacity building and strengthening of the of the social impact assessment and mitigation
curriculum, (g) Strengthening PONRE divisions for implementation of the PESAP with a focus on
enforcement of environment and social impact regulations (in eligible provinces), and (h) Development
of an environment and social curriculum and teachers training at the National Academy of Politic and
Administration (NAPA)’s.

Component 2: Management of wildlife and protected areas (US$20.6 million of which World Bank
US$19.4 million (82% IDA and 18% GEF))

This component seeks to improve the capacity and collaboration of public institutions, civil society and
communities to manage protected areas and implement wildlife laws. Some of these sub-projects are
implemented through the EPF’s window Community and Biodiversity Investment (CBI). The CBI
sub-projects proposed are (a) Capacity building for participatory management of the Nam Theun Two
Watershed, (b) Capacity building for participatory management of the Nam Et Phou Louey NPA, (c)
Support to community engagement and PA management in eligible provinces, and (d) Support to
wildlife law enforcement in eligible provinces. None of these sub-projects will be initiated prior to the
Board approval of the AF.

Component 3: Project administration and capacity building (US$5.4 million of which World Bank
US$4.0 million (82% IDA and 18% GEF))

This component is implemented in 2 sub-components.

Sub-Component 3.1 Project Administration. This sub-component seeks to deliver the Project’s
outputs within the allocated time frame and with satisfactory planning, procurement, financial
management, monitoring, and communication. It will support the administration of the sub-project
mechanism by EPF. It will include technical assistance to help EPF assure compliance with the World
Bank’s fiduciary requirements, especially procurement, financial management, and environment and
social safeguards, M&E, communication with stakeholders, and facilitating effective coordination and
cooperation among SDAs.

Sub-Component 3.2 EPF’s capacity development. This sub-component seeks to help EPF’s become a
significant and recognized player in environment financing and is capable to deliver and monitor
sub-projects throughout the country. It will support capacity building of EPF staff and systems to
improve EPF organization and staffing for effectiveness and efficiency as well as optimize various
business functions of EPF such as (a) fund raising, (b) planning and M&E, (c) communicating.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
All sub-projects in Project component 1 will support national level’s institutions. As for the
Component 2, in addition to Vientiane capital, eight provinces are eligible for Sub-project support
under LENS2: in addition to the five provinces that were included under the PAW project, namely,
Bolikhamxay, Khammouane, Houaphan, Luang Prabang and Xiengkhouang, three more provinces,
namely, Savannakhet, Xaysonboun and Vientiane Province are newly added under LENS2. Within
those provinces, capacity building of provincial and district government officers, integrated
development planning and/or river basin planning will be carried out. Site-specific investments and
community support will be limited to “PAs? (both the conservation forests that protect biodiversity and
the ‘protection forests’ that protect upper watersheds) as well as community areas adjacent to these
“PAs?.

In PAW, only NPAs - a generic term for National Conservation Forests defined in the Forestry Law -
are eligible for financing. LENS2 will also support Provincial, District and Village Conservation
Forests as well as National, Provincial, District and Village Protection Forests (watersheds forests).
For the purpose of the LENS2, all categories are bundled under the generic term ‘Protected Areas’
(PAs). It is to note that watersheds forests inside National Conservation Forests were already
implicitly considered eligible for funding under the PAW project. Given the importance for the
objective of the project, it was decided that LENS2 will explicitly make sub-projects to strengthen
watersheds forests management eligible for funding. Of notice, all PAs include rivers most of which
are direct or indirect tributaries of the Mekong, itself an international waterway.

All sub-project locations will be confirmed during implementation, except for the two National
Protected Areas (NPAs) identified for funding under the PAW project: Nakai Nam Theun National
Protected Area (NNT NPA) 3,450 km2 and NEPL NPA (5,959 km2), which were already pre-selected
at PAW appraisal. The SDAs of the two sub-projects are developing proposals for sub-project
financing. These two NPAs are located in two of Lao PDR’s most distinctive ecological regions: the
Northern Indochina Sub-Tropical Moist Forests and the Annamite Range Moist Forests. Together
they are globally distinguished by containing the last confirmed breeding population of Indochinese
Tigers in Lao PDR, by having the largest remaining population of the critically endangered Northern
White-cheeked Gibbon, and one of the densest concentrations of small carnivores in the world. The
Annamite Range (shared between Vietnam and Lao PDR) contains the most species endemism of any
non-island ecosystem in the world and new species are regularly discovered such as the critically
endangered Saola (identified in 1993), and endangered Giant Muntjac (identified in 1994). The
Annamite forest also contains scattered physical cultural resources such as ancient cemeteries and
stupas. Of notice, the NNT NPA is adjacent to the Nam Theun 2 (NT2) Hydropower Station and
protects the watershed of its reservoir. The dam investor/operator is already financing the protection of
the watershed. LENS2 will provide incremental financing.

The Provincial Forest Resource Management units have pre-identified sub-projects in areas such as the
Dong Na Tad Provincial Conservation Forest and the Nam Ngiep-Nam Mang National Protection
Forest as well as PA within the Nam Lik river basin. Others are likely to be proposed. All are likely
to be in the Annamite Range and are important for upper watershed protection and biodiversity.
However, their eligibility will be confirmed during the implementation of LENS2. Their funding is
also subject to fully complying with the processes and procedures provided in the ESMF and CEF.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Ruxandra Maria Floroiu ( GENDR )
Satoshi Ishihara ( GSURR )
Feng Ji ( GENDR )
Sybounheung Phandanouvong ( GSURR )

6. Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           Yes              The Project is a Category B project. It
                                                               seeks a positive environmental and
                                                               social outcome. The project and
                                                               sub-projects will not involve any major
                                                               civil works. Sub-project includes the
                                                               following two types of interventions that
                                                               would have safeguards implications: (1)
                                                               sub-projects in support the formulation,
                                                               and/or capacity building for
                                                               implementation, of studies, surveys,
                                                               strategies, policies, regulations, decrees
                                                               and laws on watershed planning,
                                                               environment and social impact
                                                               mitigation, protected area conservation
                                                               and wildlife protection at regional,
                                                               national, and local level; (2) sub-projects
                                                               to strengthen the soils, forest and
                                                               wildlife conservation in PAs starting
                                                               with NE-PL and NNT NPAs by
supporting the preparation and
implementation of PA management
plans and annual plans, participatory
demarcation of PA boundaries and
internal zoning; and supporting
community livelihood development
activities. These impacts are expected to
be environmentally and socially positive
and adverse effects minor, identifiable
and readily mitigated through
implementation of mitigation measures
and monitoring.

Subprojects of type (1) will support the
review of existing laws, decrees,
guidelines and rules. The impacts of
such reviews are expected to be positive,
both on environment and social, because
they will help improve the sustainability
of natural resources use and ultimately
reduce the environmental damage
created by hydro power, mines and
roads. Such rules and regulations,
however, may not be developed with
sufficient consultations with
stakeholders, including ethnic groups
and local communities, and may
inadvertently restrict their access to
natural resources. Given that the specific
laws, regulations is unknown before
project appraisal, an Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF)
has been prepared to describe the
process and guidance to address the
alignment of such regulatory framework
with the World Bank ‘s own safeguards.
The same hold for training modules and
for the development of bachelor courses
in environment and social impact
management.

Also, experience in other countries
indicates that the exploitation of natural
resources may temporarily increase prior
to the introduction of stricter
enforcement. In order to address such
risks, the draft rules and regulations will
be consulted with key stakeholders
including ethnic groups and local
communities, and their perspectives will
be addressed in the regulations before
official adoption. Also, PAs will be
alerted of the temporary increase in the
exploitation of natural resources during
the development of regulations and
support will be provided so they step up
enforcement.

Regarding sub-project of type (2), given
the unknown specific activities, or the
list of PA and village selected before
project appraisal, the ESMF describes
the process to address environmental
impacts once investments are selected
and their location defined during project
implementation. The ESMF includes
screening criteria for selecting
investments that could be financed by
the Project; lists potential impacts and
relevant mitigation measures such as an
Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP)
and a Physical Cultural Resources (PCR)
chance find forms annexed to the
ESMF); describes implementation
arrangements for environmental
management aspects; and includes the
Project consultation and disclosure
process.

During PAW and then LENS2 project
preparation, stakeholders--in particular
of the two pre-selected NPAs--have been
regularly consulted on sub-project
proposed design, potential impacts and
procedures toward sub-projects
preparation and implementation. The
sub-projects have not yet been designed,
so no ancillary activities exist.

It is in this context a standalone
Environmental and Social Management
Plan (ESMP) for each of the sub-project
covering a PAs will be prepared. The
ESMPs will address the requirements of
OP4.01, OP4.04 and OP4.36 that are
relevant for the revised project scope.
Specifically, the ESMPs will include: (a)
Baseline information on each of the
participating PAs, including its current
management practices, stakeholders
involved in its management, ongoing
and planned infrastructures (e.g., roads,
transmission lines, hydropower projects)
or other natural resource excavation
activities (e.g., mining, wood factory) in
the participating PA, the extent to which
the communities are using the
timber/non-timber forest resources, main
biodiversity value, etc.; (b) Assessment
of whether the ongoing/planned
infrastructures or other natural resource
excavation activates would significantly
affect the effectiveness of the project
activities in achieving the PDO; and (c)
Preliminary review of the existing PA
management plan(s) for the participating
NPAs, if available, and identify areas
that require improvements to achieve the
project objectives, especially in the
context of the findings from the above
assessment.

The above review and assessment will
be used as a basis for developing
recommendations on actions that need to
be taken during project implementation.
The recommendations would include:
(a) Recommendations for the
formulation/update during project
implementation of PA Management Plan
and annual plan, institutional
arrangements of sustainable use of
non-timber forest resources by local
communities, demarcation of PA
boundaries and internal zoning, etc. The
recommendations are expected to
include advice on how these activities
will be designed and implemented in a
manner that will conserve the health and
quality of the forests; protect the rights
and welfare of local communities and
their livelihood of dependence
on/interaction with forests; and
minimize the adverse impacts from
bringing changes in the management,
protection, and utilization of forest
resources (as specified under para 3,
policy scope of OP4.36 Forests); (b)
Recommendations for additional studies
and monitoring programs that may need
                                    to be commissioned during project
                                    implementation in order to inform the
                                    design and implementation of PA
                                    Management Plans and annual plans,
                                    arrangements of sustainable use of
                                    non-timber forest resources by local
                                    communities, demarcation of PA
                                    boundaries and internal zoning, etc.

                                    The ESMP will be prepared through a
                                    consultative and participatory process by
                                    involving a representative range of
                                    stakeholders, including national and
                                    international NGOs, local communities,
                                    key government agencies, and disclosing
                                    relevant information in a timely manner
                                    in local language(s)
                                    As the proposed project will also assist
                                    the government in formulating new
                                    regulations during project
                                    implementation to help define,
                                    strengthen, and enforce the existing laws
                                    and policies on PA management/wildlife
                                    conservation. It was agreed that these
                                    new regulations will be developed
                                    through a consultative, participatory, and
                                    informative process, which engages key
                                    stakeholders including indigenous
                                    peoples groups, and takes into account
                                    the potential environmental and
                                    socio-economic impacts on local
                                    communities during the implementation
                                    of the new regulations.

                                    To mitigate any potential environmental
                                    impacts from those small-scale civil
                                    works to be financed under the
                                    community-level livelihood
                                    development activities and
                                    establishment of office facilities for the
                                    institutions, the project will prepare
                                    Environmental Codes of Practices
                                    (ECOPs) for each type of physical
                                    works. The ECOPs will provide site
                                    selection criteria to avoid potential
                                    impacts on Physical Cultural Resources.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   This policy is triggered as the proposed
                                    activities involve positive changes in
                                    management of natural habitats in PAs.
                                    Project or sub-project activities will
improve the capacity of GoL to manage
natural habitat in PAs and adjacent areas
including aquatic habitat as well as to
identify and mitigate the impact of
investment projects on natural habitats.
Minor disturbance and localized
negative impact on natural habitat may
occur during the construction and
operation of small conservation facilities
planned the in the PAs management
plans, such as substations and
checkpoints or small infrastructure’s
requested by communities as part of the
Community Action Plan (CAP).
However, the impact is expected to be
minor and localized and easily mitigated
through measures incorporated in the
ECOP (annexed to the ESMF). The
ESMF include provision for monitoring
the ESMPs. A negative list prevents the
implementation of investments whose
impact is irreversible or difficult to
mitigate.

Also, Participatory Land Use Plans
(PLUP) will be developed to clearly
delineate areas of critical natural habitats
and incentives for protection of critical
and non-critical natural habitats are
provided through community grants
based on community compliance with
forest conservation contracts. The ESMF
includes screening procedure to (1)
determine whether the proposed
facilities are in a critical or non-critical
natural habitat and (2) avoid any
significant conversion or degradation of
any critical natural habitat. Areas
demarcation under PLUP will be subject
to management measures within criteria
considered by the policy to avoid,
minimize, mitigate, restore, and offset.
Conservation Agreements (CA) will be
made with communities during the
initial stage of sub-project
implementation. CAs includes
restriction of use and incentives for
community compliance provided
through community grants. The CA
could include wildlife, natural habitat
                           conservation, fish protection zones,
                           anti-erosive measures and forest
                           resources management programs with
                           small-holders, which will be based on
                           the principles of the policy for achieving
                           sustainability.

                           Review of sub-projects will ensure that
                           invasive exotic species are not
                           introduced or promoted within and in the
                           buffer-zones of PAs.
Forests OP/BP 4.36   Yes   This policy is triggered as the proposed
                           activities involve positive changes in
                           management of forest areas in PAs.
                           The Project is expected to improve the
                           management of forested areas including
                           a beneficial impacts and reduction of the
                           deforestation rates. Still, its
                           implementation may locally affect the
                           forest cover as well as affect the rights
                           and welfare of people and their
                           dependence on the forests.

                           The ESMF includes screening
                           procedures (and a negative list) for
                           project investments so that interventions,
                           which could have the potential to
                           adversely impact upon forested areas are
                           not eligible for financing under the
                           Project. Participatory Social Assessment
                           and PLUP under the Community
                           Engagement Framework (CEF) process
                           will ensure relevant government
                           agencies and communities work to
                           delegate protection/ production forests
                           from community use areas, and
                           communities will be supported to
                           develop alternative livelihoods to reduce
                           dependency on forest resources for
                           livelihood. Conservation Agreements
                           (CA) will be made with communities
                           that include restriction of forest resource
                           use and incentives for community
                           compliance provided through
                           community grants. The CA will include
                           forest and non-timber forest product
                           (NTFP) management programs with
                           small-holders, which will be based on
                           the principles of the policy for achieving
                           sustainability.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  Yes   The project will not finance procurement
                                               of pesticides or use of any pesticides that
                                               are banned in country or adhere to
                                               international best pest management
                                               practice. However, support to agriculture
                                               activities compatible to PA purposes is
                                               eligible as a community grant that might
                                               increase the use of
                                               insecticides/chemicals/eligible
                                               pesticides or present pest management
                                               practices. Impacts of pesticide use will
                                               be assessed during each subproject
                                               screening. If eligible pesticides will be
                                               used, the project impact is expected to be
                                               mitigated through a simplified Pest
                                               Management Plan (PMP) (developed
                                               and annexed to the ESMF). The plan
                                               includes criteria to ensure that the
                                               pesticides used are legal and have
                                               negligible or minimal impact on
                                               environment and are listed as allowed to
                                               be used in country in line with World
                                               Health Organization and World Bank
                                               standards.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes   The project will not affect any known
                                               Physical Cultural Resources (PCRs)(e.g.
                                               historical, cultural, and/or
                                               archaeological, paleontological,
                                               religious, or unique natural values of
                                               national and/or regional cultural
                                               importance). However, the Project area
                                               covers Ethnic Minority groups such as
                                               Hmong, Mien, Lao Tai and Khmu; there
                                               could be a limited number of graves,
                                               village cemeteries, and/or communal
                                               properties in spiritual forests in the
                                               subproject sites that may be affected by
                                               project activities. ESMF includes
                                               provisions for screening of PCRs during
                                               subproject investments and sites’
                                               location as well as “chance find?
                                               procedures, so that suitable mitigation
                                               measures are implemented and
                                               incorporated into the corresponding PA
                                               management plan(s).
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            Yes   As with the PAW project, many project
                                               beneficiaries of LENS2 are expected to
                                               be Ethnic Minorities who are known in
                                               Lao PDR as Ethnic Groups and meet
                                            eligibility criteria under OP 4.10. For
                                            example, Hmong, Khmu, Mien,
                                            Makong, Bru and others are living in and
                                            around the two pre-selected NE-PL and
                                            NNT NPAs. Many ethnic groups are also
                                            known to be present in other provinces
                                            that are included under LENS2,
                                            especially in and near PAs where
                                            LENS2 will likely finance sub-projects.
                                            These are considered to be vulnerable
                                            ethnic groups in Lao PDR as their
                                            livelihood is heavily based on
                                            subsistence agriculture and forest. The
                                            presence of these Ethnic Groups triggers
                                            this safeguard policy. It is expected that
                                            the types, scale and scope of activities to
                                            be supported under LENS2 are similar to
                                            those of PAW subprojects, and that the
                                            environmental and social impacts that
                                            may result will also be similar, even
                                            though LENS2 will expand the
                                            geographical coverage from five to eight
                                            provinces. The impact of LENS2 on
                                            these communities is anticipated to be of
                                            the same nature, scale and scope, and
                                            generally positive, as under the PAW
                                            project. No new impacts that are not
                                            anticipated under PAW are expected to
                                            occur to ethnic groups under LENS2.
                                            The same eligibility criteria as under
                                            PAW will be used under LENS2 for the
                                            selection of sub-projects, and all
                                            activities will be implemented inside or
                                            near PA, as under PAW.

                                            Any negative impacts that may occur
                                            will be addressed under the Community
                                            Engagement Framework (CEF) that was
                                            originally developed for PAW and
                                            updated for LENS2. The CEF includes
                                            an Ethnic Group Planning Framework.
                                            Where their broad community support is
                                            not ascertained based on free, prior and
                                            informed consultations, sub-projects will
                                            not be implemented.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes   The policy is triggered because LENS2,
                                            like the PAW project, will support a
                                            stricter enforcement of PA management
                                            which will restrict the current access of
                                            local communities and people to natural
resources inside the PAs. No new
impacts that are not anticipated under
PAW are expected under LENS2. It is
expected that the types, scale and scope
of activities to be supported under
LENS2 are similar to those of PAW
sub-projects, and that the environmental
and social impacts that may result will
also be similar, even though LENS2 will
expand the geographical coverage from
five to eight provinces. The same
eligibility criteria as under PAW will be
used under LENS2 for the selection of
sub-projects, and all activities will be
implemented inside or near PA, as under
PAW. The Water Resources
Management (WRM) window will be
newly introduced, however, this window
is expected to support the same kinds of
activities as under PAW, such as the
preparation of management plan,
resource protection and monitoring by
the management team, establishment of
boundary posts, management trails and
guard posts, in addition to community
involvement in forest management and
improvement in livelihoods through the
implementation of the CEF. LENS2 just
decided to explicitly make them eligible
for funding, given the importance for the
objective of the project.

Like under the PAW project, local
people affected by LENS2 will benefit
from more sustainable access to forest
and other natural resources and project
support for alternative livelihoods which
seeks to enhance their livelihoods
sustainably. Nonetheless, short-term loss
of livelihood could be unavoidable
because adaptation to changes in
resource allocation and livelihoods may
be a longer-term process. Project
impacts due to access restrictions to
natural resources will be addressed
under a Process Framework (PF) that is
contained in the updated Community
Engagement Framework (CEF). It is
developed in line with OP 4.12, to allow
a meaningful participation of affected
                                                people in the developing a plan of action
                                                (Community Action Plan - CAP) to
                                                enhance livelihood in the long run and
                                                mitigate short-term livelihood losses,
                                                and grant financing will be provided to
                                                support implementing the CAP. The
                                                project will not involve physical
                                                relocation. However, minor land
                                                acquisition may be required under
                                                community livelihood activities and/or
                                                small repair, rehabilitation or new
                                                construction of office buildings and
                                                other facilities on public land. The
                                                Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                                was also updated that set out policies and
                                                procedures for the limited land
                                                acquisition. RPF is attached to CEF.
                                                During the Project implementation, if
                                                land acquisition is required, an
                                                abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan(s)
                                                (RAP) will be prepared and
                                                implemented for any activities that
                                                require involuntary land acquisition.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No     The NNT NPA which may receive funds
                                                under this project is located in the area of
                                                the Nam Theun 2 (NT2) dam and
                                                hydropower station. However, none of
                                                the Project activity is dependent and/or
                                                affects the existing dam as the Project
                                                area is upstream of the dam. Most PAs in
                                                Laos are adjacent or include an existing
                                                or future hydro-power scheme.
                                                However, none of the Project activity is
                                                dependent and/or affects those dams.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP Yes   Some of the PAs supported by the
7.50                                            Project are likely to include rivers that
                                                are direct or indirect tributaries of the
                                                Mekong, an international waterway. In
                                                or around these PAs and along these
                                                tributaries, the CEF implementation may
                                                include construction of small water
                                                distribution systems or small scale
                                                irrigation if this is a community priority
                                                and if it is compatible with the CAs. The
                                                OP/BP is therefore triggered. At the
                                                request of the EPF, the Bank has notified
                                                riparian countries (China, Myanmar,
                                                Viet Nam, Thailand and Cambodia) on
                                                December 18, 2014 prior to appraisal.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60         No               The project activities are not located in
                                                               any disputed areas as described in
                                                               OP/BP 7.60.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Like under the PAW project, no large scale or irreversible adverse environmental or social impacts (at
the level of Category A projects) are anticipated under LENS2 given the Project objective to strengthen
GoL capacity to improve the management of natural resources and of environment / social issues
associated with investment projects hence the Category B rating. The Component 1 of LENS2 will be
implemented nationwide, however, the Component 2 will be implemented in three new provinces on
top of the five included under the PAW project. It is expected that the types, scale and scope of
activities to be supported under LENS2 are similar to those of PAW subprojects, and that the
environmental and social impacts that may result will also be similar, even though LENS2 will expand
the geographical coverage from five to eight provinces. The same eligibility criteria as under PAW will
be used under LENS2 for the selection of sub-projects, and all activities will be implemented inside or
near PA, as under PAW.

OP4.01 on Environment Impact Assessment is triggered for several reasons. First, while the
legislative and regulatory works is anticipated overall to have positive impacts, it is always possible
that the new legislation or regulations are not well aligned with World Bank safeguards and cause
unexpected harm. In the same vein, the training modules developed with Project support, especially
those dealing with environment and social standards, could also oppose some of the some low
environmental and/ or social adverse impacts. Second, the sub-projects under the component 2 will
support enforcement of national and international good practice conservation laws and the
development of sustainable protected areas management, which may result in a short-term loss in
livelihood of local people who will not continue carrying out some of the livelihood activities they
traditionally engaged in before the Project. The initial assessment conducted during PAW project
preparation, and confirmed during the design of the LENS2preparation, did not find significant
potential negative impacts that may be caused by project activities. This is partially because the
Participatory Land Use Planning (PLUP) will be carried out which will help preserve the current
patterns of land and natural resource use.

OP4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources is triggered given the potential impacts on PCR and the
unknown location of the sub-projects.

OP 4.04 on Natural Habitats is triggered given the high biodiversity value and protected area status of
project area and the positive benefits provided by the Project interventions in the targeted natural
protected areas.

OP4.36. on Forest is triggered as the proposed activities involve positive changes in management of
forest areas in PAs. The Project is expected to improve the management of forested areas including a
beneficial impacts and reduction of the deforestation rates. Still, its implementation may locally affect
the forest cover as well as affect the rights and welfare of people and their dependence on the forests.

OP 4.09 on Pest Management is triggered as subproject activities in PA may include interventions that
could further lead to increased use of pesticides or of current pest management practices. Screening
procedures (and negative list) are in place to prevent any use of pesticides that would impact the Project
area of intervention.

OP7.50 on International Waterways is triggered since many of the PAs supported by the Project are
likely to include rivers that are direct or indirect tributaries of the Mekong, an international waterway
and small community water supply (less than 50 l/s) and small scale irrigation (less than 10 ha) are
eligible for financing.

OP4.10 on Indigenous Peoples (who are called Ethnic Groups in Lao PDR) is triggered because they
will constitute the majority of affected people and project beneficiaries under the sub-projects of
component 2. The overall project impacts on Ethnic Groups are expected to be positive, however, care
will be exercised so their precarious land/ natural resource tenure will not be adversely affected by the
Project. As with the PAW project, many project beneficiaries of LENS2 are expected to be Ethnic
Minorities who are known in Lao PDR as Ethnic Groups and meet eligibility criteria under OP 4.10.
For example, Hmong, Khmu, Mien, Makong, Bru and others are living in and around the two
pre-selected NE-PL and NNT NPAs. Many ethnic groups are also known to be present in other
provinces that are included under LENS2, especially in and near protected areas where LENS2 will
likely finance sub-projects. These are considered to be vulnerable ethnic groups in Lao PDR as their
livelihood is heavily based on subsistence agriculture and forest. No new impacts that are not
anticipated under PAW are expected to occur to ethnic groups under LENS2. It is expected that the
types, scale and scope of activities to be supported under LENS2 are similar to those of PAW
subprojects, and that the environmental and social impacts that may result will also be similar, even
though LENS2 will expand the geographical coverage from five to eight provinces and from
biodiversity protected areas to watershed protected areas. The same eligibility criteria as under PAW
will be used under LENS2 for the selection of sub-projects, and all activities will be implemented
inside or near protected areas, as under PAW.

OP4.12 involuntary resettlement is triggered because LENS2, like the PAW project, will support a
stricter enforcement of PA management which will restrict the current access of local communities and
people to natural resources inside the PAs. No new impacts that are not anticipated under PAW are
expected under LENS2. It is expected that the types, scale and scope of activities to be supported under
LENS2 are similar to those of PAW sub-projects, and that the environmental and social impacts that
may result will also be similar, even though LENS2 will expand the geographical coverage from five to
eight provinces and from biodiversity protected areas to protected areas managed for watershed
protection. The same eligibility criteria as under PAW will be used under LENS2 for the selection of
sub-projects, and all activities will be implemented inside or near PA, as under PAW. The management
of watershed protection forests is expected to support the same kinds of activities as under PAW, such
as the preparation of management plan, resource protection and monitoring by the management team,
establishment of boundary posts, management trails and guard posts, in addition to community
involvement in forest management and improvement in livelihoods through the implementation of the
CEF.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
All PAs in the country are subjected to a form or another of infrastructure/concession overlap. But all
must comply with the national Environmental impact assessment legislation and guidelines, some of
which, such as Social and Environment Standard for Operation (SESO), are supported by the Bank and
IFC under the Hydro-Mining Technical Assistance project. This Project also intend to build the
capacity of the Department of Environment and Social Impact Assessment (DESIA), and provincial
equivalents, to review EIAs, deliver certificates and monitor the implementation of mitigation plans of
investment projects.

Still, the improving/upgrading funded by GoL of existing roads passing through NE-PL (roads No. 1C,
No. 3204, and Phathi road) and NNT (8B or 1E) are likely to degrade some natural habitat and increase
the threats to both NPAs by facilitating access to remote area. There is a plan for hydropower
development outside of the NE-PL NPA, which could flood a portion of the NPA as well as increase
boat access and threat to the NE-PL NPA. The development of hydro-power projects in NE-PL NPA is
at feasibility stage. Construction is unlikely for several years. The upgrading of other roads in NE-PL
NPA is also at the stage of plan. There is a gold mine concession adjacent to the NNT NPA which, if
not monitored properly, may impact the PA in the future. It is likely that other PAs that will be
supported under LENS2 are facing or will face similar issues related to infrastructure development. The
Bank is not involved in any of these projects or concessions. However, the Bank will raise the issue of
possible impacts linked to large infrastructure development in highly valued biodiversity PAs and
provide advice to the Government as well as support if requested.

The linkage to these activities and any associated impacts, including future activities linked to technical
studies that will be financed under the LENS2, will be assessed as part of sub-projects preparation and
approval. The project will help MONRE build its capacity on environment law enforcement, build the
capacity of PONRE and PA teams to monitor investment projects, help the PONRE and the Department
of Forest Resources Management (DFRM) develop a database of large projects so they can better
anticipate their environmental and social impacts and feasibility, and prepare guidelines for
biodiversity offsets. These potential developments will be taken into account, in the PA management
plan, which will be developed and implemented during the implementation of PAW as well as LENS2.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The 5 provinces selected under PAW are the most relevant in terms of wildlife trafficking and
biodiversity. The additional 3 provinces are selected based on poverty data, provincial initial capacity
and MONRE department priority. Alternative provinces or PAs are less relevant in terms of
biodiversity although within these provinces additional PAs meet global biodiversity importance
criteria or include the watershed of rivers important for hydropower or irrigation. In terms of alternative
design, the Bank considered a strictly-PA support project as many have been done in the past.
However, because undoubtedly infrastructure driven by economic development will accelerate
degradation, the Project has decided to allocate more than half of its resources to institutional and
human resources development to gradually enable the country to make trade off that are more
conducive to greener growth.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The country adopted a new Environment Law in 2013 and is gradually preparing its implementation
decree. The Department of Environment and Social Impact Assessment (DESIA) is tasked with
reviewing EIAs and delivering certificates of compliance including clearing Social and Environment
Standards for Operation (SESOs) which are attached to concession agreements. DESIA is lightly
staffed but its current staff capacity for ESIA screening is reasonable. At the provincial level, the
Provincial Office for Environment and Natural Resources (PONRE) includes an environment impact
assessment unit. Those units are critically understaffed and under equipped. They have difficulties
monitoring EIA compliance. The Project aims to build the capacity and effectiveness of all of these
departments as well as the faculties of social science and the faculty of environment science at the
National University of Laos (NUOL).

The Bank portfolio in Laos focuses on natural resources management and environment. In other
project such as the HMTA, with the International Finance Corporation (IFC), the World Bank is
helping the Ministry of Energy and Mines develop guidelines for environment compliance. The
LENS project, just closed, assisted the development of resettlement curriculum in the faculty of
sociology as well as grievance mechanism and Ethic Group consultation guidelines.

OP4.01 on Environment Impact Assessment and other OP described earlier. An Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared by the Client for PAW project was revised and
updated for LENS2, to address potential environmental and social issues that may result from such
institutional development activities, capacity building, technical studies, river basin planning as well as
relevant mitigation measures. The ESMF includes screening procedures (and a negative list) for project
investments so that interventions, which could have the potential to adversely impact upon natural
habitat and forested areas are not eligible for financing under the Project. The ESMF includes relevant
Environment Code of Practices (ECOPs), Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) chance finds provisions
and a Pest Management Plan (PMP). When necessary, the promoters of sub-projects will prepare an
Environment and Social Management Plan which will be submitted to World Bank review and
approval. Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) will address site-specific
environmental impacts that may occur in targeted PAs as a result of minor civil works and other
activities implemented under Component 2. Provision to guide management of biodiversity and forest
in protected areas are included in the ESMF.

OP7.50 on International Waterways. At the request of the EPF, the Bank will notify riparian countries
(China, Myanmar, and the Mekong River Commission) prior to appraisal.

OP4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. The client has also updated the Community Engagement
Framework (CEF) which was originally developed for the PAW project. The CEF through its Process
Framework (PF) will continue to address potential impacts of access restrictions under the Project, by
providing detailed steps to ensure a full and informed participation of local people in PLUP process and
in the development of alternative, sustainable income streams. Free, prior and informed consultations
will be carried out with affected people, and their broad community support to project activities will be
ascertained. Community Action Plan (CAP) will be developed based on a participatory process, and
LENS2, like the PAW, will provide grant funding to implement part of the CAP, in order to at least
maintain pre-project level of livelihood after the Project. Potential presence of the PCRs will also be
identified through PLUP and verified through field visits. PA Management Plans will place emphasis
on conservation and management of endangered wildlife. Villagers will continue to be consulted on
and participate in the Project throughout implementation through participatory social assessment,
PLUP, CAP and CA processes at the village level, and through participatory Monitoring and
Evaluation (M&E) at the PA level. Baseline livelihood data especially of vulnerable households,
including women headed households, will be collected based on participatory Social Assessment (SA)
to be carried out during implementation, and their livelihood status will be regularly monitored
throughout the Project implementation under the participatory M&E. Where villages consist of hamlets
that previously constituted independent villages but are now consolidated into larger villages,
participatory planning process will start at the hamlet level.
The CEF provides detailed steps to ensure that free, prior and informed consultations will be conducted
with ethnic groups leading to their broad community support, and that they meaningfully participate in
a culturally appropriate manner in land and natural resource use planning and zoning, and the
development of alternative, more sustainable income streams.

In order to address minor land acquisition that may be required for community livelihood development
and the construction of office buildings and facilities, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was
also updated in line with OP 4.12 and as part of the CEF. An abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan
(RAP) will be developed during implementation should involuntary land acquisition become
necessary.

In order to address project risks with regard to the ongoing GoL program of village consolidations,
LENS2 will continue to distinguish between villages that have been consolidated in the past, and those
scheduled or proposed for consolidation. Villages scheduled or proposed for consolidation during the
life of the project are excluded from participation in the Project.

In villages consolidated in the past, the Project will identify such villages and: (a) determine through
participatory social assessment if land and tenure issues associated with the consolidation have been
resolved to the satisfaction of communities; (b) ascertain if adequate land for agriculture or other means
of livelihood to improve, or at least maintain their livelihoods, has been made available; (c) exclude
such villages if outstanding issues related to land for agriculture and natural resource are identified, and
convey findings to Provincial Authorities for appropriate action; and (d) excluded villages can
subsequently become Project beneficiaries if: (i) Provincial Authorities demonstrate that issues have
been resolved, (ii) communities confirm such resolution met standards of free, prior and informed
consultation, and (iii) communities provide their broad community support for participating in LENS2.

In cases where project participating villages consist of multiple hamlets including those of Ethnic
Groups, separate CAPs may be developed for respective hamlets. Elected representatives will represent
such hamlets both in village-wide and district level meetings to present views and opinions collected at
the hamlet-level meetings. The project will utilize the map of concessions granted in the previous few
years and continuously engage with provincial governors to avoid project risks due to allocation of land
concessions.

The project will use indigenous leadership and conflict resolution mechanisms as the first tier grievance
mechanism but will significantly strengthen their capacity including on safeguards requirements,
gender equity, existing legal and administrative frameworks and land management.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key potential stakeholders for the sub-projects are included national (EPF, several national department
and provincial offices of MoNRE; the Department of Forest Inspection (DOFI) of MAF; several
faculties of the National University of Lao (NUoL), provincial environment and inspection offices in
eligible provinces), about 150 villages in and around NE-PL NPA and NNT NPAs and other villages
that will be supported under LENS2.

Free, prior and informed consultations had been held during preparation of PAW project with
provincial and site level stakeholders as well as local people in the two pre-selected PAs as part of
social assessment development process, which ascertained broad community support to the Project.
In particular, the need to combine conservation with livelihood support and allow local people to
participate in conservation and natural resources management activities was emphasized and
supported. The ESMF provides guidance on how to prepare and ESMP and to carry out consultation
in that process. No support to PAs or villages will be carried out without an ESMP cleared by EPF and
the World Bank. Affected communities will directly participate in project implementation through the
process described in CEF.

The LENS2 ESMF and CEF are not substantially different from the PAW ESMF and CEF. The PAW
ESMF and CEF underwent public consultation organized by MONRE in December 2013 and January
2014 in Vientiane as well as in the districts concerned with the two NPAs in Bolikhamxay and
Khammouane Provinces, in Viengkham, Phonexay and Phonethong Districts, Louang Prabang
Province, in Viengthong, Samneua and Houamouang Districts, Houaphanh Province and in Phoukout
District, Xiengkhouang Province (see details in the PAW appraisal ISDS). In general, the meetings
were supportive of the approach, training has been proposed to provide for sub-projects implementing
unit during the Project implementation to improve the performance of safeguard implementation. The
meetings had been announced in the local newspaper in capital Vientiane. The results of these public
meetings are reflected in the final PAW ESMF which has been disclosed to Infoshop and on the
MONRE website in January 2014. SDAs will conduct free, prior and informed consultations with
affected people including but not limited to ethnic groups as they develop subproject proposals in line
with the CEF.

The ESMF and CEF was updated for LENS2 and translated in Lao language, and underwent additional
consultation in May and June 2014 in 7 provinces, including the 3 new provinces, as well as in
Vientiane capital. A separate stakeholder consultation report, with minutes of meeting has been
shared with the World Bank. The meetings had been announced in the local newspaper in capital
Vientiane. Both documents are disclosed on the EPF site since September 1 2014, updated with a new
draft on December 3, 2014 as well as in draft form at infoshop on December 3 2014. The final
approved ESMF and CEF will be re-disclosed to Infoshop and CEF site prior to the start of appraisal.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   01-Dec-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                03-Dec-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Lao People's Democratic Republic                                              01-Sep-2014
Comments: The draft #1 was disclosed in country September and improved over the period between
          September and December. It was officially received at the Bank on December 1, 2014.
          The draft was disclosed at Infoshop on 12/03/2014 and, after RSA clearance, the final
          version was disclosed at Infoshop on January 13, 2015.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   01-Dec-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                03-Dec-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Lao People's Democratic Republic                                              01-Sep-2014
Comments: The draft #1 was disclosed in country September and improved over the period between
          September and December. It was officially received at the Bank on December 1, 2014.
          The draft was disclosed at Infoshop on 12/03/2014 and, after RSA clearance, the final
          version was disclosed at Infoshop on January 13, 2015.
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   01-Dec-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 03-Dec-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Lao People's Democratic Republic                                               01-Sep-2014
Comments: The draft #1 was disclosed in country September and improved over the period between
          September and December. It was officially received at the Bank on December 1, 2014.
          The draft was disclosed at Infoshop on 12/03/2014 and, after RSA clearance, the final
          version was disclosed at Infoshop on January 13, 2015.
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                 Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    01-Dec-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 03-Dec-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Lao People's Democratic Republic                                               01-Sep-2014
Comments: The draft #1 was disclosed in country September and improved over the period between
          September and December. It was officially received at the Bank on December 1, 2014.
          The draft was disclosed at Infoshop on 12/03/2014 and, after RSA clearance, the final
          version was disclosed at Infoshop on January 13, 2015.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ X ]          No [     ]   NA [   ]

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager Yes [ X ]         No [ ]       NA [   ]
(PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the Yes [ X ]      No [     ]   NA [   ]
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or              Yes [   ]     No [ X ]     NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation   Yes [   ]     No [     ]   NA [ X ]
of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?             Yes [ X ]     No [     ]   NA [   ]

Is a separate PMP required?                                            Yes [   ]     No [ X ]     NA [   ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included in project
design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management
Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? Yes [ X ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the            Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as       Yes [ X ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or       Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or
Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [ X ]        No [   ]   NA [   ]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or       Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and    Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome      Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it     Yes [   ]   No [ X ]   NA [   ]
include provisions for certification system?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                 Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]

If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification   Yes [   ]   No [ X ]   NA [   ]
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and
the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ X ]        No [   ]   NA [   ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [ X ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [ X ]   No [    ]   NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [ X ]   No [    ]   NA [   ]
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [ X ]   No [    ]   NA [   ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [ X ]   No [    ]   NA [   ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:              Name: Jean-Michel G. Pavy
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard                          Date: 3/9/15
Practice Manager/Manager:      Name: Iain Shuker                          Date: 3/8/15
