                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC1453

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            India                            Project ID:      P132418
                            Project Name:       Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Services (P132418)
                            Task Team           Nupur Gupta
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           15-May-2014                      Estimated        09-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      SASDT                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal Area:     Climate change

                            Sector(s):          Public administration- Transportation (20%), Urban Transport (80%)
                            Theme(s):           Infrastructure services for private sector development (5%), Gender (5%), Other
                                                urban development (65%), Climate change (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    129.01                      Total Bank Financing:            0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      118.89
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                              10.12
                              Total                                                                         129.01
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project's development objective is to promote a shift to environmentally sustainable modes of
                           transport through a more comprehensive focus on city bus transport.
                           C. Project Description
                           This proposed project intends to fund the incremental activities aimed to enhance sustainability,
                         energy efficiency, and quality of city bus services, and therefore the potential for GHG emissions
                         reductions from the baseline project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project comprises the following components:

                         Component 1: Capacity building and Technical Assistance on Policy, Regulatory, Fiscal issues (GEF
                         US$ 0.7M, co-finance US$ 2.0M): As part of this component, policy, regulatory and fiscal
                         constraints will be reviewed at national, state and city levels to promote efficient and high quality
                         city bus services and policy notes developed for discussion and debate among key stakeholders.
                         Capacity building initiatives involving development of knowledge materials, training activities,
                         knowledge sharing through website/newsletters and cross learning events etc. in cutting edge areas
                         aimed at development of the overall urban bus sector in the country shall form part of this
                         component.

                         Component 2A: City Demonstration Projects (GEF US$ 6M, co-finance US$ 113 M): This
                         component shall support physical improvements targeted at modernizing the city bus services in
                         demonstration cities including (i) modern depot equipment for improved maintenance and life of
                         buses, (ii) modern Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) and Management Information Systems (MIS)
                         - to make the services more user friendly and for improved planning and management of operations
                         to enable optimal use of resources. Four cities have been selected as demonstration pilots. These are
                         Bhopal, Chandigarh, Jaipur and Mira Bhayandar.

                         Component 2B: Capacity Building & Technical Assistance to Demonstration Cities (GEF US$ 2.1m,
                         co-finance US$ 0.92m) : The capacity building and technical assistance component is targeted at
                         supporting the modernization efforts of selected demonstration cities. These shall include to the
                         following kinds of activities (i) institutional strengthening, capacity building and training, (ii)
                         business planning including route planning and rationalization for better utilization of buses, (iii)
                         marketing and branding, (iv) technical support with private sector participation including
                         mainstreaming of informal sector, (v) vehicle and driver performance management with a view to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improving fuel efficiency, (vi) incremental operational expenses.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The candidate cities for demonstration investments are Bhopal (population 1.7 million), Chandigarh
                         (1 million), Jaipur (3 million), and Mira-Bhayander (0.8 million). Mira-Bhayander is part of the
                         Mumbai Metropolitan Region on the west coast of India. Chandigarh is a federally administered high
                         income city that serves as a capital of two north Indian states – Haryana and Punjab. Jaipur is the
                         capital of Rajasthan, the largest state in India. Bhopal is the capital of Madhya Pradesh in Central
                         India and is known for its lake system.

                         The physical improvements under component 2 A , targeted at modernizing city bus services in
                         demonstration cities are largely planned to be executed in the existing bus depots and bus stops.
                         However, in some cases such physical improvements and installation may be proposed at new sites
                         for bus depots too. In such cases both existing and new sites when identified would require to be
                         screened for any possible impacts on surrounding natural resources as applicable as well as need for
                         resettlement and loss of livelihood etc. For Mira Bhayander, due to its proximity to the coast,
                         mangroves covered areas are located close to two currently identified candidate sites and would
                         require protection/ suitable management measures. An environment and social framework prepared
                         for ongoing India Sustainable Urban Transport Project shall be updated to reflect new cities, sub
                           project level activities any additional issues based on the potential sites to be identified during the
                           project preparation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Large scale land acquisition or resettlement is not envisaged under this project. However, all the sub
                           activities as part of the overall project in the select cities will be subject to social screening to
                           identify/confirm need for land acquisition and resettlement. Any proposed site requiring land
                           acquisition or displacement will require a detailed social assessment and preparation of Resettlement
                           action plan acceptable to the Bank. All sites would also be subject to environmental screening
                           followed by an adequate level of environmental assessment and preparation of management plan.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           MoUD, GoI has some capacity for safeguards policies, mostly outsourced from consultants, since it
                           is partnering with the Bank on the on-going India Sustainable Urban Transport Project. However, the
                           pilot cities are engaging substantively with the Bank on the Urban Transport agenda for the first time
                           and have no prior experience of applying safeguards policies provisions of the Bank. However, they
                           may have some experience of handling environmental management and social issues under
                           Jawaharlal Nehru Urban Renewal Mission to the extent that the activities would have required
                           regulatory clearances under national/local regulations. This capacity will be supplemented with
                           deployment of Project Preparation and Management Consultant teams with suitable environmental
                           and social expertise.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDI)
                           Sangeeta Kumari (SASDS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              Proposed activities will require adequate level
Public Disclosure Copy




                           BP 4.01                                                of environmental assessment, especially to
                                                                                  ensure proper consideration of impacts on the
                                                                                  local environment. Currently identified
                                                                                  activities include construction of bus
                                                                                  maintenance infrastructure and installation of
                                                                                  passenger information components in bus-stops
                                                                                  in cities. This will be city-specific and guided
                                                                                  by a common framework, which will be based
                                                                                  on the ESMF prepared for the SUTP.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           TBD              While no recognized protected areas are known
                                                                                  to be present in the current proposed locations,
                                                                                  since some of the areas are in the outskirts of
                                                                                  cities, there is a possibility of presence of
                                                                                  patches that may act as havens for wildlife, such
                                                                                  as mangroves close to some candidate sites in
                                                                                  the city of Mira Bhayander. This will be
                                                                                  investigated further as project preparation
                                                                                  progresses. This will be done through secondary
                                                                                                                                 data and site visits during preparation of city-
                                                                                                                                 specific investment plans.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            No Forests are likely to be impacted by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 project. The project activities are likely to be in
                                                                                                                                 urban areas where Forests are unlikely to be
                                                                                                                                 found.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            The project activities do not require use of
                                                                                                                                 pesticides.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   Yes                           While no important cultural properties are
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         known to be close to the currently proposed
                                                                                                                                 locations, there may be locally important
                                                                                                                                 shrines/other resources that may be identified
                                                                                                                                 during the ongoing studies. Moreover, chance-
                                                                                                                                 finds cannot be ruled out as construction on
                                                                                                                                 project activities progresses. These will be
                                                                                                                                 included in the ESMF and suitably incorporated
                                                                                                                                 into the management plans for city specific
                                                                                                                                 investments.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            None of the cities have any recognized tribal
                                                                                                                                 groups with distinct identity.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           Some of the sites may have their edges/
                                 4.12                                                                                            boundaries encroached or may require
                                                                                                                                 additional land for project activities. This is
                                                                                                                                 being assessed as part of project preparation for
                                                                                                                                 each city as part of Detailed Project Report
                                                                                                                                 preparation. A separate chapter will be provided
                                                                                                                                 in the DPR to reflect the benefits and likely
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 negative environmental and social impacts of
                                                                                                                                 the project activities. In case need for land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition or displacement is identified a sub
                                                                                                                                 project specific Resettlement action plan shall
                                                                                                                                 be prepared based on the Resettlement
                                                                                                                                 Framework to be developed under the ESMF.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            No dams are involved in the project.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project does not affect any international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterway.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The candidate cities do not fall in Disputed
                                 7.60                                                                                            Areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 06-May-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      ESMF including RPF, as required, to be ready by May 2014.



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:   Name: Nupur Gupta
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)       Date: 28-Apr-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (SM)   Date: 29-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
