                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA1448
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Rwanda                             Project ID:    P126498
                            Project Name:      Rwanda Feeder Roads Development Project (P126498)
                            Task Team          Tesfamichael Nahusenay Mi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          13-Jan-2014                        Estimated   27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTTR                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (50%), General agriculture, fishing
                                              and forestry sector (30%), General transportation secto r (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (60%), Decentralization (30%), Administrative
                                              and civil service reform (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      49.00           Total Bank Financing:                   45.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           4.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 45.00
                              Total                                                                                       49.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           1. The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Rwanda Feeder Roads Development
                           Project (RFRDP) is to enhance all season road connectivity to agricultural market centers in selected
                           districts. The proposed PDO will be mainly achieved by improving access roads to agricultural
                           market centers in selected areas.

                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         2. The proposed project contributes to the overarching goal of increasing agricultural production,
                         ensuring food security, and enhancing agricultural marketing. The project is designed as an integral
Public Disclosure Copy




                         part of the agricultural support initiatives in Rwanda. This project, coupled with the agriculture
                         operations, is expected to have impact on improving the livelihood of the rural population, and this
                         will be monitored during implementation.
                         3. Project Description
                         1. Component 1 – Rehabilitation, Upgrading and Maintenance of Selected Feeder Roads (US$41.1
                         million), enhancing connectivity to agricultural marketing centers; high agricultural production areas;
                         and the classified road network. The objective is to improve about 310 km of feeder roads in four (4)
                         districts. This component caters for:

                         2.       Sub-component 1.1 – rehabilitation, upgrading and maintenance of approximately 135 km
                         of selected feeder roads, in Karongi and Nyamasheke districts, through rehabilitation and upgrading
                         plus multi-year (three years) maintenance contracts. Depending the final cost estimate of the detailed
                         engineering design approximately 75 km and 60 km of priority roads would be improved in Karongi
                         and Nyamasheke district, respectively.

                         3.       Sub-component 1.2 – rehabilitation and upgrading of approximately 175 km of selected
                         feeder roads,in Rwamagana and Gisagara districts. Depending the final cost estimate of the detailed
                         engineering design approximately 103 km and 72 km of priority roads would be improved in
                         Rwamagana and Gisagara district respectively. This includes: 1.1(a) Civil works, and 1.1(b)
                         supervision services.

                         4.        Sub-componet 1.3- –multi-year (three years) maintenance of selected feeder roads , about
                         175 km of roads rehabilitated and upgraded in Rwamagana and Gisagara districts, to be financed by
                         the Government of Rwanda (GoR). This includes: 1.1(a) Civil works, and 1.1(b) supervision
                         services.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5.       Sub-component 1.4 - Technical Services under the Project Preparation Advance (PPA). This
                         supports preparatory activities, including (i) design and bid document preparation of priority roads
                         to be improved under the proposed project; (ii) updating Environmental and Social Impact
                         Assessments (ESIAs); and (iii) provision of Technical Assistance (TA), implemented under a Project
                         Preparation Advance (PPA).

                         6.       Component 2: Strategy Development for Rural Access, Transport Mobility Improvement
                         and Support to Institutional Development Support to Preparation of Follow-on Operations (US$5.5
                         million), including:

                         7.      Sub-component 2.1 - Preparation of business plans for feeder roads development and
                         maintenance as well as improvement of rural transport services. This will help to provide a strategic
                         framework for the development and maintenance of feeder roads as well as improving provision of
                         affordable rural transport services, including promoting the use of intermediate modes of transport
                         (IMTs).

                         8.        Sub-component 2.2 – support to Institutional Development for Rural Infrastructure
                         Management to build the institutional base for rural feeder roads management at the participating
                         districts and strengthening the capacity of the national level coordination entities. The


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         implementation of this sub-component will be coordinated by the RTDA and include:

                         Sub-component 2.2 (a) - Support to participating districts capacity building and strengthening the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         national coordination entities. and the support includes:

                         (i)     Support to the participating districts capacity building, including: (1) Provision of project
                         manager for the participating districts; (2) Technical assistance (TA) to the districts Infrastructure,
                         Finance, Procurement, Environmental Management, and Planning Units through adoption of systems
                         and manuals; and provision of training to district staff.

                         (ii) Strengthening the capacity of national coordination entities, through provision of training on
                         feeder roads development planning, monitoring and maintenance tools to MINAGRI and RTDA
                         staff.

                         Sub-component 2.2 (b) - Provision of project management support equipment, including (i) basic
                         equipment to facilitate the project management task at office level and field inspections to the
                         participating districts; and (ii) Provision of basic project management support equipment to the
                         RSSP- Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and RTDA

                         9. Sub-component 2.3 - Support to strengthening of the capacity of the Road Maintenance Fund
                         (RMF) (US$0.5 million), through provision of TA, training and studies improving the effectiveness
                         and efficiency of Road Fund management.

                         10.     Sub-component 2.4 - Preparation of follow-on operations; including: (a)Feasibility study,
                         ESIA and Design - for selected priority feeder roads for future improvement, including roads under
                         the second priority package; and (b) Bidding document preparation for a second cycle multi-year
                         maintenance contract

                         11.     Sub-component 2.5 - Training and organization of Local Community Associations (LCAs)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         from the road side rural population to undertake road maintenance.

                         12.     Component 3 - Support to project management (US$2.4 million), including:

                         (a)     Provision of TA (Financial Management and Monitoring and Evaluation) to RSSP- PIU.
                         (b)     Provision of TA (Technical Advisor) to RSSP-PIU and RTDA.
                         (c)     Technical, environmental, social and financial audit.
                         (d)     Support to monitoring project outputs, outcomes and impact.
                         (e)     Support to operational costs for district project management tasks.
                         (f)     Support to operational costs to central coordination entities.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         1.       The proposed project will focus on improving feeder roads in four districts, namely: (i)
                         Karongi (Western Province); (ii) Rwamagana (Eastern Province); (iii) Gisagara (Southern Province);
                         and (iv) Nyamasheke (Western Province). In terms of the roads to be improved, priority will be
                         given to roads connecting agricultural marketing centers, often located at sector headquarters to
                         main roads and district centers, followed by collector roads linking villages, cells (hamlets) and
                         agriculture project sites to market centers and sector headquarters.



                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         2.       The roads in Karongi are mainly hillside roads. The roads in Gisagara traverse partly hilly
                         and partly flat terrain. Rwamagana is mainly flat, but at certain locations the roads cross swampy or
                         marshlands. The roads in Nyamasheke cross mainly hilly areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3.       The hills are densely populated with scattered settlements often located on the small
                         holdings of individual households. However, the government has launched an initiative, which
                         encourages the scattered settlers to live in small townships established at selected central locations
                         for a population living in a defined rural neighborhood.

                         4.       The hills are covered with farms and small grazing lands, with no or limited vegetation.
                         Forest areas are mainly in the national reserves.

                         5.        The marshlands are often in between hills and more and more used for small scale
                         community owned irrigation based farming. The farmers usually live on the foot of the hills adjacent
                         to the marshland. The roads crossing marshlands may have to be raised and the side slopes may have
                         to be made flatter and involve widening, but this will not require relocating people. The existing
                         roads often cross on the shorter side of the marshland, which will limit the negative impact. The
                         impact on fauna and flora is expected to be limited as the roads follow existing routes, and road sides
                         are cultivated or already cleared.

                         6.       Roads in the hilly terrain require construction of culverts, often small in size, following the
                         existing natural water course. Side drains may require stone pitching and check dams to control
                         erosion. The soil along the roads is mostly soft that could be excavated by labor, which helps in
                         limiting damages to the environment, as labor construction involves gentle cutting and minimal
                         spillovers, when a road section has to be widened.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTN3)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes             The project has prepared an ESMF and four
                         BP 4.01                                               ESIAs. Preliminary findings from the
                                                                               Environmental and Social Impact Assessments
                                                                               for the first package feeder roads in Rwamagana
                                                                               Gisagara, Nyamasheke, Karongi districts indicate
                                                                               that rehabilitation and upgrading of roads will
                                                                               have potential adverse impacts. Potential adverse
                                                                               impacts include: loss of agricultural land and
                                                                               vegetation due to excavation of land from right of
                                                                               way and borrow areas; slope instability due to
                                                                               soil, water erosion and operation of machinery;
                                                                               disruption of natural drainage/flow and flooding;
                                                                               pollution of water bodies due to improper
                                                                               disposal of solid waste and spoil; increased noise
                                                                               and air pollution in the vicinity of construction
                                                                               sites. The ESMF provides detailed procedures to
                                                                               be followed during project implementation for


                                                                       Page 4 of 10
                                                                         preparing the environmental assessments
                                                                         necessary for the selected feeder roads, as well as
                                                                         the details of potential impacts and suggested
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         mitigation measures.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           Marshlands may be traversed by the project roads
                                                                         and, for this reason the Natural Habitats policy is
                                                                         triggered. These wetlands may have ecological
                                                                         value, and provide shelters to populations of
                                                                         birds, insects, and aquatic animal species of fauna
                                                                         and flora. Improper dumping of spoil and solid
                                                                         waste from construction sites into marshlands
                                                                         could lead to degradation and loss of habitat to
                                                                         the aquatic flora and fauna species of the
                                                                         wetlands. The project will strive to ensure that the
                                                                         ecological functions of the wetlands are retained,
                                                                         through mitigation measures as part of the
                                                                         ESMPs.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes           The road rehabilitation will follow existing
                                                                         alignments with some widening, which are not
                                                                         expected to have significant negative impacts on
                                                                         forest resources. However, initial Environmental
                                                                         and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) indicate
                                                                         that road widening on some of the selected feeder
                                                                         roads may lead to tree felling and/or re-planting
                                                                         along the roads. Potential impacts will be
                                                                         assessed in the ESIAs for each of the selected
                                                                         roads and mitigation measures provided in the
                                                                         ESMPs. A forest management plan may be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         prepared during project implementation as and
                                                                         when necessary.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project does not involve pest management
                                                                         activities.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) are not yet
                         BP 4.11                                         fully known, but some road works may be located
                                                                         in the influence area of some sites. Preliminary
                                                                         ESIAs indicate that graves could be located in the
                                                                         right of way. The ESMF has provided guidance
                                                                         on handling of PCR. Accordingly, the ESIAs
                                                                         address impacts on physical cultural resources
                                                                         and provide a physical cultural management plan
                                                                         including “Chance Finds”.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            The project does not trigger this policy.

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           Civil works will induce land acquisition. A
                         4.12                                            Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been
                                                                         prepared, reviewed by the Bank and disclosed in



                                                                 Page 5 of 10
                                                                                country and at the Infoshop on November 21,
                                                                                2013. Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for the
                                                                                selected feeder roads have been prepared and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                disclosed before appraisal.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                policy.
                            Projects on International        No                 Project does not affect any international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                waterways, thus the policy is not triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 The project does not operate in any disputed
                            7.60                                                areas, therefore the policy is not triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The roads to be widened cross hilly terrain susceptible to land slide and marsh lands which may
                              have fauna and flora. The rehabilitation and upgrading works will involve significant earthwork
                              and construction of slide protection and drainage structures, as well as embankments crossing
                              marshlands. The project is assigned Environmental Assessment (EA) Category A as upgrading of
                              the roads to meet the proposed design standard is expected to have negative environmental and
                              social impacts. Potential adverse impacts include: loss of agricultural land and vegetation due to
                              excavation of land in road expansion and borrow areas; slope instability due to soil, water erosion
                              and operation of machinery; disruption of natural drainage/flow and flooding; pollution of water
                              bodies due to improper disposal of solid waste and spoil; increased noise and air pollution in the
                              vicinity of construction sites.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Bank safeguard policies applicable to this project include: (i) OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental
                             Assessment), (ii) OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), (iii) OP/BP 4.36 Forests (iv) OP/BP Physical
                             Cultural Resources (4.11), and (v) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Cultural heritage
                             resources are not yet fully known, but some road works may be located in the influence area of
                             some sites, such as graves, which could be located in the right of way. Therefore, OP/BP 4.11 has
                             been triggered. The roads crossing the marshlands may have negative impact on natural flora and
                             fauna and OP/BP 4.04 has been triggered. The ESMF and ESIAs for the first package of selected
                             feeder roads include proposed measures for mitigating impacts on natural habitats and physical
                             cultural resources. The widening of the roads will have impact on natural vegetation including
                             felling trees along the roads, which may disturb natural soil and lead to exposure to erosion, hence
                             triggering the Forests policy, OP/BP 4.36. Proposed mitigation measures including:, tree planting
                             to stabilize slopes, provision of proper surfacing and side drainage facilities, stone pitching steep
                             slopes and check dams have been proposed as part of Environmental and Social Mitigation Plans.
                             A forest management plan may be prepared during project implementation as and when necessary.
                             The widening of the roads may also require acquiring farmlands and involve resettlement.
                             Therefor the project has triggered OP/BP 4.01and OP/BP 4.12.

                             As the roads proposed for upgrading may involve negative impact, the ESIAs and RAPs prepared
                             by the Consulting firm engaged by RTDA to conduct feasibility study and ESIAs for the first


                                                                        Page 6 of 10
                          package roads have been reviewed and updated by an independent consultant. Draft
                          Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and Resettlement Action Plan (RAPs)
                          prepared by the independent consultant have been submitted to the Bank for review. Upon
Public Disclosure Copy




                          completion of the review these documents will be disclosed before appraisal. An Environmental
                          and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have
                          been prepared to guide preparation of safeguards instruments during project implementation.
                          These documents and are under review by the Bank and will be disclosed before appraisal.

                          Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) to be prepared as part of the ESIAs for
                          selected feeder roads will be incorporated in the bidding documents. In addition RAPs will also be
                          prepared in line with the RPF and will ensure that, every person affected by the works has to be
                          relocated and/or properly compensated according to Bank policies before commencement of
                          construction works. All works contracts will have a provision for social impact mitigation
                          measures, such as HIV/AIDS prevention campaigns. Land acquisition and compensation of project
                          affected people, will be borne by the Government.

                          Overall, the project is expected to have positive social benefits by improving the livelihoods of
                          farmers through enhanced agricultural production. , The project will engage local communities
                          and micro-enterprises for maintenance. Further, the rehabilitation and upgrading works under the
                          proposed project will be carried out by small and medium contractors applying labour-intensive
                          methods. This arrangement will help to provide employment opportunity for about 1,500 to 2,000
                          people living in the project influence area.

                           Rwanda is committed to ensuring that gender issues are not only a part of the national discourse,
                           but also that they are integrated into policies and development programs. As part of project
                           implementation, a gender study and consultations with communities will be conducted to assess
                           the challenges and opportunities for the mainstreaming of gender concerns in the use of, access to,
                           and maintenance of roads.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The widening of the roads will have impact on vegetation and disturbing natural soil, which may
                           lead to exposure to erosion and pollution of water bodies, unless proper surfacing is provided and
                           side drainage facilities are provided with erosion protection measures, such as stone pitching steep
                           slopes and providing check dams. The widening of the roads may also require acquiring farmlands
                           and involve resettlement. The roads crossing the marshlands may have negative impact on natural
                           flora and fauna. Dumping of construction waste / spoil in haphazard manner may cause surface
                           and ground water pollution near the construction sites and breeding site for mosquitoes.

                           In order to minimize and mitigate potential and long term impacts, the project has prepared
                           safeguard instruments, ESMF and RPF to ensure that investments under the project are
                           environmentally and socially sustainable and comply with international best practice and GoR
                           policies and legislation.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Alternatives considered to minimizing adverse safeguard-related impacts: The road rehabilitation
                           and upgrading of the roads to a narrower road standard that could fit into the existing road
                           alignments was suggested. However, this was not consistent with the Road Act and upgrading of
                           the roads to the proposed standard has to be followed. To reduce the safeguard risk a detailed

                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                           ESIA and RAP have been prepared and mitigation measures will be implemented as part of the
                           project.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The ESIAs, ESMPs and RAPs have been prepared for the selected feeder roads. These documents
                           explain the project’s environmental and social impacts and provide detailed mitigation measure to
                           ensure sustainability and compliance with GoR’s regulations and legislations, as well as with
                           World Bank social and environmental policies.

                           Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources (MINAGRI) through the RFRDP is the lead agency
                           in the implementation of the ESMPs and RAPs and building the capacity of other actors in
                           environmental and social management. MINAGRI has the required capacity to coordinate and
                           implement the environmental and social management plans and monitoring programs. MINAGRI
                           will designate one of its officers to act as an Environmental and Social Safety Officer (EO), who
                           will provide oversight of environmental aspects of the construction contracts, including the
                           enforcement of all monitoring requirement. The project is spread in four districts in three
                           provinces, which also have in their core staff the environmental and social safeguard officers
                           under the Environment and Water Resource Management Units. However, Most of the
                           Environmental Officers at district level have limited experience and will need to be supported by
                           the Environmental and Social Safeguard Experts of RTDA.. It is envisaged that Resident
                           Engineers / contractor firm under the project will contribute to the capacity enhancement on
                           environmental and social management at district level. Moreover, expert opinion could be sought
                           from government agencies or specialist consultants. Addition support on safeguards will be
                           provided by RTDA, through training and technical assistance on safeguards to districts under the
                           project. The ESMF and ESIAs have made provisions for staff training and individual capacity
                           enhanced through specialized module in the required field.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           CConsultations with various stakeholders: Public consultations were held throughout the
                           preparation processes for ESMF, RPF and ESIAs and RAPs in communities along the selected
                           roads. The stakeholders included: local governments and administrations; Community Based
                           Organizations; Community Based Facilitators; and Non-Governmental Organization (NGOs). The
                           consultations focused on confirming the support of the population to the project, defining potential
                           impacts and mitigation measures, identifying potential areas of conflict between stakeholders and
                           defining areas of collaboration.

                           The safeguard instruments namely, ESMF, RPF, ESIAs and RAPs will be disclosed locally on the
                           website of the National Coordinating entity (Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources –
                           MINAGRI). The ESIAs and RAPs will be approved by the Rwanda Development Board, which is
                           responsible for reviewing and approving development projects safeguard instruments. The
                           safeguard documents will be provided to the four district administration, which will share with the
                           local population through the sectors (administration structure under district) and cells
                           (conglomerate of villages where storage facilities are established to deliver agricultural inputs and
                           store surplus products of farmers).
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          19-Nov-2013

                                                                      Page 8 of 10
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-Nov-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      22-Nov-2013
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Rwanda                                                           22-Nov-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Jan-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Rwanda                                                           10-Jan-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests

                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Tesfamichael Nahusenay Mi
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                      Date: 09-Jan-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (SM)                        Date: 09-Jan-2014




                                                                       Page 10 of 10
