                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA5639
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                             Project ID:    P133114
                            Project Name:      Heilongjiang Cold Weather Smart Public Transportation System (P133114)
                            Task Team          Binyam Reja
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          16-Dec-2013                       Estimated   27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Urban Transport (100%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (70%), Infrastructure services for
                                              private sector development (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     431.00           Total Bank Financing:                200.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   231.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      200.00
                              Total                                                                                      431.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to upgrade the quality and efficiency of public
                           transport services in selected public transport corridors of the project cities.
                            3. Project Description
                           Component 1. Public Transport Corridor Improvement (Total Cost: of total project cost US$165.16

                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         million; IBRD Loan US$48.86 million.) This component will finance the improvement of three
                         designated public transport corridors in Harbin and five in Mudanjiang by: (a) improving pavement
                         conditions and developing new lane configurations within the current pavement width to provide
Public Disclosure Copy




                         dedicated bus-priority lanes, bike lanes, and pedestrian facilities; (b) installing bus stops and
                         providing heated indoor bus waiting facilities, limited underground conduit / pipeline, sidewalk and
                         roadside parking improvement. The component will also finance one non-motorized corridor
                         improvement in downtown Mudanjiang.

                         Component 2. Public Transport Infrastructure Improvement (Total Costs, US$178.79 million; IBRD
                         Loan: US$89.46 million). This component will finance the following activities in Harbin and
                         Mudanjiang: (a) the procurement of cleaner-fuel and accessible buses to increase usage of cleaner-
                         fuel vehicles and introduce accessible buses to be used by people with disability; (b) construction of
                         passenger hubs, terminal, depots/garages, maintenance facility, safety education facility, and bus
                         driver training facility; (c) implementation of ITS applications and other information technology to
                         improve the efficiency and management of bus operations.

                         Component 3. Traffic Management and Safety Improvement (Total Costs, US$54.53 million; IBRD
                         Loan: US$37.29 million). This component will finance the procurement of equipment and related
                         civil works for traffic management in Harbin and Mudanjiang for: (a) traffic control system,
                         including traffic signals with bus priority function to ensure bus priority and pedestrian crossings
                         safety; (b) traffic monitoring and violation detection system; (c) real time traffic information system
                         and traffic guidance system; and (d) traffic safety education.

                         Component 4. Emergency Response and Road Maintenance (Total Costs, US$11.92 million; IBRD
                         Loan: US$4.41 million). This component will support Harbin in the development of an effective
                         emergency response and road maintenance system. The project will finance procurement goods for
                         (a) road, bridge and tunnel inspection equipment; (b) underground utility detector; (c) road
                         maintenance equipment; and (d) emergency response equipment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 5. Capacity Building (Total Costs, US$8.42 million; IBRD Loan: US$8.42 million). This
                         component will support improvements to the institutional and financing framework within which
                         public transport services are developed and operated in both Harbin and Mudanjiang. The project
                         will finance urban transport related studies, including evaluating and optimizing bus service in cold
                         weather regions, providing transport planning and management strategies, and developing a new
                         ownership and regulatory structure for public transport operations in the project cities. The proposed
                         studies and planning will strengthen the institutional capacity of the local municipalities to develop
                         solutions unique to the challenge of public transport in extremely cold weather condition. The project
                         will also build capacity for local municipal government to implement the respective project
                         components so as to achieve the proposed PDO. It The project will also finance consulting services
                         and incremental operation cost for project management, as well as support domestic and international
                         training/study tours.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project will support public transport improvements in two cities in Heilongjiang
                         Province, namely Harbin and Mudanjiang. Heilongjiang Province is located in northeastern China
                         and has a population of 38 million. Harbin is the capital city of Heilongjiang, and the largest city in
                         northeast China. In 2011, Harbin Municipality had a population of 10.6 million (6 million urban
                         population only), making Harbin the tenth most populous city in China. It is located in the central


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         plains by Songhuajiang River, the third longest river in China

                         Mudanjiang is a much smaller city than Harbin. It is a prefecture-level city located in the southeast of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Heilongjiang, bisected by Mudanjiang River, the second largest tributary of Songhuajiang River. In
                         2011, Mudanjiang Municipality had a population of 2.8 million (960,000 urban population only).
                         Both Harbin and Mudanjiang are located above 45 degrees latitude and both cities have dry and
                         extremely cold winter. Annual precipitation around 580 mm and snowing season from November to
                         January. The temperature in Harbin averages around 3.6 ºC annually and in the coldest month
                         (January) ranges from -13 ºC to -24 ºC, whereas those for Mudanjiang are slightly higher.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Songling Yao (EASCS)
                         Xin Ren (EASCS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes
                         BP 4.01
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No                The project will take place in built-up area in
                                                                               both cities with no natural habitats in the vicinity
                                                                               of any project sites.as defined by this OP.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No                Not applicable

                         Pest Management OP 4.09              No                 Not applicable

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/      Yes                There are three historical buildings alongside
                         BP 4.11                                               one proposed project corridor in Harbin for which
                                                                               care needs to be taken during construction.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No                 The project activities are located in within
                                                                               developed areas of Mudanjiang and Harbin.
                                                                               According to the social assessment carried out in
                                                                               the project areas, there are no ethnic minority
                                                                               communities in the project areas. Therefore, the
                                                                               project does not trigger OP 4.10, Indigenous
                                                                               Peoples.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes                The project will involve civil works, such as
                         4.12                                                  construction of bus terminals and depots,
                                                                               management centers; and install or make
                                                                               available overpasses and passage tunnels along
                                                                               the proposed corridors. For some of these works,
                                                                               land acquisition will be required. As a result, OP
                                                                               4.12 is triggered.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                         Projects on International            No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50




                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              As an urban transport project without building new roads or widening but rehabilitating existing
                              roads and building/rehabilitating transit hubs, bus depots and terminals, the adverse environmental
                              impacts during construction are moderate and mostly temporary in nature. The environmental
                              impacts during operation mainly include air pollution, noise, road safety and sewage from bus
                              hubs and depots, but these would be offset by the environmental improvement of reduced air
                              pollution that would result from improved bus speed and lower congestion than would otherwise
                              be the case if improvements are not done under the project. Overall, net positive impact on the
                              environment is expected.

                              A social assessment (SA) study was conducted separately in Harbin and Mudanjiang. With in-
                              depth analysis on and extensive consultation with various stakeholders, including transport service
                              users, affected citizens by land use and construction, officials and academics, the SA concluded
                              that the project will improve the public transportation system in both cities and provide direct
                              benefit to the citizens in their daily life. In addition, the SA also recommended several measures to
                              maximize the social benefits of the project by pursuing a user-friendly design. The SA suggestions
                              have been reflected into the project feasibility study and will be incorporated into detailed
                              engineering design. At the same time, the SA also identified some likely adverse impacts on
                              resettlement, which would be managed and mitigated through the social safeguard instruments,
                              including the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Resettlement Plan (RP) already prepared
                              for the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Long term impacts occur mainly during operations, such as air pollution and noise from traffic,
                              waste and wastewater from bus hubs and depots, passenger and vehicle safety etc, particularly in
                              cold and snowing season. Measures to address these impacts are specified in the Environmental
                              Management Plan (EMP) developed for each city of the project. In addition, by design, the project
                              will contribute to the reduction of negative environmental and safety impacts from transport.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Alternative analysis of different design options was undertaken as part of the EA process,
                              including a “without project scenario”, to avoid or minimize negative impacts from the project.
                              Different lane configurations for the proposed corridors, access to bus stops via overpass/
                              underpass versus ground level crossing at cross-roads, different layout of ground floor of bus
                              terminals and hubs, different floor materials for bus terminals and hubs, and inside buses were
                              compared. Alternatives that can better shelter passengers from the cold, wind and snow and can
                              provide safety (e.g. non-slippery floor material) and comfort thus more user friendly, especially in
                              cold weather, were recommended and included in the project design.

                              Different heat sources and technologies for heating terminals that are not connected to district


                                                                         Page 4 of 9
                           heating network were analyzed with the one that can meet relevant emission standard yet
                           economically viable being recommended. These recommendations from the EAs have been
                           incorporated in the feasibility studies (FS) or annexed to the FSs so as to be taken into account
Public Disclosure Copy




                           during design phase.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environment

                           Capacity building of the clients in Harbin and Mudanjiang has been an integral part of the project
                           preparation process to address environmental safeguard issues. To ensure the EMP
                           implementation, a budgeted training plan is included in the EMP. The EMP is the result of close
                           collaboration between the PMOs and the EA consultants. This ensures the EMP’s ownership by
                           the project entities which in turn helps guarantee its effective implementation.

                           The EMP specifies supervising mechanism and institutional arrangement to foster its
                           implementation. During construction, supervision engineers will be primarily responsible for daily
                           supervision of EMP measures. The PMOs, assisted by environmental experts, will carry out
                           random inspection. The EMP will be referred to in bidding documents and contracts with
                           contractors and supervisors to ensure its implementation. During operation, responsibility to
                           implement the EMP will largely be shifted to relevant public transport operators and government
                           agencies. Component 5 includes activities to enhance operators’ skills and project management.

                           Social Aspects

                           For Harbin, the Public Transport Corridor (Component 1) is not expected to require land
                           acquisitions as the improvements are within the right of way. However, during detailed design
                           work, there may be a need to acquire small piece of land to make changes to alignment as needed.
                           Because of this uncertainty, an RPF has been prepared, reviewed and agreed with the Bank. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Public Transport Infrastructure component will need land for the construction of three bus
                           terminals, depot, and management centers. All the identified land is state-owned and have already
                           been designated for the project. The RPF carried out due diligence review for the public
                           infrastructure land and concluded that the three sites will utilize 5.2 ha state-owned land that have
                           been allocated to the project and do not involve resettlement.

                           For Mudanjiang sub-project, the Public Transport Infrastructure (Component 2) requires land
                           acquisition for the five terminals/depots/management centers. Among the five sites, three of them
                           will need to acquire land from three villages, while the other two sites already have the land.
                           Therefore, a RP was prepared for the three sites and a due diligence review was done for the two
                           sites as annex to the RP. About 3 ha collective land at three villages separately for the three
                           terminals/depots/management centers will be acquired and will be covered in the RP, while 4.7 ha
                           state-owned land at two terminals/depots/management centers were acquired prior to 2007 and
                           reviewed in the due diligence review. The review on already-owned land identified that the
                           villagers were fully consulted, paid, provided with adequate livelihoods, and generally satisfied
                           with the land compensation and livelihood restoration. Meanwhile, the RP covers the resettlement
                           measures for the 102 persons in 26 households affected by Component 2 (Public Transport
                           Infrastructure), mainly relying on cash compensation plus social security program and training,
                           given only less than 10 percent of the income of the affected people is to be lost.



                                                                      Page 5 of 9
                          The two project cities have prepared RPF/RPs, which provided details on resettlement policy
                          procedures and requirements, compensation rates, measures to restore livelihoods, and institutional
                          and monitoring arrangements.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Gender Issues. The SA and the RPF/RP cover gender-disaggregated analysis including women’s
                          unique demand to explore measures to ensure women benefit from the new transport facilities.
                          Women participated in the consultation meetings and the social assessment process. The women-
                          related demand and proposed measures have been included in the FSR, which include the need to
                          (i) monitor service quality at bus stops and inside buses; (ii) provide street lighting along project
                          roads; and, (iii) provide cross bridges with cover.

                          Consultations and Participation. The SA and the RPF/RP were carried out through extensive
                          consultation and participation in the preparation process. Users’ and other stakeholders’ concerns
                          and needs were integrated into the project design and the resettlement planning. In Mudanjiang
                          city 32 specific recommendations were generated in SA participation process, and of which 23
                          have been included in the FSR to be included in the project design for implementation; while in
                          Harbin 46 specific recommendations were generated and 39 are included in the FSR.

                          Grievance Redress. A grievance redress mechanism is included in the RP, which provides a
                          process and a grievance record table, in which grievances can be filed both orally and in writing.
                          The grievance process starts with affected people filing complaint at village and neighborhood
                          committee level. If resolution is not obtained, the complaint can be elevated to county/district,
                          municipality level. Affected people can also file their complaints in court if not satisfied with the
                          resolution by the project authority at the different levels. All grievances and their resolution will
                          be recorded. The grievance filing mechanism has been disclosed to the local population and will
                          be further disseminated through the Resettlement Information Booklet, which is attached to the
                          RPF/RP.

                          Implementation Arrangement. The SA and RPF/RP were well prepared by the client, reviewed by
Public Disclosure Copy




                          the Bank, and are compliant with the Bank requirements. A resettlement management
                          arrangement with proper staff and resources in each city has been agreed up on and detailed in the
                          RP. Dedicated safeguard staff will be responsible for carrying out resettlement activities in each
                          project cities. An experienced external resettlement monitor will be engaged according to the RP
                          to ensure regular monitoring and reporting. Training plan is included in the RPF/RP, and will be
                          provided to the PMO staff, related agencies, and affected people before and during resettlement
                          activities.

                           Monitoring & Evaluation. Internal and external resettlement monitoring arrangement is included
                           in the RPF/RP, which covers the monitoring indicators, frequency, agency qualification and their
                           roles. The PMOs will provide resettlement progress monitoring report to the Bank semiannually.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Public consultation has been undertaken following public disclosure of EA/EMPs. The primary
                           objective was to collect the public opinion about the project, the EA findings and the sufficiency
                           of mitigation measures. These consultations took various forms, mainly through questionnaires,
                           interviews and meetings with the public and experts. Altogether, 944 people with a wide range of
                           background were surveyed in Harbin and more than 1200 people in Mudanjiang. Major concerns
                           include dust and social disturbance during construction, and emissions and noise during operation


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                           phase. The EAs and EMPs provided feedback and counter measures to address these concerns,
                           which were included in the Feasibility Study Report (FSR) to be taken up during engineering
                           design.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Information disclosures were undertaken during the EA preparation and investigation. The draft
                           EA/EMP for Harbin was disclosed on the website of the Harbin Transportation Bureau on July 2,
                           2013, with a notice published on a local newspaper, Harbin Daily on July 15, 2013. The revised
                           Harbin EA/EMP was re-disclosed on November 8, 2013. The hard copy of is available at the city
                           PMO office and EA institute for public reading. For Mudanjiang, the draft EA/EMP was disclosed
                           on the government website July 11, 2013. with a notice published in local newspaper on July 20,
                           2013. The revised Mudanjiang EA/EMP was re-disclosed on government website November 23,
                           2013. The hardcopy is also available at the city PMO office and the EA institute for public
                           reading. The Chinese and English versions of the Harbin and Mudanjiang EA/EMP documents
                           were disclosed on the World Bank’s InfoShop on October 28, 2013. After incorporating comments
                           from Bank safeguard review, the revised documents were re-disclosed on InfoShop on December
                           9, 2013.

                           On social side, the SA and the RPF/RP recorded the conducted extensive consultation and
                           participation in the preparation process, as well as a plan for next steps. Users’ and other
                           stakeholders’ concerns and needs were integrated into the project plan and integrated into the
                           project design, and the resettlement planning. In Mudanjiang, 32 specific recommendations were
                           proposed through the participation process, of which 23 were accepted and included in the FSR
                           project design; while in Harbin 46 specific recommendations were generated, of which 39 have
                           been accepted and included in the FSR.

                           Information Disclosure. Information about the project was distributed to local communities during
                           the SA and RPF/RP preparation. The SA and RPF/RP were disclosed in Mudanjiang on Oct 10,
                           2013, and in Harbin on Oct 16, 2013 through government websites, as well as through making
                           announcements on local newspapers. The hard copies of the safeguard documents are also
Public Disclosure Copy




                           available in the PMO offices. The Chinese and English versions of the documents were disclosed
                           on the World Bank’s InfoShop on October 28, 2013. After incorporating comments from Bank
                           safeguard review, the revised documents were re-disclosed on InfoShop on December 8, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         25-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      09-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                               08-Nov-2013
                           Comments: The EA for Harbin was disclosed on the website of city Transportation Bureau on
                                         November 8, 2013. The EA is downloadable and hardcopy is available at the city
                                         PMO office and EA institute. For Mudanjiang, revised EA/EMP was disclosed at
                                         government website on November 23, 2013. The EA hardcopy is also available at
                                         the city PMO office and the EA institute for public viewing.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process


                                                                    Page 7 of 9
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           China                                                            16-Oct-2013
                           Comments: Relevant information on the project social aspects was distributed among the local
                                         communities during the SA and RPF/RP preparation. The prepared SA and RPF/RP
                                         were disclosed in Mudanjiang on Oct 10, 2013, and in Harbin on Oct 16, 2013, with
                                         announcements on local newspapers.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?




                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:     Name: Binyam Reja
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:       Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                       Date: 17-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 9 of 9
