                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6858
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Sep-2013, 29-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          China                              Project ID:    P125496
                            Project Name:     Integrated Modern Agriculture Development Project (P125496)
                            Task Team         Rabih H. Karaky
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         19-Sep-2012                        Estimated   27-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    EASCS                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Irrigation and drainage (60%), Crops (25%), Forestry (5%), Agricultural
                                              extension and research (5%), Agro-industry, marketing, and t rade (5%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (25%), Water resource
                                              management (15%), Other rural development (10%), Rural policies and
                                              institutions (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     313.14           Total Bank Financing:                200.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                  200.00
                              Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country                               93.24
                              Sub-borrower(s)                                                                         19.90
                              Total                                                                                  313.14
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                                                      Page 1 of 12
                         The project development objective is to develop sustainable and climate resilient agricultural
                         production systems in selected areas of Gansu, Hunan, Jiangxi, and Liaoning provinces; Xinjiang
                         Uygur Autonomous region; and Chonqging municipality.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This will be achieved by investing in (i) irrigated agriculture infrastructure improvement, (ii)
                         enhanced climate smart agricultural practices, and (iii) institutional strengthening and capacity
                         building.
                         3. Project Description
                         The Integrated Modern Agricultural Development Project (IMAD) would finance investments in 33
                         counties/prefectures/cities in the six participating provinces/regions/municipalities. An approach that
                         balances infrastructure improvement with the promotion of climate smart agriculture practices and
                         the strengthening of the involved institutions and their sustainability is contemplated. Interventions
                         would be tailored to the local conditions and will be determined in consultation with line bureau
                         staff, technical institutions, farmer groups, local private sector representatives and local government.
                         Project areas are selected based on specified criteria such as clustered arable land with adequate
                         water resources but with infrastructure and technology gaps, vulnerability to climate shocks,
                         potential for agricultural modernization with demonstrative impacts, access to markets, etc. The total
                         cost is estimated at about $313.14 million, comprising an IBRD loan of US$200 million and
                         counterpart funding of $113.14 million. Counterpart funds comprise allocations from the six
                         provinces/regions/municipalities and farmers contribution. The GOC will pass on the Bank loan, as
                         grants, to the provinces. The project would have four components.

                         Component 1: Irrigated Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement
                         This component seeks to improve farmland infrastructure and the reliability and efficiency of
                         irrigation and drainage systems. It aims at stimulating irrigated agriculture and water productivity by
                         improving water use efficiency and the adoption of water savings irrigation. Activities financed
                         under this component include: (a) improvement of irrigation and drainage infrastructure (dredging
                         and cleaning of irrigation canals and drainage channels, canal lining, improving canal structures,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         pumping stations, irrigation wells and small water storage systems); (b) development of high-
                         efficiency irrigation systems, including low pressure pipeline water delivery systems, sprinkler,
                         micro, and drip irrigation systems; (c) water monitoring, measurement, and management, including
                         construction and installation of water measurement structures and facilities for the improved
                         irrigation and drainage systems, monitoring of the annual amount of groundwater pumped for
                         irrigation within the project area in the three northern provinces, preparation and implementation of
                         groundwater management plans for six counties in the northern provinces, and piloting crop evapo-
                         transpiration (ET) monitoring in three selected counties; and (d) rehabilitation of farm access roads
                         and on-farm rural power transmission lines.

                         Component 2: Enhanced Climate-Smart Agricultural Practices
                         This component will build on the improved irrigation infrastructure and water delivery activities in
                         Component A to improve the productivity of irrigated agriculture, increase farmers’ incomes, and
                         reduce their vulnerability to adverse climatic events. Activities financed under this component will
                         include:

                         (a) Soil conservation and land management practices such as: (i) land leveling, improved tillage
                         practices, use of crop residues and mulching; (ii) improved soil fertility management (soil testing,
                         precise/formula fertilizer application, organic fertilizers); (iii) development of multi-purpose agro-
                         ecological activities (e.g. shelter belts, greenbelts, and windbreaks); and (iv) improved access to

                                                                       Page 2 of 12
                         agricultural machinery.

                         (b) Adaptation oriented agronomic techniques through: (i) integrated pest management; (ii) green and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         non-polluted production systems; (iii) farm-based demonstrations of improved varieties and
                         technologies, rice intensification techniques, and green/plastic houses; (iv) applied research on
                         technical and policy-related to adaptation to climate change in agriculture).

                         Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building
                         This component seeks to improve the capacity of farmers, farmer organizations, and institutions at
                         various levels for conducting and promoting sustainable and climate resilient agriculture. Activities
                         under this component will include: (a) development and transfer of technical knowledge through
                         training and study tours; (b) awareness building/education and communication on climate smart
                         agriculture to the wider range of stakeholders; (c) establishing and strengthening of water users
                         associations for better operation and maintenance of on-farm irrigation infrastructure and better water
                         management for climate change resilience, and (d) promotion and support to farmer cooperatives
                         (FCs) and farmer associations (FAs) to enhance collective action for services delivery, access to
                         markets, and farmers based adaptation to climate change; (e) project management capacity building
                         for PMO staff at central, provincial, and county levels including provision of office equipment,
                         training materials, and vehicles.

                         This component would also finance technical assistance and relevant equipment to provide farmers,
                         farmer groups, and project institutions with specialist and multidisciplinary expertise (Mobile Expert
                         Teams) on various features of climate resilient agriculture (e.g. integrated and better water resources
                         management, mitigation and adaptation to climate change in agriculture, environmental, social and
                         economic aspects, evapotranspiration (ET) monitoring, environmental monitoring, and decision
                         support tools).

                         Component 4: Project Management Support
                         The purpose of this component is to provide support for project implementing agencies at each level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to manage, implement, supervise and monitor project activities and progress. Activities to be
                         financed under this component include: (a) projects surveys, design, and construction supervision;
                         (b) project management including management information systems, and establishment of an
                         effective monitoring and evaluation system to monitor physical, financial, outcomes, and impacts
                         indicators, and the recruitment of any related consultancies.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project covers the following 33 counties/districts in five provinces and Chongqing Municipality.
                         Hunan Province: Jinshi, Ningxiang, Hengdong, Datonghu, and Zixing.
                         Jiangxi Province: Jinxian, Anfu, Gaoan, Xingguo, Yushui, and Jinxi.
                         Gansu Province: Dunhuang, Gaotai, Yongdun, Lintao, Wushan, and Lintai.
                         Liaoning Province: Zhangwu, Changtu, Sujiadun, Xiaodong, Linyuan, and Lianshan.
                         Xinjiang Autonomous Region: Qitai, Fukang,Yanzhe, and Bohu.
                         Chongqing municipality: Nanchuan, Fuling, Tongnan, Dazhu, Yongchuan, and Kaixian.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Ximing Zhang (EASCS)
                         Feng Ji (EASCS)
                         Meixiang Zhou (EASCS)

                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes             The impacts of the proposed project on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                         environment are expected to be overall positive as
                                                                         the project, by design, puts strong emphasis on
                                                                         the development of sustainable and climate
                                                                         resilient agricultural production systems.
                                                                         Negative impacts are mainly related to small
                                                                         scale construction activities which are limited to
                                                                         the rehabilitation and improvement of irrigated
                                                                         agriculture infrastructure (refer to Section II).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              Based on the specified criteria, project areas are
                                                                         limited to the existing farmlands which have been
                                                                         heavily influenced by human activities. No
                                                                         ecologically sensitive site (e.g. natural habitat,
                                                                         nature reserves, etc.) has been found in the
                                                                         project influence area. The principal negative
                                                                         environmental impacts are construction-related,
                                                                         which are associated with the rehabilitation and
                                                                         improvement of existing on-farm irrigation and
                                                                         drainage infrastructure. The project will not have
                                                                         the potential to cause significant conversion (loss)
                                                                         or degradation of natural habitats. Therefore,
                                                                         Natural Habitats (OP4.04) is not triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              The project will not finance activities that would
                                                                         involve significant conversion or degradation of
                                                                         critical forest areas or related critical natural
                                                                         habitats as defined under the policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes             The project will include promotion of integrated
                                                                         pest management and production systems that
                                                                         meet green and non-polluted certification
                                                                         standards. No procurement of chemical pesticides
                                                                         is envisaged. The improved irrigation facilities
                                                                         and diversification of crop systems may induce
                                                                         some pesticides use. But the environmental and
                                                                         health risks are minor.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              The project will not adversely affect sites with
                         BP 4.11                                         archeological, paleontological, historical,
                                                                         religious, or unique natural values. Chance finds
                                                                         during construction might occur and relevant
                                                                         clauses are included in all construction contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             Among the six proposed project provinces, there
                                                                         are some ethnic minorities in the 4 proposed
                                                                         project counties of Xinjiang Autonomous Region.
                                                                         These ethnic minorities include Uygur, Kazak,
                                                                         Hui, and Mongolian. Most of them fall within the
                                                                         definition of Indigenous Peoples as per OP4.10.


                                                                 Page 4 of 12
                                                                        In addition, there are a small number of ethnic
                                                                        minority people - Mongolian who are relatively
                                                                        concentrated in some of the natural villages in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        project area of Lingyuan City in Liaoning
                                                                        Province.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             The project is expected to have marginal
                         4.12                                           impacts on land acquisition and resettlement in
                                                                        any of the six project provinces according to the
                                                                        current plan for land use. Civil works are planned
                                                                        only for canal dredging and on-farm work on
                                                                        their original bases without new land requirement
                                                                        beyond project village, and will be undertaken in
                                                                        the crop idle seasons so as to avoid impact of
                                                                        temporary landoccupation on crops as much as
                                                                        possible. However, there might be some minor
                                                                        readjustment or changes of land use for some
                                                                        irrigation facility rehabilitation connecting with
                                                                        upstream facilities. In case there might be any
                                                                        temporary or permanent involuntary taking of the
                                                                        land during project implementation, a
                                                                        Resettlement Policy Framework has been
                                                                        prepared. In Fukang city of Xinjiang, a new
                                                                        Baiyanghe reservoir is currently under
                                                                        construction and is planned to be completed in
                                                                        2013. This is a medium sized reservoir with a
                                                                        total capacity of 12 million m3 of water to irrigate
                                                                        over 10,000 ha of land. Though beyond the
                                                                        project area, the Baiyanghe reservoir constitutes
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        one of the water sources for irrigation in the
                                                                        project area in Fukang City. In view of this
                                                                        connection, due diligence has been conducted for
                                                                        this linked project, and a due diligence report has
                                                                        been prepared. The remaining livelihoods
                                                                        restoration of the affected people for this
                                                                        reservoir construction will be monitored over the
                                                                        course of project implementation.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        Yes             Although the Project does not finance
                                                                        construction of dams, the irrigation systems
                                                                        financed by the Project would draw water directly
                                                                        from reservoirs formed by a number of existing
                                                                        dams and a dam under construction (DUC), and
                                                                        they could not function if the dams were failed. In
                                                                        the meantime, a number of upstream existing
                                                                        dams also provide flood protection to the water
                                                                        diversion works being constructed under the
                                                                        Project; failure of these dams could cause
                                                                        extensive damage to or failure of the new Bank-


                                                                Page 5 of 12
                                                                                funded structures.

                                                                                Based on the requirements of the OP4.37, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                project provinces Jiangxi, Hunan, Gansu and
                                                                                Chongqing hired one or more independent dam
                                                                                specialists to (a) inspect and evaluate the safety
                                                                                status of the existing dam, their appurtenances,
                                                                                and their performance history; (b) review and
                                                                                evaluate the owner's operation and maintenance
                                                                                procedures; and (c) provide written reports of
                                                                                findings and recommendations for any remedial
                                                                                work or safety-related measures necessary to
                                                                                upgrade the existing dams to an acceptable safety
                                                                                standard. For Xinjiang and Liaoning Provinces,
                                                                                the Bank dam safety expert will work together
                                                                                with the client to ensure the project is in
                                                                                compliance with the OP4.37.
                                                                                Dam safety plans and emergency preparedness
                                                                                plans have been prepared for all the existing dams
                                                                                and for the dam under construction. The PMOs at
                                                                                all levels would also assign special staff to assist
                                                                                the Bank team to ensure the project is
                                                                                implemented in line with the OP4.37.
                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Based on the social and environmental screening at PCN stage and confirmed through further
                              project safeguard instrument preparation, five safeguards policies are triggered namely: OP4.01
                              Environmental Assessment, Pest Management (OP4.09), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), OP4.10
                              Indigenous people, and Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) .

                             Environmental Assessment (OP4.01). Environmental impacts of the proposed project are overall
                             positive. Project activities, which have been selected based on the agreed selection criteria, are in
                             compliance with relevant water resources management plans. The project would generate real
                             water saving in project areas each year through the improvement of irrigation and drainage
                             infrastructure, and through the development of high-efficiency irrigation systems. In addition, the
                             project, by its design, promotes enhanced climate-smart agricultural practices. It will bring
                             multiple environmental benefits, such as soil conservation, reuse of crop resides, reduction of the
                             use of pesticides and fertilizers through balanced fertilization application and integrated pest
                             management. Negative impacts are mainly related to small scale construction activities which are
                             limited to the rehabilitation and improvement of irrigated agriculture infrastructure. These impacts

                                                                        Page 6 of 12
                         (e.g. noise, wastewater, waste, and disturbance to local communities) will be temporary, limited
                         and local in nature.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management (OP4.09). The project will include promotion of integrated pest management
                         and production systems that meet green and non-polluted certification standards. No procurement
                         of chemical pesticides is envisaged. The improved irrigation facilities and diversification of crop
                         systems may induce some pesticides use. But the environmental and health risks are minor.

                         Dam Safety (OP 4.37). The project financed irrigation systems will draw water directly from
                         reservoirs formed by 44 dams, including 43 existing dams and one dam under construction (DUC).
                         Jiangxi, Hunan, Gansu and Chongqing Provinces/Municipality, will hire one or more independent
                         dam specialists to assist the Provincial PMOs, under the terms of references agreed by the World
                         Bank, to ensure the project is in compliance with the OP4.37. For Xinjiang and Liaoning
                         Provinces, the Bank dam safety expert will work together with the client to review the dam safety
                         status and ensure the project is in compliance with the OP4.37. Dam safety plans and emergency
                         preparedness plans have been prepared for all the existing dams and for the dam under
                         construction. Over the course of project implementation, the client will prepare Dam Safety Action
                         Plans following the recommendations of the dam safety experts. The PMOs at all levels would
                         also assign special staff to assist the Bank team to ensure the project is implemented in line with
                         the OP4.37.

                         Social safeguards

                         Indigenous People (OP 4.10). The project activities in Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region and
                         Liaoning Province would take place in some areas populated with ethnic minorities (such as
                         Yanqi, Bohu and Fukang counties in Xinjiang as well as Lingyuan and Zhangwu counties in
                         Liaoning), mostly Uygur, Kazak and Mongol who were identified to fall in the definition of
                         Indigenous Peoples (IP) as per OP4.10; and hence the IP policy is applicable to this project. A
                         Social Assessment (SA) was carried out to intensify free, prior and informed consultation among
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the ethnic minority communities; and based on their interests and enthusiasm to the project
                         activities, the Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) was developed to steer project design
                         and implementation for equitable opportunities for participation of the ethnic minority
                         communities and adequate benefits to be shared with them as compatible to their local cultures.

                         Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12). During project preparation, it was proved that this project
                         would not envisage land acquisition and resettlement in all the six participating provinces. Most of
                         the project activities on infrastructure construction would rehabilitate the existing facilities on their
                         original bases, and the rest new facilities would be established on the village level. All the
                         facilities belonged to village communities, and no land ownership and the related property rights
                         change hands. However, because the project irrigation construction may sometimes connect to
                         upstream facilities, civil work conducted beyond the village internal level could not be completely
                         ruled out. A resettlement policy framework (RPF) was hence prepared for the six project
                         provinces. This safeguard instrument was prepared just in case any land might be taken
                         involuntarily from certain project villages.

                         In addition, linkage possibility with ongoing or previous activities was also assessed. In Xinjiang
                         project area, Baiyanghe reservoir in Fukang County was under construction and was seen as linked
                         to this project. A due diligence review of land acquisition for the reservoir was prepared and
                         confirmed that the involuntary resettlement was in line with relevant Chinese laws and regulations

                                                                     Page 7 of 12
                           as well as the Bank policy OP/BP4.12. All affected people and herders felt satisfied with the
                           resettlement measures and results they experienced. The Task Team concluded that there was no
                           involuntary resettlement legacy issue. The due diligence review report was disclosed locally on
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Sept 20, 2012 and subsequently by the Bank Infoshop on Oct 18, 2012.

                           An environmental due diligence investigation for Baiyanghe Reservoir was also conducted by the
                           Research Center for Eco-Environmental Science, Chinese Academy of Science. It confirmed that
                           the reservoir was managed in compliance with Chinese EA laws and regulations which are broadly
                           consistent with the Bank policy, and that there were no outstanding environmental issues.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The proposed project supports sustainable and climate resilient agricultural production systems. It
                           is envisioned that in the future these production systems will be replicated in more areas, bringing
                           multiple environmental benefits such as soil conservation, reuse of crop resides, reduction in the
                           use of pesticides and fertilizers through balanced fertilizer application and integrated pest
                           management.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environmental Assessment. The client has engaged an experienced consultant to prepare an EMP
                           for the project in accordance with the Bank’s requirements for OP.4.01 and Chinese EA
                           regulations. The EMP specified mitigation measures, monitoring plan, institutional arrangement
                           and capacity building activities. As part of the EMP, Environmental Code of Practices (ECOPs)
                           for a typology of construction activities have been developed, including measures for
                           rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure; water-saving irrigation; rehabilitation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           electrification of pumping stations and existing tube wells; and farm and field access roads. Those
                           measures will be entered into bidding documents and civil works contracts.

                           Pest Management. Based on the survey and public consultation with local farmers and farmers’
                           cooperatives, a Pest Management Plan has been developed for each province addressing pest
                           management issues. The PMP incorporates the existing good pest management practices from the
                           project provinces and proposes a number of activities such as: (i) promoting IPM to reduce the use
                           of toxic pesticides, e.g. improvement of pest forecasting, use of bait lamps, crops rotation, pest
                           resistant varieties, and balanced fertilization. Pesticides will be reduced due to certification of
                           green and non-polluted production farmland; (ii) training and capacity building for local farmers
                           and governmental agencies; (iii) introduce and promote biological and botanical pesticides; (iv)
                           strengthening monitoring; and (v) reinforcing regulatory aspects. Implementation of the PMP will
                           be undertaken by the County PMOs, and farmer communities, with assistance of consultants,
                           County Plant Protection Stations and County Agricultural Technology Extension Services
                           Stations.

                           Dam Safety. Dam safety plans and emergency preparedness plans have been prepared for all the
                           existing dams and for the dam under construction.

                           Social: The Central PMO has hired professional consultants to conduct social assessment and


                                                                     Page 8 of 12
                          prepare the ethnic minority development plans (EMDP) for Xinjiang and Liaoning project sites, as
                          well as the resettlement policy framework(RPFs) for six project provinces to handle ethnic
                          minority development, and future land taking if any. The task team will provide training and
Public Disclosure Copy




                          guidance throughout the project cycle. The EMDP, RPFs and due diligence report were reviewed
                          by the World Bank team and deemed acceptable, and in line with the World Bank social
                          safeguards policy.

                          The RPFs set detailed principles and procedures as well as other crucial requirements for handling
                          involuntary resettlement. In the case of involuntary taking of land, the RPF will guide the project
                          component design and implementation with Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), and mandatory
                          compensation for land acquisition and livelihood restoration are required during project future
                          implementation.

                          The EMDP emphasizes participation and consultation with local ethnic minority peoples, and sets
                          key principles and measures to ensure ethnic people’s development and benefits from the project
                          in their culturally acceptable ways. Based on detailed SA studies and extensive consultation
                          among the Uygur, Kazak, Hui, and Mongol ethnic minority communities in the project areas in
                          Xinjiang and Uygur Autonomous Region and Liaoning Province, the EMDP sets forth a
                          Participatory Framework for these ethnic minority groups’ continuous consultation and
                          participation in project implementation. In the meantime, closely combined with project activity
                          design and fulfillment, it also makes a further detailed Action Plan for each of the ethnic minority
                          communities’ irrigation infrastructure development and participatory capacity building.

                          The due diligence review of the linked Baiyanghe Reservoir land requisition in Fukang County
                          concluded that there was no resettlement legacy issue and the livelihood restoration of affected
                          people would take a while and will be included as part of the whole project supervision as well as
                          monitoring and evaluation exercises during the project lifetime. In all, the implementation of these
                          safeguards instruments will be monitored periodically during the implementation stage of the
                          project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The PMO (SOCAD) has a rich experience in implementing World Bank-supported projects and
                           has successfully handled ethnic minority development, land acquisition under World Bank
                           projects without receiving any complaints in the past. The PMO will assign a dedicated staff to
                           coordinate safeguards work together with the local counterparts responsible for ethnic minority
                           development and any possible land taking in their respective project sites.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The EA safeguards documents (EMP, PMP) were prepared through consultation (e.g. interview,
                           meetings) with key stakeholders such as local farmers, farmers’ cooperatives. The PMPs and EMP
                           documents were locally disclosed on Sept 5, and Sept 6, 2012 respectively through announcements
                           published on the local website. These documents were disclosed at the Bank Info shop on October
                           17, 2012.

                          The project’s key stakeholders would be the local farmers and rural villages in the project areas of
                          the six provinces/region/municipality (Gansu, Hunan, Jiangxi, Liaoning provinces, Xinjiang
                          Autonomous region, and Chonqging municipality). During project preparation, the project
                          information dissemination campaign and repeated rounds of communication and consultation were
                          carried out by POCADs, COCADs and local practitioners among the villages in all project areas.


                                                                    Page 9 of 12
                           In particular, social assessment exercise with PRA measures was intensively conducted by the SA
                           team among the ethnic minority groups. Of a total of 24 ethnic minority communities concentrated
                           with Uygur, Kazak, Hui and Mongol populations in the project areas in Xinjiang and Liaoning
Public Disclosure Copy




                           provinces, 12 were selected by the SA team for detailed sample surveys and fieldwork, including
                           11 village meetings, 28 focus groups, 109 household interviews with PRA methodologies of the
                           seasonal calendars, wealth ranking, community resources mapping, and problem trees.
                           Information and alternative options about the project, plan of civil works, proposed locations of
                           project activities were shared and solicited with the public and key stakeholders during
                           consultation. The EMDP report was disclosed locally on August 27, 2012 and by the Bank
                           Infoshop on September 3, 2012. The RPF report was disclosed locally on August 27, 2012, and by
                           the Bank Infoshop on September 4, 2012.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Sep-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Oct-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            06-Sep-2012
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Sep-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   04-Sep-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            27-Aug-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Aug-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Sep-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            27-Aug-2012
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Sep-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Oct-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            05-Sep-2012
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.


                                                                   Page 10 of 12
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?




                                                                    Page 11 of 12
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Rabih H. Karaky
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Gailius J. Draugelis (SM)                   Date: 29-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
