INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCIO96
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Mar-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Nicaragua                  Project ID:   P152136
Project Name:    NI Comm. and Family Quality Health Care (P 152136)
Task Team        Amparo Elena Gordillo-Tobar
Leader(s):
Estimated        13-Apr-2015                Estimated     04-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GHNDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Health (100%)
Theme(s):        Child health (10%), Health system performance (40%), Injuries and non-
communicable diseases (20%), Population and reproductive healt h (30%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      60.00             Total Bank Financing:    60.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                      60.00
0          Total                                                            60.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The objectives of the Project are to: (i) strengthen the access and improve the quality of preventive,
promotional and curative health care services; (ii) strengthen the National Health Care Institution and
expand the basic health care package; and (iii) ensure financial support in case of a Public Health
Alert or Public Health Emergency.
C. Project Description


﻿Component 1. Strengthen the access and improve the quality of preventive, promotional and curative
health care services among the poor and vulnerable populations in 10 SILAIS (Sistema Local de
Atenci6n Integral). The purpose of this component is to expand coverage from 64 to 68
municipalities and improve the quality of health care with an emphasis on: (a) providing health care
0
to indigenous communities, in particular to the territories of Alto Wangki and Bocay; (b) accrediting
quality of care by level of care; and (c) implementing the Model of Family and Community Health
(MOSAFC). Capitated funding will be used to cover the incremental financial cost attached to the
provision of preventive and curative services in the municipalities.
Component 2. Institutional Strengthening of Ministry of Health (MoH) for an integral delivery of
health care services and Contingent Financing for a Public Health Alert or Public Health Emergency.
The purpose of the This component will be achieved through 3 subcomponents.
- Subcomponent 2.1. Strengthening MOSAF in terms of prevention and promotion with
emphasis in MACH/RH (Maternal, Adolescent, Child and Reproductive Care). This component aims
to support the MoH through: (a) strengthening the health care supply; (b) strengthening
comprehensive health care for adolescents and young people in municipalities of prioritized SILAIS,
which supports the implementation of the National Strategy for Integral Health and Adolescent
Development from 2013 to 2017 (ENSDIA); c) strengthening the laboratorial capabilities
(equipment, training, maintenance) of the health units in selected municipalities; and (d) supporting
the increase on the level of training for the health and administrative health resources in the central
and local level.
- Subcomponent 2.2. Improving the quality oral health services in rural areas of prioritized
SILAIS. This subcomponent aims to incorporate dental health into the health service delivery
programs in the rural areas as part of the country's primary health care strategy.
-      Subcomponent 2.3. Contingency Fund for a Public Health Alert or Health Emergency. The
objective of this component is to facilitate the use of critical resources in a case of a Public Health
O
U       Alert or a Health Emergency in the country. The component would respond to: (a) the preparation for
a potential epidemic (ex. Ebola, seasonal diseases, etc.); and (b) an emergency created by a natural
disaster.
Component 3. Strengthening of MoH's capacity to implement, supervise and evaluate the
implementation of health services.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The institutional strengthening of MoH in components 2 and 3 is national in scope, including some
indigenous territories in the RAAN (Regi6n Aut6noma del Atldntico Norte). The strengthening of
access and improvement of the quality of preventive, promotional and curative health care services
among poor and vulnerable populations in 68 municipalities in 10 selected Local SILAIS in
component 1 as well as the strengthening of comprehensive health care for adolescents and young
people in municipalities of prioritized SILAIS in component 2.1 (a) will particularly benefit the
indigenous and ethnic communities present in those areas. As part of the Improving the Community
and Family Health Care Services Project (P106870 and AF) the MoH had adapted the standard set of
basic health and nutrition services as defined under the Community and Family Health Model
(MOSAFC) to ensure that they are culturally appropriate to these communities, based on a study that
described the traditional health practices and customs and how these could be integrated in the public


﻿health systems.
The project is not expecting the construction of new infrastructure that could affect the physical
environment in sensitive or critical areas.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The borrower has previous experience with World Bank safeguards policies and has ensured
compliance in the ongoing World Bank Project (Nicaragua Community and Family Health Care
Project (P106870), both in ensuring extensive consultations to obtain broad community support for
a      the project at national and local levels and in the implementation of the Indigenous Peoples
Framework (IPPF) and Indigenous People Plans (IPP). The Directorate of Planning will manage the
development and implementation of the IPP for this project, and will be supervised by the National
Coordination of Indigenous Peoples and Traditional Medicine (as part of the Ministry of Health).
In regards of the environmental management, in the previous Project an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) was developed in order to assure the compliance of the national
law and the Bank's safeguard policies. This ESMF was approved and disclosed by the Bank and the
MoH in 2014. Additionally, as a next step or challenge of the MoH is to develop and implement
Hospitals Dangerous Waste Management Plans (HDWMP) in the main National Hospitals in order to
improve the quality of services of the Hospitals and prevent potential environment and social
problems in these health centers. , and received the environmental license from the environmental
authority (MARENA).
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (GENDR)
Peter F. B. A. Lafere (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies         Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment   Yes         This policy is triggered because the Project will
OP/BP 4.01                             support minor pre-installment works for the medical
and non-medical equipment to be purchased by the
Project. These potential negative impacts are not
significant and the mitigation measures are easy to
know and to implement. Additionally, some
activities during the operation will produce negative
environmental and social impacts that should be
prevent and mitigate. In this regards the project is
classified as Category B according with the OP/BP
4.01
A Diagnosis of the dangerous waste management in
the main 6 Hospitals in Managua was done, and 6
Hospitals Dangerous Waste Management Plans
(HDWMP) will be implemented with the Project.
Currently these HDWMP in Managua will be
finalized during the project preparation and the Bank
is supporting its finalization. These instruments will
be disclosure according with the Bank's policy.


﻿These Plans will include the WBG EHS Guidelines
for Medical Facilities; and procedure to manage
radioactive waste associated to the medical
equipment to be acquired under the project.
Finally, the capacity building effort includes
comprehensive occupational health and safety
training, including exposure to diseases, medical
waste and the use of certain equipment with
radiation.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No           This policy should not be triggered given that the
project's interventions are not located within or in
the proximity of natural habitats; hence no
conversion or degradation of natural habitats is
expected.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           This policy should not be triggered since the project
activities are not expected to impact forested areas,
forest dependent communities or involve changes in
management of forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No           This policy should not be triggered given that the
project's activities do not include the use of
pesticide.
Physical Cultural Resources  No          This policy should not be triggered given that the
OP/BP 4.11                               projects activities do not affect any physical or
cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes         There are indigenous peoples as defined by the
4.10                                     policy present in the Project area. For nine of the ten
SILAIS, the activities in component 1 are a
continuation of the activities in the Community and
Family Health Care Project P106870 for which IPPs
were consulted, disclosed and implemented. These
IPPs will be reviewed, updated, consulted and
disclosed again prior to appraisal to ensure that there
is continued broad community support for this
project in the nine original SILAIS. A new IPP for
the added SILAI will be prepared, consulted locally
and disclosed prior to appraisal to ensure that the
indigenous communities in the territories of Alto
Wangki and Bocay also broadly support the project
activities. The IPPs will also be consulted at national
level prior to disclosure to ensure that the measures
related to Maternal, Adolescent, Child and
Reproductive Care take into account the cultural
practices of Indigenous Groups.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No         This policy should not be triggered given that the
BP 4.12                                  project will focus on strengthening the access and
improving the quality of health care services. The


﻿project will, however, finance minor pre-installment
works for medical and non-medical equipment, for
which no land acquisition will be required and for
which no impacts covered under OP 4.12 are
expected.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           This policy should not be triggered given that the
project will not support the construction or
rehabilitation of dams.
Projects on International    No           This policy should not be triggered given that the
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      project will not affect international waterways as
defined under the policy.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         This policy should not be triggered given that the
BP 7.60                                   project will not affect disputed areas as defined under
the policy.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 13-Mar-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Safeguard studies are currently underway.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Amparo Elena Gordillo-Tobar
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards    Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                     Date: 13-Mar-2015
Advisor:
Practice Manager/      Name: Christoph Kurowski (PMGR)                 Date: 13-Mar-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


