                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC7800

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                            Project ID:      P147367
                            Project Name:      China:Xinjiang Technical and Vocational Education and Training Project
                                               (P147367)
                            Task Team          Liping Xiao
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       15-Oct-2014                         Estimated        16-Jul-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASHE                                Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Vocational training (80%), General education sector (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (80%), Education for all (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        98.00               Total Bank Financing:        50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     48.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        50.00
                              Total                                                                        98.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project will have total investment of US $98 million, with US$50 million from the World Bank
                           loan and the other US$48 million from counterpart contributions. The Project’s Development
                           Objectives is: to improve the quality and relevance of project schools to produce skills that respond
                           to the labor market demand in Xinjiang. The objective will be achieved through project investment in
                           improving the schools overall capacity in delivering TVET, and in enhancing provincial governance
                           and more balanced development of TVET system.
                         C. Project Description
                         The project will have two main components: (i) school-based reform; and (ii) provincial level policy
                         development, school twining partnership, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management. School level reforms will improve the quality, relevance of TVET provision in five
                         selected project schools and their respective partner schools through a set of innovations centering
                         around school-industry linkage and competence-based teaching and learning. Provincial level
                         activities will promote project management through knowledge sharing and monitoring and
                         evaluation, and enhance governance through policy making and school twining partnerships.

                         The primary beneficiaries of the project will be the students, especially those who are from poor
                         households in rural areas. As shown in Table 1, 71 percent of project school students are from rural
                         areas. About 60 percent of the students are from poor households who are eligible for subsidies from
                         the government. On average 43 percent of the total number of students are from minority ethnic
                         groups ranging from 30% to 98%. In Xinjiang Uygur Medical College most of the students are from
                         ethnic minority groups. These data shows that the proposed TVET project will meet the education
                         needs from students in poverty, and students from ethnic minority groups is a significant part of the
                         beneficiaries.

                         Table 1 Proportions of rural students, students from low-income families and ethnic groups
                         School Share of rural students (%)        Share of students from low-income households (%)
                         Share of minority ethnic groups (%)
                         Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College        85.0    65.9   45.0
                         Xinjiang Institute of Light Industry Technology 85.0      52.7    30.0
                         Xinjiang Institute of Engineering         49.9     52.9   31.0
                         Urumqi Vocational University 67.1         64.6     46.0
                         Xinjiang Uygur Medical College            83.8     79.1   98.0
                         Project School Average 71.0      60.0     43.0
                         Source: Project School Survey, January 2014.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The students from poor households and ethnic groups will have better employment prospects and
                         higher wage incomes after graduation. Table 2 gives a summary of school-reported employment rates
                         for recent graduates. Therefore, the proposed project will help promote shared prosperity and
                         mitigate income inequality through providing the required skills for students from lower income
                         households and from ethnic minority groups in Xinjiang.

                         Table 2 Employment rates for recent graduates
                         Name of Institute        Employment rate within six months of graduation (percent)
                         Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College     98.0
                         Xinjiang Institute of Light Industry Technology 98.4
                         Xinjiang Institute of Engineering        96.0
                         Urumqi Vocational University 97.2
                         Xinjiang Uygur Medical College           81.6
                         Source: Project School Survey, January 2014.

                         Ethnic minorities in the project area will benefit from the educational improvement of the vocational
                         colleges. As illustrated in Table 1 overall 71% of students will be from rural areas with 43% of them
                         part of ethnic groups. During the preparation stage, the task team will among other things discuss
                         with Xinjiang counterpart how to identify culturally sensitive and proper mitigating measures
                           catering to ethnic students like delivery TVET with local language and additional physical facility for
                           ethnic students. By doing so, the project will ensure the inclusion and promotion of ethnic minorities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           In particular, the inclusion of the Xinjiang Uygur Medical College into this project demonstrates the
                           project design emphasizes inclusiveness. The Xinjiang Uygur Medical College is the only institute in
                           China aiming at inheriting and developing the Uygur medicine and pharmacy through cultivation of
                           applied technical talents. Uygur m edicine and pharmacy had been recognized as national intangible
                           culture heritage in 2011 due to its long history, high effect, low cost, and wide outreach serving
                           minority people in remote and poor region. In addition to all school reform activities, the project will
                           support the College to translate and publicize some ancient Uygur medical literatures. Hence, the
                           local Uygur people will not only benefit from better health care services from more and higher
                           skilled graduates, but also enjoy the public goods produced by the project.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will be carried out in Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region. The project will include five
                           project schools, namely: Xinjiang Agricultural Vocational Technical College, Xinjiang institute of
                           Light Industry Technology; Xinjiang Institute of Engineering; Urumqi Vocational University and
                           Xinjiang Uygur Medical College. The Agriculture College locates at Changji city; the Uygur
                           Medical College locates at Hetian City; the other three colleges locate at Urumqi. The planned civil
                           works consist of the construction of a five or six- floor building for each school on the existing land
                           within the campuses of the 5 schools. The potential environmental impacts would be short-term, site
                           specific, and readily managed with mitigations measures. There are no families and ethnic minority
                           communities on the land and therefore there will be no persons affected by construction under the
                           project on these parcels of land. It is not anticipated that the Bank involuntary resettlement policy OP
                           4.12 would not be triggered for this project. However, a due diligence will be undertaken during
                           project preparation. The Indigenous People policy OP 4.10 is triggered as they represent an important
                           part of project beneficiaries as indicated in Table 1.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The World Bank has supported several projects in Xinjiang. However this is the first investment
                           project in education and vocational training there, therefore the institutional capacity for safeguard
                           policies is limited at present. The Project will be managed by the provincial Project Management
                           Office (PMO) established under Xinjiang Education Department. The PMO is staffed with 6 fulltime
                           staff; one staff will be responsible for safeguard-related work. Experienced professional consulting
                           teams will be hired to prepare the assessment of environmental implication of the project, as well as
                           the social study report for Xinjiang Uygur Medical College. The Bank’s safeguards specialists will
                           make extraordinary efforts to help the client to complete the work in a satisfactory manner. Financing
                           will be available during implementation to contract relevant skills to build the capacity of the client
                           with respect to safeguard aspects.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Zhefu Liu (EASCS)
                           Peter Leonard (EASDE)
                           Yiren Feng (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes   The proposed project will finance the
                         BP 4.01                                 construction of new school buildings for
                                                                 additional training space and skills training. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 planned civil works consist of the construction
                                                                 of a five or six- floor building for each school
                                                                 on the existing land within the campuses. No
                                                                 land acquisition or relocation of people is
                                                                 anticipated. The water supply, drainage and
                                                                 power supply will be provided by the existing
                                                                 system within the campuses, no additional
                                                                 facilities are needed to make the building
                                                                 function properly. Considering the type,
                                                                 location, sensitivity, and scale of the proposed
                                                                 project, the project is proposed to be classified
                                                                 as Category B due to the potential impacts that
                                                                 are small scale and limited to the site. An
                                                                 Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP) will be
                                                                 prepared for the civil works of the five schools
                                                                 to cover the environmental management
                                                                 activities of the project.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    The civil works of the project are within the
                                                                 existing campuses, sites visit confirmed that the
                                                                 project will not affect any natural habitats or
                                                                 critical natural habitats as defined under the
                                                                 policy.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    Project activities will not affect forest areas, it
                                                                 will not involve any logging or planting
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 activities in forest areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not procure pesticides or
                                                                 increase use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    There are no any physical cultural relics within
                         BP 4.11                                 the campuses. Chance finding procedure will be
                                                                 included in the ECOP, and relevant clauses will
                                                                 be included in all construction contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   Task Team has carried out initial social
                                                                 screening. Xinjiang is one of the largest ethnic-
                                                                 inhabited provinces in China. There are 47
                                                                 officially recognized ethnic groups covering 13
                                                                 million people, about 60% of total population in
                                                                 the province.
                                                                 The policy is triggered as Ethnic Minorities in
                                                                 the project area will benefit from the
                                                                 educational improvement of the vocational
                                                                 colleges. Overall 71% of students will be from
                                                                 rural areas with 43% of them part of ethnic
                                                                 groups.
                                                                                                                                 A Social Assessment and Ethnic Minority
                                                                                                                                 Development Plan (EMDP) – commensurate to
                                                                                                                                 the project issues - will be undertaken during
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 project preparation to ensure that the project
                                                                                                                                 design and implementation takes into account
                                                                                                                                 the specific requirements of ethnic minorities
                                                                                                                                 groups that are covered by the Bank definition.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    TBD                           The proposed project will finance new
                                 4.12                                                                                            construction of school buildings, workshops,
                                                                                                                                 and laboratories. Based on the information
                                                                                                                                 provided by clients all civil works will be within
                                                                                                                                 the existing campus and no involuntary land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition will be involved. It is anticipated
                                                                                                                                 that no people will be adversely affected by the
                                                                                                                                 civil works supported by the project. Based on
                                                                                                                                 the information above, the Task Team
                                                                                                                                 concluded that the proposed project will not
                                                                                                                                 trigger the Bank Policy on Involuntary
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement OP 4.12. However, a due diligence
                                                                                                                                 on existing sites will be undertaken during
                                                                                                                                 project preparation to confirm that there are no
                                                                                                                                 legacy issues or land acquisition required.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                                                                 policy.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project is not located in any international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways as defined under the policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not located in any known
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas as defined under the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Sep-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      ECOP and EMDP will be ready by August 20, 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Liping Xiao

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (RSA)                                                                                           Date: 24-Mar-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Luis Benveniste (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 24-Mar-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
