INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC8632
Country:         Ethiopia                   Project ID:   P148850
Project Name:    Ethiopia- Expressway Development Support Project (P148850)
Task Team        Tesfamichael Nahusenay Mitiku
Leader(s):
Estimated        13-Jan-2015                Estimated     21-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Rural and Inter-Urban Roads  Highways (75), General transportation
sector (25%)
Theme(s):        Rural services and infrastructure (75%), Trade facilitation and market access
(i5%), Infrastructure services for private sector development (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     355.00             Total Bank Financing:   355.00
U       Financing Gap:            0.00
IFinancing Source Amount
SBORROWER/RECIPIENT 0.00
(%International Development Association (IDA)                   355.00
Total                                                           355.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
1.     The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to facilitate the efficient and safer
movement of goods and people along selected heavily-trafficked corridors, whilst building systems
to manage and finance high-capacity roads and promote the safety of the core road network.
C. Project Description


﻿3.     The Project has three components with a total investment cost estimated at US$372 million,
of which US$300 million will be financed by IDA.
4.     The project constitutes mainly the construction of a new highway and support to the
0
establishment of the institutional base for expressway development. In due course of preparation, the
economic analysis results will be further reviewed and the proposed design standards and contracting
approaches be discussed and economically viable options and innovative road contract management
methods will be adopted. Capacity, safety and environment related challenges will be analyzed in
detail and a common set of objectives to make structural transformation in these areas will be
adopted.
5.     Based on consultations with the Ethiopian Authorities conducted during the identification
mission, the proposed project will encapsulate the following components:
6.     Component 1: Construction of High Capacity Highway (US$352 million) Construction of
the Zeway to Arsi Negele section (about 61 km) of the new highway from Modjo to Hawassa, with
associated supervision and monitoring services. In addition, Government of Ethiopia (GoE) will
undertake prioritized road safety improvement works at potential accident sites.
7.     Component 2: Setting out the Framework for Expressways Development and Institutional
Strengthening (US$12 million) - focusing on: (a) preparation of a comprehensive and integrated
expressway development master plan, and regulatory and legal framework for financing, operation
and maintenance of expressways and high capacity roads; encapsulating road toll strategies, platform
for PPP, safety and environment, and framework for monitoring impacts on poverty reduction,
shared prosperity and gender aspects; (b) support to institution building for an expressways and high
capacity highways management enterprise; (c) preparation of a design manual for expressways; (d)
piloting corridor based Road Safety actions along the Addis-Adama and Modjo-Hawassa corridors;
(e) provision of international experts to mentor junior staff of ERA and support critical activities
related to contract administration, safeguards and construction site safety management, and design
O
U       review to better control time, cost, scope, quality and safeguards of road construction projects; (f)
Technical assistance (TA) to monitor and strengthen governance and transparency in procurement
and contract management; and (g) feasibility studies, Environmental and Social Impact Assessments
(ESIAs) and concept designs for the priority potential high traffic roads.
8.     Component 3: Support to Enhancing Road Safety and Capacity Building of MOT (US$8
million) - including: (a) strengthening the NRSC secretariat under MOT; (b) programmatic Road
Safety capacity building, including: (i) training for safety professionals and provision of Technical
Assistance (TA); (ii) sensitization of policy makers and the population; and (iii) building the capacity
of the National Road Safety Council and Traffic Police; (c) identification of potential accident sites
and prioritization of improvements along key road corridors; and (d) technical support to the policy
and planning functions of the Ministry of Transport. This support will complement the Road Safety
database establishment supported by European Union and the financial support from the Road Fund.
9.     The total cost for the expressway dev elopment support project is estimated at US$372
million. IDA's contribution is estimated at US$300 million while GoE's counterpart funding is
estimated at US$72 million.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)


﻿10.    The proposed Modjo-Hawassa high capacity highway (210 km) is part of the Trans-African
Highway, the Cairo-Gaborone-Cape Town highway, which will link Addis Ababa with Kenya and
the port of Mombasa. The highway starts at Modjo town located 70 km east of Addis in Oromia
National Regional State (ONRS), branching south from the Addis Ababa - Adama - highway, and
terminates at the northern entrance to Hawassa town, capital of Southern Nation, Nationalities and
People Regional State (SNNPRS). The road corridor traverses five administrative weredas in the
O
ONRS covering about 95 percent of the total road length. The last section of the road starting from
Tikure Wuha river to the end of the project falls in Hawassa wereda of SNNPRS. The project road is
classified as Trunk and will be constructed on a green field site following an alignment that runs
parallel to the existing road. However, due to the significant impact on resettlement of the urban
dwellers in Hawassa, it is agreed to end the new highway at Tikurwuha entrance and provide a town
section type dual carriageway access road following the existing route.
11.    The new Modjo-Hawassa is a dual carriageway road to the DS-1 standard with a length of
210km and 70m right of way (ROW). In future when the need arises, this will enable possible
transformation of the highway into an expressway by adding some ancillary works without
demolishing and/or replacing initially constructed works.
12.    The project road traverses the Modjo, Awash, Meki, Bulbula and Horekelo rivers, requiring
construction of major crossing structures. Therefore, a total of 13 bridges will be constructed to
accommodate the dual carriageway. It will also be necessary to construct 11 major culverts along
main drainage streams. Based on the current design, a total of 43 underpasses (access for vehicles,
animals), at an average of every five km will be constructed. At Tikure Wuha entrance of Hawassa,
it's planned to provide 7 multiple culverts having a total length of 3 8m. Environmental and safety
impacts will be significant, though the expressway will not affect critical natural habitats.
13.    The road passes through the central Rift Valley characterized by flat land and depressions
that formed the lakes, with run off from the highlands draining through stream channels. The flat
topography from around km 24+000 to 29+000 enables backwater from the Koka Dam & reservoir
to form a wide flood plain west and east of the route during the wet season. The streams crossing the
road corridor originate from hilly and mountainous areas in the surroundings. The topography in the
last section of the road route starting from 198km to 205km is flat plain with seasonal floodplain and
the Cheleleka swamp area. The project road passes close (traverses watershed areas) to a number of
Rift Valley lakes, namely: lake Koka (man-made), Zeway, Langano, Abjata Shalla and Hawassa, as
well as Abjata Shalla National Park. The highway will also provide access road following the
existing route. To avoid traversing Hawassa town and reducing the impact on some farm lands and
settlements.
14.    For the execution of the project a total of 1520 ha will be required for the entire Modjo-
Hawassa section. This includes the dual carriageway with a 70m Right-of-Way (ROW) and road
links to the various establishments and access to towns along the corridor. In addition, sites for the
development of borrow pits and quarries sites will take up about 50ha of land, and the total land for
establishing the camp and garages would be 48ha. The total land requirement for the project is
therefore calculated to be 1618ha.
15.    The initial screening on OP4.12 and task teams visit to the project site identified that the
project will involve land take and restriction in economic activities. The tentative estimate of the
magnitude of the displacement and resettlement issues associated with the four lots of the highway is


﻿likely to be high -- though the Bank-financed portion will not involve the displacement of large
numbers of people. A review of the RAP submitted by the ERA, including categorization of the
different types of impacts and losses associated with the proposed footprint, including: numbers of
affected people, potential resettlement and expropriation cost, complexity of the social issues
O
U       associated with the resettlement, which includes potential strong opposition of certain groups, and
public controversy. In fact, the RAP report prepared by ERA for AfDB indicates that the Modjo-
Hawassa Expressway will affect an estimated 31, 854 PAPs. Preparation of RAP for the sections of
road to be financed by the World Bank and China EXIM Bank is ongoing. During the screening it
was determined that the potential impacts could be avoided or minimized through design measures.
These may include such measures as reducing the design scope and standard at the highest impact
areas or location and, reducing fill heights where appropriate. This will significantly reduce the
negative impact associated with land take to community/project affected persons. It is also noted that
the potential magnitude and complexity of resettlement and the full costs of resettlement activities
will be huge and will require a high degree of safeguard management and supervision to meet the
international best practice on resettlement.
16.    As the project corridor is already defined the ESIA and RAP to be prepared for the project
will identify and address potential negative impacts. In addition, the ESIA and RAP for the Modjo -
Hawassa road will include environmental and social management as well as resettlement principles
and methodology to guide the preparation of any additional RAP and ESMP that might be needed to
address any negative impacts identified during the final design preparation and construction. The
additional ESMPs and RAPs will be prepared by the contractor, reviewed by an independent
consultant to be engaged by ERA and consulted upon and disclosed. The RAPs will be implemented
by ERA before any construction will take place. As the project will be financed by four financiers,
including China EXIM Bank, ERA should ensure that all contracts will adopt the safeguard
instruments prepared for the project. The Government of Ethiopia (GoE) should ensure that the ESIA
and RAP prepared for the entire road are acceptable to all the financing partners. GoE should ensure
that adequate safeguards monitoring and supervision is in place for all sections, and arrange for joint
World Bank and ERA safeguards supervision of the section to be financed by China EXIM Bank,
and allow reciprocation.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
18.    ERA will be responsible for supervising the implementation of the RAP, EMP and
applications of ESIA and RPF. ERA will develop contract documentation (bidding documents) that
will include preparation of Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) that are responsive
to the findings of the ESIAs and RAPs, and will ensure that all prohibitions and mitigation measures
that are identified in the ESIAs are complied with.
19.    ERA's Environment and Social Management Team (ESMT) will be responsible for setting
and implementing ERA's environmental guidelines in support of and in line with the national level
requirements, playing the role of advisory, coordination and supervision aspects that are pertinent to
the road environmental impacts and implication assessment, and co-ordination with the respective
ERA district offices.
20.    The ESMT is currently staffed with six professionals: one Environmentalist, one Ecologist,
two Sociologists, one Lead Hydrologist (acting Team Leader) and one Geologist. There are also two
professionals assigned exclusively for HIV/AIDS prevention and control at ERA workplaces. ESMT
has been playing a good role in the implementation of mitigation measures.


﻿F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Anil H. Somani (GENDR)
Asferachew Abate Abebe (GENDR)
O
Chukwudi H. Okafor (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         This policy is triggered due to the potential
OP/BP 4.01                               environmental and social impacts of the planned
construction of Modjo-Hawassa road. Environmental
and Social Impact Assessments, and a RAP are under
preparation. They will be consulted upon and
disclosed before appraisal.
Environmental Management Plans in the ESIAs will
be instrumental to avoid and/or mitigate negative
environmental and social impacts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes         The project road passes close to lakes and a national
park endowed with natural habitats, any potential
negative impact will be assessed and addressed in the
ESIA.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          Yes         The project road passes close to a national park and
traverses a large area of woodland dominated by
Acacia species. The impacts of the construction on
the woodland and forests need to be assessed. The
draft ESIA included tree planting as an offset to the
potential damage that will occur to the woodlands
trees along the periphery of the Right-of Way
(ROW) and the ESIA should address how the tree
plantation should be managed.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          The project does not involve pest management.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes         Some road works and ancillary activities may be
OP/BP 4.11                              located in the area of influence of some sites. The
project ESIAs includes procedure for identification
and management of chance finds. If existence of
physical/cultural resources is confirmed, the ESIA
will be updated with the Physical/Cultural
management plan. In any case, "Chance Find"
procedures will be included in the contract
documents.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No          The social screening to determine vulnerable/
4.10                                    underserved groups that meet the criteria in OP 4.10,
observed no visible or unique socio-cultural
characteristics similar to the OP4. 10 requirements


﻿and notes that the project location in Modjo is within
the Oromai region and inhabited by the dominant
Oromian ethnic group, while the Hawassa site is a
semi urban area and inhabited by the Sidima ethnic
group, in SNNPR. Therefore, the task team has
concluded that OP 4.10 should not be triggered.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes          Since the ROW is defined the project will prepare
a       BP 4.12                                    detailed RAP, which will be consulted upon and
disclosed. Potential quarry, borrow material and spoil
sites should be pre-identified and encapsulated in the
RAP. The RAP should be implemented by ERA
before the start of civil works. If the design requires
major resettlement, the RAP has to be implemented
before project approval. In addition, a Resettlement
Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared, consulted upon
and disclosed to guide the preparation of any
additional RAP and address any negative impacts
identified during the final design preparation and
construction. The additional RAP will be prepared by
the contractor, reviewed by an independent
consultant to be engaged by ERA and consulted upon
and disclosed. The RAPs will be implemented by
ERA before any construction will take place. To
minimize the impact on resettlement, ERA should
consider alternative sites and route for design
optimization.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No            The project does not involve dams.
O
Projects on International     No           N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No          N/A
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Dec-2014
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
December 15, 2014
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Tesfamichael Nahusenay Mitiku
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards     Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)               Date: 14-Jan-2015
Coordinator:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿Practice Manager!     Name: Fabio Galli (PMGR)                      Date: i 5-Jan-20 15
Manager:
o
0
o
Ct
o
Ct
o
3
o
0
o
Ct
o
o
Ct
o


