                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA7620
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Guyana                            Project ID:    P147924
                            Project Name:      Guyana Secondary Education Improvement (P147924)
                            Task Team          Hongyu Yang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          18-Mar-2014                       Estimated   28-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSHE                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Secondary education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        12.00                Total Bank Financing: 12.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               12.00
                              Total                                                                                     12.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the Project is to increase the number of students with access to secondary school
                           mathematics teachers benefiting from continuous professional development nationwide and, to
                           increase the number of students in secondary schools with improved learning conditions in targeted
                           regions.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 10
                         The project would achieve its development objective through implementation of two components:

                         1)Number of students with access to teachers that meet 3 out of the following 4 conditions:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         i)      80 hours of in-service training per year (starting year 2 of the Project).
                         ii)     90% of attendance to the monthly peer-based teacher professional development workshops
                         per school year.
                         iii)    Receiving school-based supervision by mathematics instructional specialists at GSSs and
                         SDs, 3 times per academic year.
                         iv)Using the on-line “Community of Practice”

                         2)Number of students enrolled in secondary schools that meet 3 out of the following 4 conditions in
                         regions 3 and 4:
                         i)      Offering a full secondary schools curriculum (from grades 7 to 11)
                         ii)     Equipped laboratory
                         iii)     Classrooms with separating walls
                         iv)Class sizes with no more than 40 students

                         A.       Project Components
                         Component 1: Continuous Professional Development for Secondary School Math Teachers (US$ 1.9
                         million): The objective of this component is to improve content knowledge and pedagogy of
                         secondary school Mathematics teachers to improve teachers’ practices in the classroom (with the
                         ultimate goal of improving students learning). The expected outcome is improved Mathematics
                         instruction as measured by a classroom observation tool. Three sub-components are proposed:

                         a)       Sub-component 1.1 - In-Service Teacher Training and Upgrading in Mathematics (US$1.3
                         million). This would include: (i) a diagnostic assessment of mathematics teachers to determine
                         content knowledge, reveal current instructional practices and identify training needs; (ii) professional
                         development and enhanced capacity of master trainers from NCERD, CPCE and UG to deliver in-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         service training to all secondary school Mathematics teachers; (iii) design, development and
                         provision of modular, iterative, competency-based training for all secondary mathematics teachers;
                         and (iv) distribution of mathematics teaching aids to all secondary schools, to promote the
                         application of training in the classroom and improved student learning. This training would be
                         closely followed up by regular supervision visits by mathematics instructional specialists (3 times per
                         year per school), who would observe teachers’ practice and provide immediate feedback. The
                         project would finance technical assistance, materials, training activities, supervision logistics and
                         procurement/distribution of teaching aids.

                         In addition, at the regional level, Mathematics Subject Committee Meetings would continue to be
                         held for all Mathematics Department Heads. Subject Committee Meetings would be carefully
                         planned, structured and offered each month to address specific learning objectives and to share
                         experiences, facilitated by mathematics instructional specialists and coordinated by Regional and
                         District Education Officers. At the school level, Department Heads for Mathematics would organize
                         monthly meetings for all math teachers, to share lesson plans, teaching methods, knowledge and
                         skills from regional Subject Committee Meetings, and to prepare new lessons and learning activities
                         together. The Project will also provide information through initial training sessions to ensure the
                         buy-in and support of all School Heads and to emphasize their responsibility as school leaders and
                         agents of change for the whole school. The project would finance procurement of laptops and LCD
                         projectors to support these meetings. Meanwhile, the GoG has committed to provide sufficient


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         funding each year in the MOE’s budget to provide required logical support (supplies, transportation,
                         snacks, etc.).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Finally, the project would support establishment of an on-line “community of practice” among all
                         mathematics teachers, via a comprehensive website which would enable teachers to inter alia access
                         on-line instructional resources, share lesson plans, pose questions to fellow teachers and mathematics
                         experts, post blogs, review CSEC mathematics study guides, and locate email addresses of fellow
                         mathematics teachers.

                         Provision of continuous professional development at central, regional and school levels, and on-line,
                         would be mutually reinforcing. This four-year in-service training program would complement other
                         pre-service training activities supported through the IDA-financed “Improving Teacher Education
                         Project”.

                         b)Sub-component 1.2 – Revision of the Appraisal Instruments for Secondary School Teachers. (US
                         $300,000). This sub-component aims to improve mathematic teaching through the following three
                         activities: (i) the development of specific standards for Mathematics instruction, based on the general
                         teaching standards that are being produced by the MOE; (ii) the revision and piloting of the appraisal
                         instruments for secondary school teachers and school Principals, based on the current Report on
                         Annual Appraisal on Teachers in Guyana and the teachers’ diagnostic under subcomponent 1.1.; and
                         (iii) training for secondary school Principals and Deputy Principals in the use of the revised teacher
                         appraisal instruments.

                         c)       Sub-component 1.3 - Technology-assisted Learning in Mathematics (US$300,000): This
                         would include support to: (i) pilot the use of technology (both hardware and software) to improve
                         mathematics instruction and learning in about 8 secondary schools over three years, promoting
                         innovation and providing lessons for possible future scaling up; and (ii) carry out an independent
                         process evaluation to assess the effectiveness of different packages of hardware and software in
                         improving student learning outcomes in mathematics. Alternative technologies would be piloted,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         including portable tablets with the capability to download and operate a range of mathematics
                         software applications, as well as more standard visual display devices (LCD projectors). Teachers
                         would post regular “reflection blogs” regarding their experiences and questions to a website set up
                         for this purpose. To establish a baseline, school-level results for the 2013 Grade 9 mathematics
                         achievement exam would be used (covering both intervention and control schools). The same test
                         would be administered in both intervention and control schools after 4 years, so that the respective
                         learning gains over this time period could be assessed (difference in differences approach). In
                         addition, a more qualitative, process-focused evaluation would be conducted to gather teacher and
                         student feedback, assess technology adoption, review on-line resources prepared by participating
                         teachers, and compare outcomes from different technology packages. The project would finance
                         technical assistance, procurement of hardware and software, training and evaluation activities.

                         Component 2: Expansion of Secondary School Facilities (US$ 9.0 million): The objective of this
                         component is to expand access to general secondary school services in underserved areas of Regions
                         3 and 4. New school construction would include classrooms, laboratories, outdoor areas and
                         specialist rooms required under the secondary education curriculum. This would enable
                         approximately 1,800 students to be re-assigned from low-quality SDs and over-crowded GSSs to
                         new high-quality GSSs, and create an additional 1,800 student places at the secondary level. It
                         would have 2 sub-components.



                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         a)      Sub-component 2.1 - New School Construction (US$8 million): The project would finance
                         construction (civil works) of four new GSS in Regions 3 and 4. Two new GSSs would be for 1,000
                         students each, while the two other GSS would be for 800 students each (for a total of 3,600 new GSS
Public Disclosure Copy




                         student places). This would consolidate an estimated 10 SDs into complete secondary schools
                         offering Grades 7-11, reduce severe overcrowding at 2 existing GSS, and prepare for increasing
                         student populations coming from the primary level to all GSS in these regions. Two of the new
                         GSSs would be located in new housing areas where hundreds of new homes are in the process of
                         being built and no schools exist. The basic design and architectural plans already exist from recently
                         constructed GSSs financed through domestic resources; although they need to be revised, this should
                         accelerate bidding and implementation of the civil works.

                         b)Sub-component 2.2 – New School Furnishing and Equipment (US$1 million): This would finance
                         procurement of classroom furniture, laboratory equipment and basic technology for the four new
                         GSSs, to ensure that the new schools provide the necessary learning conditions to offer the full
                         secondary education curriculum.

                         Component 3: Institutional Capacity Building and Project Management (US$ 1.1 million): The
                         objective of this component is to strengthen capacity of: (i) the Education Management Information
                         System (EMIS); and (ii) MOE Project management. It would have 2 sub-components.

                         a)       Sub-component 3.1 - Strengthening of EMIS Capacity (US$200,000): This would include
                         design, development and implementation of a new EMIS, which would enable school heads and
                         MOE policymakers to more efficiently manage education sector data and use information for more
                         effective planning and policymaking. The project would finance procurement of EMIS software and
                         hardware, tablets (one or two) for each GSS, technical assistance and training. Worth noting is that
                         this EMIS would capitalize on the GoG’s “e-government initiative”, which has set up a large national
                         data center (now operational) and is establishing 4G wireless connectivity covering approximately 80
                         percent of the population (expected to be operational in August 2014). The vast majority of
                         secondary schools are located within this high-speed wireless area, so they will have free
Public Disclosure Copy




                         connectivity, easy uploading and access to education information with their tablets, and free hosting
                         of the EMIS software and database.
                         b)Sub-component 3.2 - Project Management and Monitoring (US$900,000): This would support
                         implementation of project activities with technical assistance, limited equipment and supplies and
                         certain operational costs, as well as financing of annual independent audits and monitoring of the
                         Project objectives and outcomes.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The plans are to create four secondary schools distributed within Region 4 (three schools), Region 3
                         (one school). Region 3 (Essequibo Islands – West Demerara) and Region 4 (Demerara – Mahaica)
                         are both located in coastal urban areas, near the capitol city of Georgetown. These regions are on the
                         east side of the Essequibo River surrounding the capitol on the low-lying fertile coastal plain along
                         which most of the population is concentrated.

                         While the projects will focus on meeting needs in these urban coastal areas, the final number and
                         specific locations (within Regions 3 and 4) of schools will depend on feasibility studies, analysis of
                         recent government-financed secondary schools, and other investment priorities. Proposed project
                         activities and locations will therefore be verified in appraisal mission.



                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                         Component 1 of the Project, Improved Mathematics Instruction, will be implemented in Hinterland
                         Regions 1, 7, 8, 9, home to the country’s indigenous, Amerindian populations. The objective of the
                         project in these Regions is to train secondary school teachers and improve teaching in mathematics
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for about 12 general secondary schools (GSS) and 100 secondary departments in primary schools
                         (SD) – grade 7 and 8. Approximately 148 mathematic teachers will be trained in the 4 Hinterland
                         regions. No school construction or rehabilitation is planned in the Hinterland.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong (LCSSO)
                         Michael J. Darr (LCSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes            TThe Project is Category B in terms of potential
                         BP 4.01                                            environmental impacts, and OP4.01 is triggered.
                                                                            The main environmental impacts expected of the
                                                                            Project are localized, low and possible to mitigate
                                                                            or prevent, and these will be related to the
                                                                            construction and rehabilitation works planned
                                                                            under Component 2. Construction activities will
                                                                            create minor impacts such as dust, noise, storage
                                                                            and disposal of debris, traffic and utilities
                                                                            disruption, and safety of workers and road users.
                                                                            A simplified Environmental Assessment and
                                                                            Management Plan (EAMP) has been prepared and
                                                                            disclosed that is commensurate with the level of
                                                                            design (e.g. pre-feasibility, feasibility, etc.). The
                                                                            EAMP includes: i) a description of the project (e.
                                                                            g. location, size and features of the new school);
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            ii) a simple description of the existing
                                                                            environmental and social baseline conditions of
                                                                            the project site, affected areas and communities;
                                                                            iii) an assessment of the potential environmental
                                                                            and social effects likely to occur (e.g. increased
                                                                            noise levels and traffic disruption during
                                                                            construction, safety issues, waste management
                                                                            during construction and school operations among
                                                                            other issues); iv) generic mitigation measures
                                                                            applicable during the design and construction
                                                                            phases (e.g. waste water and sanitation services,
                                                                            generic health and safety measures, etc.), which
                                                                            will be similar for each of the 4 new schools; v)
                                                                            specific environmental and social measures for
                                                                            each site to address any site-specific problems;
                                                                            and, vi) legal and institutional provisions (e.g. the
                                                                            environmental permits to be acquired,
                                                                            governmental agencies involved during
                                                                            constructions and operations, etc.). The EAMP
                                                                            also includes mitigation measures applicable


                                                                    Page 5 of 10
                                                                         during operations. For example, waste
                                                                         management activities will be implemented
                                                                         because Component 2 includes provisions for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         laboratories and specialist rooms required under
                                                                         the secondary education curriculum.
                                                                         The EAMP includes a public information and
                                                                         communications strategy to help ease concerns
                                                                         from secondary students and their families, as
                                                                         well as to build buy-in for the Project and
                                                                         tolerance for any temporary inconveniences that
                                                                         the project may cause. The project also
                                                                         establishes a grievance redress mechanism that
                                                                         will collect complaints of the communities and
                                                                         provide timely response.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            This policy is not triggered since the potential
                                                                         impacts to natural habitats will not be significant
                                                                         due to the location of the works (adjacent to
                                                                         existing schools and in urban areas) and the small
                                                                         scale of project interventions. Any impacts on
                                                                         vegetation will be carefully screened during
                                                                         project preparation and through provisions in the
                                                                         EAMP to ensure that natural habitats are not
                                                                         impacted.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            This policy is not triggered because any impacts
                                                                         are expected to be small and will not affect
                                                                         management of forest resources.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            Pesticide may be used in small quantities for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         termite treatments of foundations and ceilings, or
                                                                         for vector control during school operations;
                                                                         however, the EAMP will specify that only
                                                                         licensed, authorized pest control specialists may
                                                                         provide these services.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            This policy is not triggered since there are no
                         BP 4.11                                         physical cultural resources at any of the existing
                                                                         school sites and the size of project/site is small.
                                                                         Given that the construction of new school and
                                                                         rehabilitation works could result in small
                                                                         earthworks, the EAMP will specify that site
                                                                         screening must be performed to avoid affecting
                                                                         physical cultural resources; that stakeholders
                                                                         contribute to project conceptual design; and, that
                                                                         chance-find procedures must be included in
                                                                         contracting documents.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           The Indigenous Peoples Policy is triggered since
                                                                         the project’s intended intervention areas include
                                                                         those inhabited by indigenous groups in the



                                                                 Page 6 of 10
                                                                                 Hinterland. An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) has
                                                                                 been prepared with associated consultations. The
                                                                                 expected impacts of the project on indigenous
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 communities are both positive and discrete; the
                                                                                 main impact is expected to be improved learning
                                                                                 of mathematics among indigenous youth, which
                                                                                 should increase their secondary level completion
                                                                                 rates and opportunities to continue on to higher
                                                                                 education and/or succeed in the labor market.
                                                                                 There is no school construction or rehabilitation
                                                                                 planned in indigenous areas.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No              This policy is not triggered. No private land
                            4.12                                                 acquisition will occur under the project. All
                                                                                 schools will be constructed on existing
                                                                                 Government land and the Government will
                                                                                 provide proof of land ownership and transfer of
                                                                                 title (to the MOE) to the Bank prior to project
                                                                                 appraisal. A cut-off date will be established after
                                                                                 which no claims on the lands (crops, squatters
                                                                                 etc.) will be recognized.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No              This policy is not triggered because the Project
                                                                                 will not finance the construction of new dams nor
                                                                                 will support other investments that rely on
                                                                                 services of existing dams.
                            Projects on International            No              The policy is not triggered since the Project will
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 not affect any international waterways as defined
                                                                                 under the policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  Schools to be constructed are not in disputed
                            7.60                                                 areas as defined under the policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The potential negative effects of the project are related to construction activities, which are minor
                              and manageable with standard techniques as described in the EAMP; there are no long-term
                              negative impacts associated with the project.
                              Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 - Component 1, Improved Mathematics Instruction, will be
                              implemented in Hinterland Regions 1, 7, 8, and 9, home to the country’s indigenous, Amerindian
                              populations. Approximately 148 mathematic teachers will be trained in the 4 Hinterland regions.
                              The project is expected to improve mathematics teaching secondary schools. No school
                              construction or rehabilitation is planned in the Hinterland.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              None.



                                                                         Page 7 of 10
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Alternatives for possible school sites were reviewed in the field in a pre-appraisal mission. No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           major issues were observed with the selected sites.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Ministry of Education (MoE) issued the EAMP and will be the implementing agency
                           responsible for the Project. Coordination, technical and fiduciary aspects of the Project would be
                           overseen by a Project Coordinator (PC), to be located in the MoE Planning Department, Buildings
                           Unit, who would report to the Permanent Secretary of the MoE.

                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10. The Borrower has consulted with Amerindian beneficiaries in
                           Regions 1, 7, 8, 9 and will finalize and will disclose an Indigenous Peoples Plan prior to Appraisal.
                           The Borrower (and specifically the MOE) has experience with OP/BP 4.10 in the context of the
                           University of Guyana Science and Technology Project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The EAMP was disclosed and included a web-based grievance redress mechanism.

                           The primary stakeholders of the project, in both Coastal and Hinterland Regions, are secondary
                           school mathematics teachers, their students and their families as well as the Ministry of Education.
                           In addition, the following stakeholders will also likely benefit, particularly in the Hinterland the:
                           Regional Education Officers; District Education Officers.

                           Indigenous Peoples Plan OP/BP 4.10. Teachers, pupils and their families in the Hinterland were
                           consulted during the preparation of the Indigenous Peoples Plan. The draft disclosed plan will in
                           turn be consulted for final comment and the stakeholders will be engaged during the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation of the project.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         07-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      12-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                          Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          13-Mar-2014
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       17-Mar-2014




                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Guyana                                                           18-Mar-2014
                           Comments: IPP is expected to be disclosed between today and tomorrow March 18. Today,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         March 17 is a Country holiday.
                                         Location: Ministry of Education, Guyana:
                                         http://www.education.gov.gy/web/index.php/project
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?


                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Hongyu Yang
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Reema Nayar (SM)                          Date: 17-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
