                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA9796

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jun-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Jun-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Indonesia                         Project ID:    P123940
                                                       Parent         P111577
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     Local Government and Decentralization Project Additional Financing (P123940)
   Parent Project    Local Government and Decentralization Project (P111577)
   Name:
   Task Team         Taimur Samad
   Leader:
   Estimated         30-Jul-2014                       Estimated   22-Sep-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    EASIS                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Sub-national government administration (100%)
   Theme(s):         Municipal governance and institution building (67%), Decentralization (33%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:        500.00               Total Bank Financing:      500.00
   Financing Gap:               0.00
     Financing Source                                                                     Amount
     Borrower                                                                                0.00
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                 500.00
     Total                                                                                 500.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         Yes
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)



                                            Page 1 of 19
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The objective of the project is to improve the accountability and reporting of the central
   government’s Specific Purpose Grants (DAK) for the infrastructure sub-sectors within pilot local
   governments (LGs). This will be done through improved financial and technical reporting, and
   verification of outputs delivered by LGs with the DAK grants.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
Component 1: DAK Reimbursement (USD 500.0m of Bank Financing)

The component will reimburse the Borrower for Outputs produced by Sub-projects undertaken by
Selected Local Governments financed by annual DAK Transfers and annual LG Contributions for
roads, water, sanitation and irrigation.
Component 2: Institutional Support Program (USD 10.0m of Borrower financing)

The component will support the following sub-components:

2.1 Policy Advisory: Providing technical assistance and policy advice, and carrying out capacity
building activities for the Ministry of Finance’s Directorate General of Fiscal Balance to reform
intergovernmental transfers and improve local government service delivery, including, inter alia, the
design of output and performance-based transfers, the development of a system linking service
standards to government transfers, the strengthening of the Borrower’s monitoring and evaluation
framework for intergovernmental transfers, and the development of tools for citizen accountability.

2.2 Strengthening Local Government Capacity to Improve Public Service Delivery: Carrying out
capacity building activities to (i) improve DAK utilization by Selected Local Governments by, inter
alia, providing support to Selected Local Governments to strengthen their capabilities in areas such
as procurement and internal controls, investment planning and maintenance, technical quality
control, safeguards management and reporting and accountability; and (ii) improve local public
service delivery by, inter alia, developing and implementing tools to improve municipal
management.

2.3 Strengthening Central Government Capacity for Effective and Efficient Use of DAK:

2.3.1 Providing implementation support on the day-to-day management of the Project including in
areas such as reporting, monitoring and evaluation of Project progress, information dissemination to
Local Governments, implementation of the DAK web-based reporting system, updating and
expansion of reference unit costs, social and environmental safeguards, and development and
updating of training materials for Local Governments.

2.3.2 Providing technical assistance for verification support by, inter alia, (i) improving the
capacity of the Verifier of Outputs to conduct technical audits, and verify safeguards and Local
Government procurement process, and strengthening internal controls in Local Governments.



                                            Page 2 of 19
2.3.3. Providing technical assistance for monitoring and evaluation support by, inter alia,
strengthening the system for monitoring and evaluation of reports on DAK utilization submitted
through the DAK web-based reporting system, and carrying out mid-term and end of Project
evaluations.

Component 3: Verification of Outputs (USD 10.0m of Borrower financing)

Providing technical assistance for BPKP to strengthen its capacity to conduct verification of Outputs,
which includes technical (engineering), procurement, financial management and environmental and
social safeguards.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Location: The LGDP AF will finance investments in a total of 30 provinces, gradual rollout to 14
provinces in 2015, 22 provinces in 2016, and a total of 30 provinces by 2017.

Investment Typology: The LGDP AF project will reimburse infrastructure investments mainly for
maintenance, rehabilitation and improvement of three types of investments; i.e. roads (fixing pot
holes, resurfacing of existing road, minor alignment), irrigation (fixing the retaining walls, upgrading
of existing canals, minor realignment), and water supply (repairing existing lines, and some upgrades
and sanitation (construction of basic bathing, washing, toilet facilities and communal piped
wastewater system). There may be new construction of small roads, irrigation channels, water supply
facilities and distribution pipes to improve existing service. New construction of small roads,
irrigation and water supply subprojects is defined based on the criteria specified in the Ministry of
Environment Decree no 5/2012 on determining the appropriate level of environmental assessment
required (AMDAL, UKL/UPL or SOP) and in the Ministry of Public Works No 10/2008.
Construction for sanitation facilities is regulated by the MPW’s Technical Guidelines for Community
based DAK/SLBM (the latest version was issued in 2014). Based on these criteria new construction
eligible for financing includes:

•        new irrigation channels with a coverage area no greater than 2000 ha;
•        new roads with the length of less than 5km; and
•        new water treatment facilities with no more than 100 l/s capacity, water supply transmission
lines no longer than 10 km and water distribution network systems serving no more than 500 ha.
•        new basic community sanitation facilities (toilets, with communal septic tank system, sludge
treatment and sewerage system (for no more than 100 families).

These aforementioned technical specifications apply to all references of ‘new construction’
supported under the Project.

Despite the inclusion of new construction within the eligibility framework for both the original
Project and the Additional Financing, experience under the original LGDP operation suggests that
subproject supported under the Project are largely for rehabilitation and maintenance of existing
infrastructure assets. Data for FY 2011 investments shows that of 791 total irrigation sector
subprojects, none were for new construction. Similarly, of 523 total road sector subprojects, only 7
(or 1.34 percent) were for new construction. In the water sector, all 287 subprojects were for small-
scale new construction (such as wells, hydrants, small reservoirs/tanks) in already built-up areas.
New construction supported in the roads and water sector remained small in size – average contract
value for new roads investment was approximately USD100,000 and USD 21,150 for water supply


                                             Page 3 of 19
investments. It is expected that these trends will largely prevail for the Additional Financing.

Salient characteristics relevant to safeguards: The LGDP AF, in expanding the geographical
coverage of the program from 5 pilot provinces (covering eligible 82 LGs) to 30 participating
provinces (covering approximately 400 eligible LGs), increases the possibility of new construction’
in the some of the less developed provinces and, as such, alters the risk profile of the project due to
the possible increase of impacts from new construction. The LGDP Additional Financing will also
raise the threshold for eligible investments from USD 1.0m to USD 2.0m thereby increasing the
possibility of greater social and environmental impacts caused by individual sub-projects. New
construction of small scale irrigation system in some provinces could potentially increase the indirect
risk of increase pesticide use due to the expected increase in crop production. Therefore, the
Additional Financing triggers two additional Bank safeguard policies: Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
and Pest Management (OP 4.09).

Application of OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats and OP 4.09 Pest Management will ensure that explicit
and enhanced measures are in place to mitigate and manage any and all adverse impacts related to
the potential indirect increase in pesticide use caused by increased crop production related to the
irrigation investments and potential adverse impacts on natural habitats related to all subproject
typologies in peri-urban and agricultural space. The Supplemental Technical Guidelines (STG) for
Environmental and Social has been updated to reflect the two additional policies (Natural Habitats
and Pest Management), the increased maximum amount for eligible sub-projects and the expanded
geographical area of eligible projects.

The policies will also lead to improved safeguards management at the LG level with respect to
natural habitats and awareness and adoption of integrated pest management methods. The policies
were not triggered for the original Project due to the pilot nature of the operation and the limited
scale and scope of the investments of the original Project.

Assessment of safeguards issues conducted during preparation of the AF found that the safeguards
instrument for the original operation (STG for Environment and Social) has been applied to screen,
identify and mitigate and manage social and environ mental impacts associated with subproject
investments. The assessment also found that the nature of the subproject investments to be supported
under the AF would likely be limited to rehabilitation and maintenance works and minor new
construction and not substantively different from those under the original operation given that both
the original and AF are subject to the same subproject eligibility criteria as outlined in the MPW
Technical Guidelines (TG) for DAK Infrastructure Sectors (including community sanitation)
although the maximum eligibility for sub-projects has been raised to USD 2.0m.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Indira Dharmapatni (EASIS)
Krisnan Pitradjaja Isomartana (EASIS)

6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The LGDP AF will finance the same types of
BP 4.01                                               activities as the original Project, including
                                                      maintenance, rehabilitation and improvement of
                                                      existing and new roads, irrigation and water
                                                      supply systems. The LGDP AF will include basic


                                              Page 4 of 19
        community sanitation investments. Sub-project
        sites are all located at an existing facility on
        already converted sites in urban, peri-urban or
        agricultural sites. There may be new construction
        of small roads, irrigation channels, community
        sanitation facilities (public bathing, washing and
        toilet facilities), water supply facilities and
        distribution pipes – as specified above – to
        improve the existing service of the existing
        infrastructure.

        Potential adverse environmental impacts are
        expected to be similar to the original project as
        described in section II below. Given the nature of
        the activities to be financed, potential adverse
        environmental impacts are expected to be minor
        to moderate in scale, site specific, reversible and
        readily managed through application of standard
        mitigation measures and adherence to proper
        guidelines at the local level. All subprojects will
        be screened using the mechanisms in the updated
        Supplemental Technical Guidelines (STG) to
        screen the subproject impacts, policies triggered
        and specific instruments to be prepared. The said
        guidelines were updated in June 2014 to take into
        account new policies triggered by the LGDP
        Additional Financing and the lessons learned
        from implementing the original Project.

        Eligibility for new construction of DAK
        investments is governed by the Ministerial Decree
        no. 15/PRT/M/2010 regarding “Technical
        Guidelines for DAK Infrastructure” dated 1
        November 2010 Appendix 1 - section III.3.2.1
        which stipulates that new construction subprojects
        “shall not require or involve land acquisition and
        not in the protection forest (sensitive area)”.

        In addition, MPW’s Circular Letter no 19/
        SE/2010 regarding the Supplemental Technical
        Guidelines (STG) article III.2.b and the same
        clause within the STG (June 2014) stipulates that
        the subprojects which have significant and/or
        irreversible environmental impacts – and as such
        would require AMDAL – are considered
        ineligible for the financing under the Project.
        Such subprojects with significant and irreversible



Page 5 of 19
                                            environmental impacts are considered ineligible
                                            due to the annual implementation cycle of DAK
                                            activities (which does not provide adequate time
                                            for a full environmental assessment and the
                                            implementation of an environmental management
                                            plan consistent with AMDAL requirements) and
                                            the limited capacity of Local Governments to
                                            manage complex environmental issues.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           The policy is triggered based on the fact that the
                                            LGDP AF will increase the geographical
                                            coverage of the Project and thereby increase the
                                            risk and exposure of subproject impacts to natural
                                            habitat areas. Civil works, whether related to
                                            rehabilitation, expansion or new construction (as
                                            defined above) would generate impacts from site
                                            development, which may affect natural habitats.

                                            The Project includes environmental screening
                                            procedures that reflect key considerations related
                                            to reducing, mitigating and managing any and all
                                            adverse impacts on natural habitats including
                                            appropriate mitigation measures for subprojects
                                            that are identified as having impacts on natural
                                            habitats. Such measures are included in MPW’s
                                            Circular Letter no 19/SE/2010 on the
                                            Supplemental Technical Guidelines (STG) and
                                            Environmental Management SOP of MPW,
                                            which has been updated in June 2014. Viable
                                            mitigation measures to address adverse impacts of
                                            rehabilitation, maintenance and new construction
                                            activities in sensitive areas such as wetlands,
                                            mangrove, coastal areas and rivers are adequately
                                            covered in SOP 10/BM/2009 of Bina Marga -
                                            MPW Implementation Guidelines of
                                            Environmental Management and Ministry of
                                            Environment Decree No 16/2012 concerning
                                            Guidelines for Preparing Environmental
                                            Documents (AMDAL, UKL/UPL, and SPPL)
                                            The LGDP AF will not result nor cause
                                            significant conversion or degradation of natural
                                            habitats nor in established or proposed critical
                                            natural habitats because the AF will continue to
                                            apply the STG’s principle article III.2 a (4) and
                                            (5) “The Project cannot finance any Project
                                            Activity within, adjacent to or traversing forest
                                            area (conservation, production and protection
                                            forest) and at protected areas and sensitive areas



                                    Page 6 of 19
                                        such as natural conservation areas etc. (see Annex
                                        5 of the STG for detailed criteria for such areas).”
Forests OP/BP 4.36        No            The Project will not finance activities that involve
                                        plantation forestry activities or significant
                                        conversion or degradation of critical forest areas
                                        or natural forests as defined under the policy.

                                        For new road construction up to 5km of DAK
                                        project, the Ministerial Decree no 15/PRT/
                                        M/2010 about “Technical Guidelines for DAK
                                        Infrastructure” dated 1 November 2010
                                        Appendix 1 - section III.3.2.1 - stipulates that the
                                        new construction project “shall not require or
                                        involve land acquisition and not in the protection
                                        forest (sensitive area)”.
Pest Management OP 4.09   Yes           The policy is triggered on a precautionary basis
                                        based on the expansion in geographical coverage
                                        of the Project that could potentially increase the
                                        indirect risk of increased pesticide use due to the
                                        expected increase in crop production resulting
                                        from larger subproject investments in the
                                        irrigation subsector.

                                        It is important to note from the outset that the
                                        Project will not procure nor supply any pesticides
                                        based on the Circular Letter Ministry of Public
                                        Works (MPW) No. 19/SE/M/2010 about
                                        Supplemental Technical Guidelines article no
                                        III.2 a (4) and (5) ‘DAK funded project must not
                                        contain activity that purchase any products
                                        containing pesticides’. In the Verification
                                        Checklist Form, measures are included to ensure
                                        that the procurement pesticides, herbicides and
                                        insecticides are not supported under the LGDP
                                        AF. The abovementioned guidelines were
                                        updated in June 2014 for the LGDP AF.

                                        It is also important to note that pesticide use in
                                        Indonesia is primarily used for horticulture efforts
                                        in highland areas and not for irrigated crops or
                                        rice fields which are the primary focus of DAK
                                        irrigation investments. In addition, the price of
                                        pesticides is quite high in Indonesia, preventing
                                        most small scale farmers from being able to
                                        afford pesticides. As such, local farmers tend to
                                        use bio-pesticides made from organic local source
                                        and implement Integrated Pest Management


                                Page 7 of 19
        (IPM) methods on their farm plots. Indeed,
        Indonesia is at the forefront of application of IPM
        methodologies on small holder farms and such
        methods are strongly supported by formal
        government regulations.

        Specifically, the sustainable agriculture system
        currently applied in Indonesia is implemented to
        address the challenge faced by traditional/
        conventional agriculture systems which caused
        adverse effects due to increased persistence of
        pests against pesticides, reduced soil fertility and
        crop productivity. One of the efforts enacted by
        government to overcome this was through the
        Integrated Pest management approach based on
        UU (Act) no. 12, 1992 on Crop Cultivation
        System.

        In Article 20, it is stipulated that the crop
        protection system shall be done with IPM
        approach. Since 1989, Indonesia has implemented
        and developed the IPM training program for the
        extension workers and the farmer collectively.
        This program is now extensively applied with the
        name of Field School IPM. The IPM program is
        based on the agro-ecosystem based management.

        The monitoring of the application of OP 4.09 in
        the project will be done in: (1) The
        implementation report of Environmental
        Management Plan (EMP), the regular UKL UPL
        reporting). For example, one of the environmental
        management effort (UKL) proposed is the
        installation of the "V" notch to measure the
        potential increase in the flow rate of the irrigation
        system and as part of the monitoring effort is to
        regularly monitor its flow rate; (2) Support the
        adoption of IPM during project socialization or
        during STG socialization (brochure,
        presentation); and (3) The verification checklist
        for new irrigation works will include the question
        about IPM implementation efforts

        Project Component 2 - will incorporate a
        component to strengthen the local government
        capacity in developing the UKL UPL or ECoP
        (Environment Code of Practice) that will



Page 8 of 19
                                                appropriately covers the pest management aspect
                                                and also this capacity building component will
                                                also target BPKP and MPW key personnel.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            Project activities will not affect archeological,
BP 4.11                                         paleontological, historical, religious, or unique
                                                natural values as defined under the policy because
                                                the project sites are located on existing sites and
                                                in already converted space. Thus, no major
                                                impacts on PCRs are expected during project
                                                implementation, yet attention will be paid to the
                                                possibility of chance finds.

                                                Standard chance finds procedures will continue to
                                                be included in all construction contracts regarding
                                                procedures to be followed in the event of ’chance
                                                finds’ of culturally significant artifacts. Existing
                                                MPW Guideline no 010/BM/2009 from DG Bina
                                                Marga referred in Supplemental Technical
                                                Guidelines about Environmental Management
                                                during construction include guidelines for PCR.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           The Task Team screened for the presence of IPs
                                                in participating districts in the 5 provinces of the
                                                original LGDP and in all districts of the 9
                                                provinces additional provinces scheduled to
                                                participate in the Additional Financing during
                                                GoI FY 2015. (ref. World Bank Study for IPs
                                                Screening, 2010). This screening exercise
                                                identified that 34 of the 77 districts of the original
                                                LGDP and 59 of the 178 districts in 9 provinces
                                                have IPs presence. A list of the geographical
                                                distribution of IPs communities in the AF
                                                provinces is presented in project files. In 2015,
                                                the IP screening exercise will be expanded to
                                                cover the additional 16 provinces scheduled to
                                                commence participation in the Additional
                                                Financing in 2016 and 2017.

                                                As subproject investments financed by the AF
                                                may be located in the 93 districts, the AF
                                                continues to triggers OP/BP 4.10. However, as
                                                the sites of the subproject investments cannot be
                                                identified at this stage, the extent to which they
                                                would affect and/or engage IPs can only be
                                                assessed once subproject investment sites are
                                                identified. Methods to screen for the presence of
                                                IPs as well as to assess the potential significance
                                                of the impacts and how best to engage IPs in


                                        Page 9 of 19
                                                project interventions are included in the MPW’s
                                                Circular Letter no 19/SE/2010 on Supplemental
                                                Technical Guidelines (STG) for Safeguards. The
                                                STG also provides guidance on how to prepare an
                                                IPP. The STG was updated for the LGDP-AF in
                                                June 2014, including a strengthening of the
                                                section on IPs.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes            It is anticipated that, as is the case of the original
4.12                                            LGDP operation, subproject investments in the
                                                AF that require land acquisition will adopt the
                                                same approach, i.e., through voluntary land
                                                donation. Very few cases of land acquisition with
                                                compensation were identified under the original
                                                operation.

                                                In cases where land acquisition may be necessary,
                                                it is anticipated that it will also be for small plots.
                                                Given the expanded number of districts in the AF
                                                and the increased ceiling amount of a subproject
                                                package (from USD 1 to 2 million), it is
                                                anticipated that land acquisition may increase
                                                either due to a larger subproject size or higher
                                                number of new subprojects.

                                                Eligibility for new construction of DAK
                                                investments is governed by the Ministerial Decree
                                                no. 15/PRT/M/2010 regarding “Technical
                                                Guidelines for DAK Infrastructure” dated 1
                                                November 2010 Appendix 1 - section III.3.2.1
                                                which stipulates that new construction subprojects
                                                “shall not require or involve land acquisition and
                                                not in the protection forest (sensitive area)”.

                                                The STG provides detailed guidance on screening
                                                and identifying the intensity of potential adverse
                                                impacts, and selection of appropriate social
                                                safeguard instrument to mitigate and manage
                                                identified impacts, i.e. Simplified (LARAP) or
                                                Comprehensive LARAP. The STG also provides
                                                guidance on how to prepare the LARAP and
                                                provides outlines of both types of LARAPs.

                                                For voluntary land donation, the STG provides
                                                specific criteria for defining it and template for
                                                documenting the voluntary land donation. The
                                                track record indicates that the STG guidance and
                                                associated tools have been applied but awareness



                                       Page 10 of 19
                                                        and application of the said guidelines needs to be
                                                        continuously improved. The said guidelines were
                                                        updated in June 2014 for the LGDP AF.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               The project will not finance construction or
                                                        rehabilitation of any dams.
   Projects on International        No                  Project sites will not be located in the watersheds
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 of any international waterways.
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The project is not located in any known disputed
   7.60                                                 areas as defined under the policy.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     Scale of Potential Adverse Environmental and Social Impacts: The AF is not expected to generate
     nor result in any large scale, significant or irreversible environmental or social impacts.

    Summary of Potential Adverse Environmental and Social Impacts: Subprojects will be primarily
    located in already converted urban, peri-urban or agricultural sites. The road and community water
    supply and sanitation sub-projects will be located in peri-urban areas. Irrigation investments are all
    located on established farm land area. The potential adverse environmental and social impacts of
    all types of subproject investments financed by the AF are expected to be minor to moderate in
    scale, site-specific, reversible and readily managed through application of standard mitigation
    measures at the local level.

    Environmental Impacts: Potential adverse environmental impacts for the three types of subproject
    investment typologies might include temporary soil disturbance, vegetation removal, construction
    phase increase in traffic and noise, increased generation of construction waste requiring proper
    transport to a suitable final disposal site and, for irrigation projects, the minor to moderate risk of
    an indirect increase in pesticide application. During the supervision of the original Project, adverse
    environmental impacts led to the ineligibility of only two subprojects. These impacts were minor,
    involving the impact of road rehabilitation on the operation of existing public facilities, i.e. a
    community water well or public hydrant due to damage caused during construction (in Mamuju
    LG). In the second case, the drilling of a new ground water well (in Jambi LG) was considered to
    be poorly located near potential sources of groundwater contamination. These two subprojects
    were excluded from the eligibility for reimbursement and remedial actions were identified and
    communicated to the relevant LGs. The factors for ineligibility in both cases were related to the
    impacts of the works on existing public facilities (e.g. community water wells or public hydrants)
    and not with respect to broader adverse environmental impacts.

    For irrigation works, due to limited time and budget of LGDP annual cycle - all previous irrigation
    subprojects are all rehabilitation works (the objective is to meet its original design capacity, via
    dredging, and cleaning works. Data for FY 2011 investments shows that of 791 total irrigation
    sector subprojects, none were for new construction. For new construction of irrigation sub sectors
    under LGDP AF the monitoring of the pesticide management in the project will be addressed in
    the project’s EMP.


                                               Page 11 of 19
Social impacts: Land acquisition related to subproject investments is expected to be minor due to
the nature of the subproject investments which are primarily focused on rehabilitation and
maintenance of existing structures on converted sites. During the supervision of the original
operation, it was also noted that LGs actively aimed to minimize land acquisition in subproject
selection, planning and implementation. For example, LGs demonstrated a preference for selecting
subprojects already included in community priority lists and for which land is voluntarily provided
by the community members. The recent supervision suggested that this occurred in the
development of sanitation and water supply facilities.

LGDP supervision missions indicate that most subproject investments that required land obtained
it through voluntary land donation. Some land owners provided a Statement Letter of Voluntary
Land Donation (VLD), but some did not, as it is a common practice in the country that land
owners who are also beneficiaries of the subproject investments donate away land voluntarily.
Most land obtained was for small plots, and, in one case of road improvement (including
widening) in Jambi province, affected structures in the road shoulder within the right of way and
also affected private land were compensated by the LG. Beneficiaries had been consulted and all
agreed on the compensation level.

For FY12 reimbursements, the BPKP Verification Report identified 4 of the 44 sampled
subprojects as ineligible for reimbursement due to improperly documented land acquisition or the
lack of voluntary land donation. It is anticipated that under the AF there will continue to be a
limited number of requests for land acquisition and majority of land needed by subprojects will
remain small in scale and obtained through VLD.

Indigenous Peoples: Potential IPs presence was screened in reference to the World Bank Study on
IPs Screening (2010). In the original LGDP, Indigenous Peoples communities were found to
possibly be present in 34 of 77 participating districts. Based on the supervision record, the project
has not affected or involved IPs communities as beneficiaries. In addition, the verification report
of BPKP also did not identify the presence of any IPs communities affected or engaged in the
original LGDP.

In the 9 new provinces scheduled to be covered under AF in 2015, there is a potential IPs presence
in 59 of the 182 districts. Although the number of participating districts in the new 9 2015
provinces in AF is not yet confirmed, screening was conducted for all eligible 182 districts. As the
LGDP AF will cover all of Local Governments in the 14 provinces (assuming that the 178 districts
in the 9 provinces apply to join the project and are accepted), it is likely that some investments
would take place in villages where Indigenous Peoples are present. The geographical distribution
of IPs in the 14 provinces scheduled to participate in the Additional Financing in 2015 is presented
in Project documentation. Similar screening exercises will be conducted in 2015 for the remaining
16 provinces that will commence participation in the Additional Financing in 2016 and 2017.

Although it is likely that some investments would take place in villages where Indigenous Peoples
are present in the new participating districts, at this stage the potential areas or villages are not
known. During project implementation if screening concludes that investments could take place in
such villages or Indigenous Peoples are present in the area, public consultations will be undertaken
prior to sub-project investments to ensure there is Broad Community Support and free, prior and
informed consultations as indicated in the Supplemental STG for Environmental and Social
Safeguard.

                                          Page 12 of 19
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  Not Applicable.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  Not Applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Instruments used for environmental and social safeguards management for the original LGDP that
  will be used in the AF, include:

 (i)     MPW Decree no. 15/2010 on Technical Guidelines (TG) for DAK Infrastructure that is
 nationally adopted as the main umbrella guideline for DAK including for original LGDP and
 LGDP AF. The Team is aware that MPW is updating this TG which is planned to be issued this
 year. Ministry of Public Works issued MPW Circular Letter No. 19/SE/M/2010 served as a
 supplement of the MPW Decree no. 15/2010, issued specifically for DAK infrastructure financed
 under the original LGDP (DAK-reimbursements). This Supplemental Technical Guidelines (STG)
 was developed in reference to the GOI’s regulations and World Bank Safeguard Policies. For
 LGDP Additional Financing the STG has been updated in June 2014 to reflect the triggering of OP
 4.04 and OP 4.09 and the lesson learnt from the application of the STG in the previous project,
 including strengthening the environment and social screening of subprojects. MPW considers that
 the updated STG will be part of the new TG. For Sanitation, the LGDP AF will also adopt the
 Technical Guidelines for the SLBM issued by the MPW in 2014.

 (ii)     STG for Environmental and Social Safeguards. The STG (June 2014) outlines provisions
 for environmental and social management consistent with five environmental and social safeguard
 policies, i.e., Environmental Assessment, Involuntary Resettlement, Indigenous Peoples, Natural
 Habitats and Pest Management which have been streamlined into the DAK project cycle. It also
 includes a provision for verification and provides outlines on EMP, Land Acquisition and
 Resettlement Action Plans (LARAPs), Indigenous People Plans (IPPs), and templates related to
 environmental management, public consultation, complaint handling, voluntary land donation,
 social assessment, monitoring the implementation of RAP, and SOP for environmental
 management. The STG (June 2014) covers: (a) requirements, procedures and protocols for
 screening and mitigating potential adverse environmental impacts for the three types of
 investments (road, irrigation and water supply) during planning, design, construction and
 operation (following the DAK cycle); (b) requirements, procedures and protocols for various
 schemes of land acquisition (VLD, compensation, exchange), to address livelihoods, to carry out
 consultation and grievance mechanisms and documentations; (c) requirements, procedures and
 protocols for subprojects involving IPs to ensure that there they are fully consulted with
 participatory approach with sufficient information provided in advance facilitated by local
 facilitator(s) or other parties interested or support the IPs communities during the planning,
 implementation and operational stage; (d) requirements, procedures and protocols for subprojects
 to ensure that subproject financed under the Project do not have significant or irreversible impacts
 in natural habitat areas and sensitive areas; as part of EMP development and (e) requirements,
 procedures and protocols for subprojects that ensure that integrated pest management practices are
 utilized in cases where subprojects may potentially increase the use of harmful pesticides as an
 integral part of the EMP development. The STG provides guidance on how to prepare safeguards


                                           Page 13 of 19
instruments such as EMP, Land Acquisition and Resettlement Action Plan (LARAP) , IPPs, in
addition to templates for VLD, outlines of LARAP and IPP. The STG (June 2014) also provides
guidance to refer to SOPs issued by the MPW for road, water supply development and irrigation
sectors for environmental management which also covers requirements for land acquisition. The
STG includes the verification process, subjects to be verified and generic indicators that will be
done by the BPKP; this is to inform the districts early on so that they can prepare the necessary
documentation. The STG applies to sub-project investments that are partly or wholly financed by
the Project. Furthermore, it applies to all local investments for which reimbursement will be made
under the Project. Any investment that is found out of compliance with the safeguards
arrangements as set out in the STG will be ineligible for reimbursement.

(iii)   Project Operation Manual (POM), issued by Ministry of Finance. It details the compliance
process and outcomes (implementation, monitoring, and reporting) of the adoption of the
environmental and social safeguards management specified in the STG for Safeguards. The initial
POM was also socialized to all participating districts and cities by the MOF.

(iv)     BPKP as an independent verifier has developed a Verification Guidelines which includes
Verification Checklists for Environmental and Social Safeguards, to assist the regional BPKP
officials in implementing the LGDP output verification. The Verification Checklists has been
recently updated for LGDP-AF. Amongst BPKP’s responsibilities (as a Verification Agent) in
cooperation with the MPW will be to ensure compliance with safeguards by LGs. BPKP samples
of 20 percent of subprojects. The verification arrangement creates an additional layer of
supervision and risk mitigation, since the Project would not reimburse expenditures where
safeguards are not complied with.

(v)      Verification Arrangements. BPKP is tasked to carry out the verification of outputs, from
the technical, costs, financial, procurement and safeguards aspects. It has Verification Guidelines
which has been updated periodically twice to date, in which verification indicators are established
including those for safeguards. The verification process for safeguards is done in two steps. First,
BPKP reviews DAK report, subproject proposals, and also reviews each of the sampled contract/
subproject documents (this includes the VLD Statement Letter, UKL/UPL, etc. and other
documents as relevant). Second, BPKP conducts field visits to sites of sampled subprojects. Field
visits include examining physical outputs of completed subprojects, carrying out interviews with
beneficiaries and project stakeholders. Based on the discussions during supervision missions with
regional BPKP staff in various provinces as part of supervision, most have not faced serious issues
in verifying safeguards aspects of subprojects. They have noted that the associated verification
checklist is quite clear and impacts on the ground are relatively simple and small-scale.

(vi)    Borrower and the Bank have agreed to a joint field-based review to take stock of the
experience and application of the current safeguard instrument within the first six months of
Project effectiveness in light of the enhanced geographic scope and subproject size. The review
will recommend any necessary measures to be developed and implemented for the LGDP-AF.
Additionally, the Borrower and the Bank have agreed to incorporate technical assistance activities
in component 2 of the AF (as further detailed in the Operations Manual) to strengthen LG
awareness and capacity with respect to managing environmental and social safeguards in general,
and in more specific in natural habitat issues and strengthening the current integrated pest
management practices as indicated and mandated in the instrument GOI’s regulations,
accompanying project manual, MPW TG and the overarching national legal and regulatory
framework.

                                          Page 14 of 19
 (vii)    Capacity Building under Component 2 of the project will continue to provide
 environmental and social safeguards training to the technical agency (Ministry of Public Works),
 BPKP, and MOF as well as to LG beneficiaries, including LGs’ technical agencies of the four
 project typologies. MPW has experienced in many Bank supported projects over the last three
 decades and has a good understanding on the Bank’s environmental and social safeguards policies.
 It has sufficient capacity to implement the Bank environmental and social safeguards policies, but
 its capacity to monitor and assess the performance of the LGs in implementing the STG needs
 strengthening as per the following recommendations and guidelines:

  •        The Bank pre-appraisal and recent implementation support mission recommended the
  assignment of consultant(s) in charge for monitoring ES safeguards implementation to assist the
  MPW and MOF;
  •        BPKP and the MOF have experienced in implementing the Bank environmental and social
  safeguards policies under the LGDP project. However, the BPKP and MOF awareness in the
  application and monitoring of Bank safeguard policies in the DAK Grants need to be strengthened
  by the project. The AF will assist with training program for central and regional BPKPs with a
  focus on the BPKPs of the new participating provinces on the understanding of environmental and
  social safeguards requirements, technical guidelines, and the practical use of the safeguards
  verification indicators checklist;
  •        LGs have some capacity in implementing environmental and social safeguards instruments
  according to Indonesian regulations. Some have experienced in other World Bank projects such as
  EIRTP-1 and 2, PAMSIMAS, and PNPM Rural/Urban. However, many LG staff handling DAK
  (especially in new potential participating districts) have limited awareness of the importance of
  safeguards management and understanding, furthermore, also have limited capacity to implement
  the Bank requirements on environmental and social safeguards; and
  •        In coordination with MPW, the LGDP AF will continue increasing awareness and
  capacity building for safeguards implementation amongst participating LGs, particularly the
  technical agencies, and also the local environmental agency (BLHD/BLH/KLH) and BAPPEDA.
  To the extent possible, the Environmental Agency will be involved in the DAK preparation/
  monitoring. The LGDP-AF project will also ensure that quarterly and final reports prepared by
  LGs include information of the implementation of the requirements, procedures and protocols of
  the environmental and social safeguards as specified in the STG such as UKL-UPL reporting etc.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Stakeholders: BPKP, MOF, MPW and LGs in the 30 participating provinces.

 Disclosure. The draft STG for Environmental and Social Safeguards was disclosed on the MPW
 website (see: www.djpk.depkeu.go.id/berita) on June 24, 2014 and in the Infoshop on June 23,
 2014, prior to Appraisal. A final STG issued as a Circular Letter of the Minister of Public Works
 to all provinces and local governments participating in the Additional Financing will be disclosed
 after Board Approval and prior to Loan Effectiveness. The issuance of the Circular Letter and STG
 is stipulated in the Legal Agreement as a condition of Effectiveness.

 Consultation. The LGDP AF will finance investments in a total of 30 provinces, with a gradual
 rollout to 14 provinces in 2015, 8 more provinces in 2016 for a total 22 provinces in 2016, and
 once again 8 more provinces in 2017 for a total of 30 provinces. Public consultation has taken
 place and is ongoing and will continue during project implementation with the gradual rollout of


                                          Page 15 of 19
the project. A public consultation program has been developed and agreed upon with counter-parts
in order to ensure that consultation that has taken place, the ongoing consultation and the future
consultation during project implementation is meaningful, timely and taken into consideration.
The consultation program includes recurring annual consultations, a preliminary consultation for
the Additional Financing and a detailed consultation program on the final draft STG that is
ongoing and will take place prior to the eligibility of new provinces. The public consultation
program is structured as a continuing/ongoing process in order to address Indonesian counter-parts
regulations and procedures using a government decree such as the STG as the main safeguards
instrument while taking into account Bank requirements on public consultations. It also takes into
account the results of the previous ongoing Project and the successive rollout of the eligible
provinces during project implementation.

The consultation program includes different activities that are part of an annual consultation
process. LGDP PIU has conducted an Overall Program Consultation between November and
January with all prospective participating LGDP provinces and local governments on overall
Project procedures and approach, including safeguards aspects. A preliminary Overall Program
Consultation was conducted between November 14-22, 2013 through three regional workshops in
Manado, Jakarta and Denpasar covering the nine participating provinces scheduled for inclusion in
GoI FY15. These nine provinces include Lampung, Bengkulu, West Java, Central Java, West
Kalimantan, North Sulawesi, South Sumatera, NTB and NTT

MPW also conducts annual detailed technical consultation with all provinces and LGs receiving
DAK funds in infrastructure sectors. These consultations focus on socializing Technical
Guidelines for DAK Infrastructure while additionally, for provinces and LGs participating in the
LGDP program, this consultation includes the Supplemental Technical Guidelines on
Environmental and Social Management. The recent MPW socialization took place in November
2013. Furthermore, the central BPKP has disseminated its verification guidelines to regional
BPKP offices leading up to each ensuing fiscal year. Central BPKP also conducted socialization
with regional BPKP offices as part of its consultation process. BPKP conducted a preliminary
socialization on the LGDP AF, including safeguards requirements, in the nine provinces scheduled
for inclusion in GoI FY15 in November 2014.

In addition to the abovementioned program of recurring annual consultations and the preliminary
consultation for the Additional Financing, a detailed consultation program on the final draft STG
has been developed, is ongoing and will continue during project implementation. This consultation
program includes three regional sessions in the 14 provinces and constituent local governments
eligible for participation in the LGDP Additional Financing for GoI FY 2015. The regional
consultation sessions cover: the Eastern Indonesia: Denpasar, Bali region with the three provinces
of North Maluku, West Nusa Tenggara, East Nusa Tenggara; The Central Indonesia: Makassar,
South Sulawesi region with the provinces of Central Kalimantan, West Kalimantan, North
Sulawesi, South Sulawesi, West Sulawesi; and the Western Indonesia: Surabaya, East Java region
with the provinces of Jambi, Lampung, Bengkulu, West Java, Central Java, East Java.

The consultation program also includes consultations with the other Provinces and constituent
local governments that will become eligible for participation under the LGDP AF in GoI FYs 2016
and 2017 will be conducted between October and December of 2015 and in 2016 prior to project
commencing in the respective provinces.

Furthermore, although it is likely that some investments would take place in villages where

                                         Page 16 of 19
  Indigenous Peoples are present in the new participating districts, at this stage the potential areas or
  villages are not known. During project implementation if screening concludes that investments
  could take place in such villages or Indigenous Peoples are present in the area, public
  consultations will be undertaken prior to sub-project investments to ensure there is Broad
  Community Support and free, prior and informed consultations as indicated in the Supplemental
  STG for Environmental and Social Safeguard.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Jun-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Jun-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Indonesia                                                        24-Jun-2014
  Comments: The draft STG for Environmental and Social Safeguards was disclosed on the MPW
                website (see: www.djpk.depkeu.go.id/berita) on June 24, 2014.
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Jun-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Jun-2014
"In country" Disclosure
  Indonesia                                                        24-Jun-2014
  Comments: The draft STG for Environmental and Social Safeguards was disclosed on the MPW
                website (see: www.djpk.depkeu.go.id/berita) on June 24, 2014.
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Jun-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Jun-2014
"In country" Disclosure
  Indonesia                                                        24-Jun-2014
  Comments: The draft STG for Environmental and Social Safeguards was disclosed on the MPW
                website (see: www.djpk.depkeu.go.id/berita) on June 24, 2014.
 Pest Management Plan
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   NA
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      NA
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   NA
"In country" Disclosure
  Indonesia                                                        00000000
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                                             Page 17 of 19
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
 project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
 in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
 Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
 Indigenous Peoples?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Sector Manager review the plan?
 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
 Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Sector Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies


                                           Page 18 of 19
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Taimur Samad
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                            Date: 26-Jun-2014
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Nathan M. Belete (SM)                          Date: 26-Jun-2014




                                            Page 19 of 19
