                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA7950
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Tunisia                            Project ID:    P132157
                            Project Name:      TN-Oases Ecosystems and Livelihoods Project (P132157)
                            Task Team          Taoufiq Bennouna
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          14-Feb-2014                        Estimated   11-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSEE                              Lending     Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                               Multi-focal area
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), General water, sanitation
                                              and flood protection sector (40%), Other Renewable Energy (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Biodiversity (20%), Other rural development (20%), Other environment and
                                              natural resources management (20%), Water resource manageme nt (20%),
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              Climate change (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       5.76           Total Bank Financing:                   0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   0.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                          5.76
                              Total                                                                                      5.76
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)


                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         The Project Development Objective/Global Environmental Objective is to improve sustainable
                         natural resources management and promote livelihoods diversification in targeted traditional oases in
                         Tunisia.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         Component 1: Strengthening capacities for sustainable management of oasis ecosystems (GEF US$
                         1,031,830)

                         This component aims at strengthening the capacities of national and local stakeholders in order to
                         create an enabling environment for the scaling up of sustainable management practices in the oases.
                         Activities of this component are organized according to the following three sub-components:
                         Sub-component 1.1: Action Plan for the national strategy for sustainable development of Tunisian
                         oases. Main activities will include: (i) Preparation of the Action Plan of the national strategy for the
                         sustainable development of the oases; (ii) development and implementation of a communication
                         strategy (to be funded by the Government); and (iii) Preparation of complete monographic profiles
                         for each of the 210 Tunisian traditional oases, including status of wildlife and biodiversity, together
                         with a Web-based Geographic Information System (GIS). These activities will be implemented
                         through the organization of consultative workshops, provision of consultants’ services, goods, and
                         training. GEF will support activities (i) and (iii).
                         Sub-component 1.2: Strengthening the capacities of stakeholders. Capacity building activities will
                         comprise two groups of activities: (i) Training and technical assistance for the benefit of local and
                         national stakeholders on topics related to participatory approaches, biodiversity protection,
                         environmental governance, SLWM techniques, and initiatives aimed at diversifying local livelihoods
                         and preparing community-driven micro-projects; and (ii) Specific support to oasis biodiversity-
                         related activities carried out by the following national specialized institutions: the National Bank of
                         Genes (BNG), the Regional Research Center for Oasis Agriculture (CRRAO) in Deguache and
                         Tozeur, and the Institute of Arid Regions (IRA) of Medenine. These activities will be implemented
                         through the provision of consultants ‘services, goods and training.
                         Sub-component 1.3: Monitoring and evaluation of Project activities. The key activity will focus on
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the establishment of an M&E system, which will be fully in harmony with those of other projects
                         currently operating in the areas of land management, biodiversity valorization and conservation and
                         ecosystem management. These activities will be implemented through the provision of consultants
                         ‘services, goods and training.
                         Component 2: Supporting the implementation of the PDPOs (GEF US$ 4,434,000)

                         In line with the key element of the strategy, this component aims at restoring and better managing the
                         productive assets of the targeted oasis ecosystems and their resources through the establishment of a
                         dynamic partnership between the various stakeholders. Lessons drawn from these oases will
                         eventually be applied to other oases on a larger scale. Indeed, given the increasing pressure on oasis
                         agro-systems, capacity building programs should allow local populations to see their oases as
                         opportunities that can be better explored, and that they should contribute in protecting them. This
                         will also allow them to better comply with SLWM norms, to protect biodiversity and promote
                         activities aimed at reducing pressure on the environment. As holders of PDPOs, the GDAs of the
                         targeted oases, through a participatory and consultative process with all stakeholders, and on the
                         basis of eligibility criteria (see Box 3), will coordinate the preparation and implementation of
                         community micro-projects. The PDPOs of the six selected oases, which have been developed during
                         the project’s preparatory phase, present the strategic vision for the development of each oasis and
                         identify the characteristics of community-driven micro-projects and other initiatives to be
                         implemented. These micro-projects, which are in line with the objectives of the proposed Project, are

                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         grouped in two categories, each category could include small-scale physical investments (including
                         habitat, roads, and gravel roads):
                         Sub-component 2.1: Community micro-projects in the area of sustainable management of land and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         water (SLWM) and biodiversity. The main objective of this sub-component is to strengthen the
                         management of oasis natural resources by scaling up SLWM and biodiversity conservation
                         techniques. The ownership of these techniques by the communities will ensure their scaling up. More
                         particularly, this sub-component will financially support micro-projects aimed at: (i) Protecting oases
                         against flooding, sand invasion, and wild boars; (ii) Improving the productivity of agricultural
                         activities and the oasis eco-systemic services by scaling up SLWM practices; and (iii) Restoring and
                         protecting oasis biodiversity . These activities will be implemented through the provision consultants
                         ‘services, good and training and community procurements procedures.
                         Sub-component 2.2: Community micro-projects in the area of the diversification of local livelihoods.
                         The diversification of local livelihoods comprises community micro-projects aimed at promoting
                         alternative farming and non-farming activities, which not only generate income and improve living
                         conditions, but also re duce pressure on natural resources and help improve the quality and the
                         sustainability of these resources. Moreover, community-based micro-projects will, on one hand,
                         enhance local craftsmanship know-how and support ovine fattening activities and beekeeping, and,
                         on the other hand, preserve and protect and develop oases’ cultural heritage and promote ecotourism.
                         These activities will be implemented through the provision consultants ‘services, good and training
                         and community procurements procedures.

                         Component 3: Project coordination and management (GEF US$ 294,900)
                         This component will support the establishment and management of a fully-functioning Project
                         Management Unit within the General Directorate for Environment and Quality of Life (DGEQV), of
                         the Ministry of Equipment, Territorial Management, and Sustainable Development (MEATDD),
                         through the provision of goods, consultants’ services and training, it will cover (i) the equipment cost
                         for the Unit; (ii) audits for the Project; and; (iii) the incremental operating costs for the Project.

                         Cross-cutting issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Global environmental benefits (GEBs). By investing in techniques that improve soil fertility and
                         agricultural productivity, and giving special attention to the conservation and promotion of food
                         products from oasis agricultural biodiversity, the Project will improve the sustainability of selected
                         oasis and the livelihoods of local populations and provide the following GEBs: (i) Land degradation:
                         improved provision of agro-ecosystem goods and services, and reduced vulnerability of agro-
                         ecosystems to climate change and other human-induced impacts, and conservation and sustainable
                         use of biodiversity in production landscape; (ii) Biodiversity: Conservation of globally significant
                         biodiversity, and sustainable use of the components of globally significant biodiversity. More
                         particularly, the Project will provide the following local environmental benefits: (i) in-situ
                         conservation of crops/selected plants, including staples such as local hard wheat, rye, local vegetable
                         crops, alfalfa and corn which are important for nutrition and food security; (ii) improvement of soil
                         fertility and its resilience in order to increase organic matter; (iii) reduction of soil erosion; (iv)
                         integration of conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity in public policies, programs and
                         regulatory frameworks through the strategy; and (v) integration of biodiversity considerations into
                         market mechanisms and increased SLWM investment. These benefits will be audited by tracking: (a)
                         the number of local varieties preserved and cultivated and the number of applications for the use of
                         local seeds; (b) agricultural land (at least 700 ha) under improved agricultural practices, (c) areas
                         protected against flooding; and (d) reduction of degraded oasis areas.
                         Adaptation. A key innovative aspect of the project is the concept of adaptation of local agricultural
                         practices, traditional know-how and community needs for the integration of agricultural biodiversi ty

                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         in the local economy, as a driver for local development. The result is the ownership of the key
                         objectives by local stakeholders through the participatory approach. Local institutions are aware and
                         strongly support this proposal, thus ensuring ownership and their participation in the implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of micro-projects.
                         Innovative approach. The innovative and sustainable approach of the Project is based, on one hand,
                         on ensuring ownership and commitment of local communities, and, on the other hand, on integrating
                         biodiversity conservation and SLWM practices into national policies and programs. With this
                         approach, the Project aims at creating a participatory management model, which would involve all
                         the stakeholders, and which would eventually be scaled up to all Tunisian oases. The potential to
                         extend the project approach will be fostered through dissemination of lessons learned and
                         experiences to raise awareness and ensure that local communities and stakeholders understand and
                         adopt, with government support, the dynamic development model (eventually to be promoted in the
                         neighboring regions).
                         Gender. Finally, the proposed Project will focus on another key cross-cutting issue, namely a gender-
                         based approach that outlines the specific roles and needs of men and women (including young boys
                         and girls), and will conduct regular assessments of the impact of Project initiatives to reduce gender
                         disparities.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Six oases have been selected following an inclusive selection process, involving officials of
                         ministerial departments that are implementation partners of the Project, representatives of line
                         departments (Agriculture, Tourism, Arts and Crafts, Equipment, Environment, etc.), representatives
                         of civil society and resource persons, on the basis of a range of criteria focused essentially on: (i)
                         their representativeness of Tunisian oases; (ii) their heritage value; (iii) the existence of GDA and
                         active associations; (iv) the capacity of local people and stakeholders to adopt the participatory
                         approach of the project; and (vi) the for the available opportunities for oasis rehabilitation and
                         preservation. The selected oases are the following:
                         •        Coastal area Oases, Governorate of Gabes: Zarat, comprising a total areas of 85 ha and 400
Public Disclosure Copy




                         farming households
                         •        Continental oases, Governorate of Kebili: Noueil, comprising a total areas of 97 ha and 500
                         farming households
                         •        Mountain oases, Governorate of Gafsa: El Guettar comprising a total areas of 500 ha and
                         2,700 farming households
                         •        Mountain oases, Governorate of Tozeur: Cluster of three oases (Tamezgha, Chebika, Mides),
                         comprising a total areas of 134 ha and 500 farming households, of which: Tamzegha (80 ha and 300
                         households), Chebika (25 ha and 116 households), and Mides (29 ha and 80 households).
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Nina Bhatt (MNSSU)
                         Africa Eshogba Olojoba (MNSEE)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The project may finance small-scale physical
                          BP 4.01                                            investments within targeted areas (including
                                                                             habitat, roads, gravel roads ...). As the exact sub-
                                                                             project types locations would not be known at the
                                                                             time of appraisal, an Environment and Social



                                                                     Page 4 of 10
                                                                               Management Framework (ESMF) have been
                                                                               prepared and disclosed in Ministry web sitre and
                                                                               Bank Infoshop. It include an environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               social screening process to guide the selection of
                                                                               subsequent sub-projects. The ESMF is also
                                                                               included in the project's Implementation Manual.
                                                                               Also, during project implementation, an
                                                                               environmental and social management plan
                                                                               (ESMP) acceptable to the Bank, will be prepared
                                                                               for each sub-project identified during the project
                                                                               implementation
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        Yes             The ESMF include measures to incorporate this
                                                                               OP
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    Yes             The ESMF include measures to incorporate this
                            BP 4.11                                            OP including a chance find procedure in its annex
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes             Although the targeted areas are in the public
                            4.12                                               domain, and as the project will finance small-
                                                                               scale physical investments within targeted areas
                                                                               (including habitat, roads, gravel roads) and for
                                                                               some investment sustainability, it may potentially
                                                                               led to community resctriction of access which
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               may triggered the OP 4.12. RPF have been
                                                                               prepared and disclosed in the Ministry web site
                                                                               and Bank Infoshop.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Social impacts of the proposed TOELP Project activities are expected to be positive. They will
                              improve local development, strengthen natural resource management, and ensure greater
                              engagement of beneficiaries in local decision-making processes. Throughout the entire project
                              preparation phase, consultations were conducted with key stakeholders within the public sector,


                                                                       Page 5 of 10
                           the private sector, and civil society. Key actors were involved in the definition of the scope of
                           activities and they will remain engaged during implementation, supervision and evaluation stages
                           of the project. Youth and women, in particular, are expected to benefit from this project because
Public Disclosure Copy




                           they will be heavily involved in most of the activities and processes. The project will strive to
                           respect and build on agricultural and environmental practices and techniques devised by local
                           communities, in order to deal with a variety of environmental and climate issues. Small-scale
                           producers, the primary target of project investments, will directly benefit from a variety of
                           investments, and special attention will be given to women and youth. Producers groups,
                           community organizations and associations of civil society will actively participate in the design
                           and in the implementation of all the activities.

                           While the project may finance small-scale physical investments (including habitat, roads, gravel
                           roads), no adverse impacts such as relocation of households; adverse impacts on incomes/
                           livelihoods/businesses; or any restriction of access to natural resources are anticipated under this
                           project. No permanent or temporary land acquisition using the principle of eminent domain is
                           expected under this project. Land requirements, if any, are expected to be small scale in nature and
                           subproject investments will be carried out only on publically owned land (or other government
                           owned land). A Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared and disclosed on March 7,
                           2014 not in anticipation of land acquisition, but as a precautionary measure in the unlikely
                           situation that access to assets will be restricted. In such an event, Resettlement Action Plans will
                           be prepared to address any adverse impacts that may arise as per OP 4.12.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The project positive impacts are as follow:
                           •        Empowerment of local communities’ capacities to sustainably manage their oasis
                           ecosystems, particularly through training, communication and environmental monitoring,
                           evaluation and adoption of participatory implementation approach;
                           •        Scaling up sustainable land and water management practices through the rehabilitation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           degraded areas particularly in reversing the process of soil degradation and bringing fertility,
                           slowing the process of salinization and restoring vegetation cover;
                           •        Implementation of innovative practices for sustainable water management which will
                           allow farmers to use optimally water for agricultural and livestock production and thereby
                           minimizes the pressures on natural sources.
                           •        Improving services oasis agro-ecosystem will develop organic farming by creating a new
                           niche high value to local agricultural products.
                           •        The promotion of technical and local knowledge would reduce the pressure on oasis
                           •        The promotion of small-scale farming would produce natural fertilizer for the soil while
                           providing revenue diversification for farmers
                           •        The protection of biodiversity through the creation and strengthening of gardens
                           biodiversity to save local cultivars.
                           •        The creation and strengthening of local nurseries cultivars to make them available to
                           farmers and thus encourage them to use and produce plants and local seeds.
                           •        The diversification of livelihoods in favor of income-generating activities (recycling,
                           ecotourism, green technologies) , the development of activities for the woman and young in
                           particular related to the high quality craftsmanship
                           •        Strengthening of activity dedicated to oasis to create a support research in the areas of
                           biodiversity conservation , tourism, crafts and other services
                           •        Overall, the social impact of the project is positive for communities in selected oasis. The


                                                                     Page 6 of 10
                           project can have spillover effects on employment and income-generating activities (poverty
                           reduction, youth employment, creation of micro-enterprises …) and strengthening community
                           associations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project potential negative impacts include:
                           •         Overexploitation of available water resources, increased use of fertilizer and treatment
                           products, disturbance of natural ecosystems, enhancement of erosion through the application of
                           technical and non- appropriate cultural practices, Intensification of livestock can pose a risk of an
                           excessive concentration of livestock , hence the risk of destruction of vegetation and soil
                           degradation due to the intensification of livestock pressure on the physical environment and
                           organic pollution of soil and water reserves.
                           •         The protection of biodiversity with the risk of introduction of imported cultivars,
                           •         Indirect impacts on natural resources and other natural habitats due to the influx of people
                           attracted by the new revenue opportunities (additional requirements for drinking water and
                           irrigation) and natural habitats outside the oasis (inadvertent dumping of waste , discharge of
                           contaminated water or heavily salted in the wadi beds , rapid urbanization areas adjacent to the
                           oasis ...)
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Proposed mitigation measures are:
                           •         Implementation of the participatory approach from the preparation of PDPO to selection
                           of activities with focus on environmental and social issues of selected activities.
                           •         Implementation of the environmental and monitoring system that will help to address the
                           problems and serve as a key tool for environmental awareness.
                           •         Implementation of support activities involving regional and national research and
                           development including support and training of young people for careers related to palm
                           (pollinators, scavengers vegetable ...).
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           In accordance with Tunisian legislation and in compliance with the Operational Policy of the
                           World Bank on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12), an RPF has been prepared and disclosed on
                           March 7, 2014.
                           Within each community oasis, the Directorate General of the Environment and Quality of Life
                           (DGEQV), which has overall responsibility for the implementation of the project, will be
                           responsible for the establishment and management of a Complaints Commission in each selected
                           oasis, including representatives of the Agriculture Development Group (GDA), associations of
                           producers and users, women’s and youth groups, and also CDRAs and other decentralized
                           technical services. The DGEQV has prepared a template to help people / households potentially
                           affected by sub-projects to properly present their complaints.
                           The DGEQV also elaborated an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                           during the preparatory phase. The ESMF has been approved during a national workshop held on
                           17 and 18 February 2014, and has been posted in the Ministry’s Web site on March 07, 2014.
                           Activities to be financed by the project will follow the steps of environmental and social screening
                           through a form of Fact Sheet Environmental and Social Information (FIES), annexed to the ESMF.
                           This screening will determine the magnitude of negative impacts on human bio-physical
                           environment and socio-economic activity that is likely to generate. Based on the information
                           contained in the FEDS and making an assessment on the ground, it is possible to determine what
                           activities the implementation of a simplified environmental impact and social assessment in is

                                                                      Page 7 of 10
                           required. This collection of information will be carried out through field observations, the use of
                           professional expertise and / or interviews with the people concerned. Management measures of
                           impacts identified in the FIES will be included in the specifications for operators activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Preparation FIES will be done in consultation with the people and the beneficiary associations.
                           These FIES will be published and posted on the Website of the State Secretariat for Sustainable
                           Development. In this case, no additional safeguard will be required for activities generating only
                           minimal impacts.
                           The DGEQV is the Executing Agency of the project and will be responsible for compliance with
                           environmental and social safeguards policies as described in the ESMF. It is the executing agency
                           for other GEF WB projects like the Gulf of Gabes project ended in December 2012, ecotourism
                           project and the environmental components of PGRN2 and PISEAU II projects. DGEQV has
                           experience with environment and social safeguards, including processing of environmental
                           assessment frameworks. Several staff have been trained and are familiar with EIA and World
                           Bank environment and social safeguard policies. They will support the project including validation
                           of procedures of environmental and social assessments and the implementation of measures for
                           monitoring and evaluation. A social and environment consultant will be hired to focus on social
                           and environment safeguards and monitoring and evaluation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project will finance the annual training and capacity building of different target groups (GDA,
                           NGOs, CRDA …) in the field of management of the environmental assessments and social
                           safeguards and the implementation and monitoring of the project activities. Awareness of the local
                           population on the environmental and social impacts will be through meetings during the
                           preparation and implementation of Participatory Development Plan (PDPO) for each subject and
                           Oasis and during sensitization sessions, which will be led by local NGOs involved in the project.
                           About 20 training workshops (ie 5 per region) will be held for regional and local structures and
                           around 80 awareness sessions to raise and support skills of local people (20 per region). Given the
                           extent and nature of the subprojects funded through this project, We can estimate the costs for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           training, capacity building and public awarenss related to social and environment impacts at
                           approximately U.S. $ 100,000, including training, capacity building and public awareness at all
                           levels.
                           A public consultation process was carried out from 2 to 06.09.2013 on various project sites. This
                           campaign involved the organization of two workshops to present the project components and
                           activities and discuss with stakeholders potential impact and mitigation measures. These meetings
                           were held on several sites (GDA offices, professional organizations, NGOs, cafes, shops,
                           agricultural sites ...). It is clear from this series of consultations that the expectations of all
                           stakeholders regarding this project are large and the involvement of all is demonstrated. The
                           implementation of this project will not meet any difficulty from local actors thanks to the good
                           development approach. The ESMF and RPF were validated at national validation workshop held
                           on February, 17 and 18 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                        05-Mar-2014
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                     07-Mar-2014
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


                                                                    Page 8 of 10
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tunisia                                                             05-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         05-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      07-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tunisia                                                             05-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                         Technical Assistance Project
                         For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
                         indicate type of document disclosed, if any.

                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?



                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Taoufiq Bennouna
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (SM)                 Date: 14-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
