INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCI 104
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Dec-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Croatia                    Project ID:   P152130
Project Name:   Croatia Innovation & Entrepreneurship VC (P152130)
Task Team       Paulo Guilherme Correa
Leader:
Estimated       23-Mar-2015                Estimated     18-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTCDR                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General industry and trade sector (60%), Other non-bank financial
intermediaries (40%)
Theme(s):       Other Private Sector Development (60%), Other Financial Sector Development
(40%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      20.00            Total Bank Financing:   20.00
U       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
Borrower                                                         0.00
o         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           20.00
Total                                                           20.00
Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
24.    The project objective is to help foster innovation, entrepreneurship, and private sector growth
by increasing the supply of risk capital financing for young knowledge intensive SMEs (including
start-ups).
C. Project Description


﻿1. The £20 million operation will be implemented over ten years and will have three components: a)
a pilot venture capital fund ; b) a seed co-investment fund; c) technical assistance. The proposed
program follows up from the STP and STP II programs by assisting the government to close the risk
capitaly financing gap for young knowledge intensive SMEs. It will do this by three means. It will
contribute to creating a venture capital segment interested in financing knowledge-based, innovative
SMEs; it will contribute to generate deal flow from such firms; and it will increase the Croatian
government's ability to spend European Structural and Investment funds on supporting young,
knowledge intensive SMEs including startups going forward.
2. HAMAG-BICRO will be the implementing agency for the project management, financial
management and the procurement of the overall program. HAMAG-BICRO is an independent
agency founded by the Republic of Croatia under the Ministry of Entrepreneurship and Crafts. The
Ministry of Entrepreneurship and Crafts will appoint a Project Implementation Team (PIU), which
would consist of HAMAG-BICRO's experts and consultants for specific functions. The entity
BICRO - which was recently merged with HAMAG as part of the current agency - has experience in
the implementation of past and current World Bank Science and Technology Projects (STP and
STPII).
3. A brief description of the three components is presented below. Funding allocation for each
component is indicative at this stage.
4. Component 1 (£14.5 million): The venture capital fund will be a pilot that takes the first steps
towards establishing a venture capital industry in Croatia. It is envisaged that it will be initially a £29
million fund with E14.5 million from the loan (through HAMAG-BICRO) and up to a further £14.5
million to be raised from private sources (which might include pension funds, and IFIs). The fund
will be privately managed by a firm to be selected by tender; the selected firm will be responsible for
raising the additional £14.5 million from the private sector. The mandate of the venture capital fund
will be to invest in young, knowledge-intensive SMEs. The fund managers will seek projects with
the potential to earn standard returns typically sought by venture capital funds. Initial investments are
O
expected to be in the range of C100,000-C1.5 million.
5. Component 2 (£2.5 million): The establishment of a seed co-investment fund is envisaged in order
to strengthen the early stage (seed) investing industry in Croatia. The fund will be £2.5 million (from
the loan) and will be managed by HAMAG-BICRO. It will co-invest (in a pari-pasu basis) alongside
pre approved investors (as angel syndicates, venture capital funds, accelerators and incubators). The
fund's mandate is to invest in young, knowledge-intensive SMEs. Investments made by the fund are
expected to range from 30k to C 100k.
6. Both Component 1 and Component 2 aim at providing risk capital financing to knowledge
intensive SMEs (including startups). The firms are expected to be less than ten years old and
relatively small (less than 50 employees). For both funds, no attempt will be made at establishing
priorities in terms of sectors. However, given the type of finance the funds will provide, the firms are
expected to operate in sectors such as, for example, information communication technology (ICT),
life sciences, medical and health related fields, and biotechnology. They are expected to invest in
non-tangible assets. Both funds will not invest in certain sectors, which will be determined
subsequently. This negative list will follow World Bank Group Safeguards practices and, drawing on
international best practices as well as ICF guidelines. To ensure that investments occur in knowledge
intensive firms the list may include activities such as hospitality, retail and real estate. The fund will


﻿also not invest in deals where there is a conflict of interest between the investees and investors. The
venture capital fund will be expected to be in compliance with the Equator Principles and not invest
in projects on the IFC's exclusion list as well as the additional restrictions the IFC applies to
Financial Intermediaries (FI).
0
7. Component 3. Technical Assistance (C 3 million): This component would be established to assist
in the creation and operation of the program. The funds would provide for: (i) Payment of the venture
capital firm management fees; (ii) Advisory Board staffed with international experts to provide
guidance and support to HAMAG-BICRO's staff on the implementation of the program; (iii)
Capacity building for investors, entrepreneurs and universities; (iv) M&E system to ensure
accountability in the use of government's money, and provide guidance on how the program can be
improved; (v) Other: this could include assistance with technical due diligence and studies on
targeted regulatory and policy reforms.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
8. The project will be implemented countrywide.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
9. HAMAG BICRO has previous experience in implementing WB projects more specifically they
have experience in implementing WB safeguards policies through the First and Second Science and
Technology Project. Furthermore, some members already participated in the WB organized
Safeguards Training in Belgrade 2011.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Natasa Vetma (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    TBD         The Environmental Management Framework will be
OP/BP 4.01                              prepared for the project prior to appraisal and will
define environmental procedures and due diligence
for the project as a whole. The EMF will be built on
existing Croatian Science and Technology Project II
which has the same implementing agency.
For Component 1 Pilot Venture Capital Fund and
Component 2 Co-investment fund, an EMF will be
developed focusing on variety of environmental
impacts that come from knowledge intense and life
sciences based start-up companies. Sub-projects
might range from low to high category B projects,
implying possible preparation of various due
diligence documents like: EIA, EMP, EMP checklist,
for which criteria will be defined in EMF. Category
A projects will be excluded, as well those listed on
IBRD non-eligible project list. The EMF will as well
deal with environmental and ethical risks posed by


﻿some of the activities (like life science - biotech)
supported by the Funds. The EMF will make sure
that the implementation of the project complies with
both National and WB safeguards procedures.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No
&        Pest Management OP 4.09       No            No. The project will not support purchasing
pesticides and its activities will not lead to their
increased usage.
Physical Cultural Resources   No            No. The project is not supporting any kind of
OP/BP 4.11                                  construction or rehabilitation activities.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No            The project would not trigger OP 4.12. The
BP 4.12                                     eligibility criteria that will be defined in EMF would
specify that no potential beneficiaries can participate
in the project if they would need land acquisition for
the activities to be supported under this project. Re-
habilitation and reconstruction (which could involve
demolition of no longer suitable structure and
erection of a new one) of existing buildings within
the roughly same footprint would be permissible,
although unlikely to be supported by the project.
Investments will only be accepted if they involve
unencumbered land or property (i.e. no squatters or
encroachers or not requiring the eviction of anyone
resident in such property). The PIU should verify for
each sub project the unencumbered status of the
property prior to approving any sub-project which
could raise such issues. The EMF should clearly note
the above.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No
Projects on International     No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 16-Mar-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿EMF is expected to be prepared by HAMAG-BICRO by the end of January 2015 after which
EMF will be disclosed on HAMAG-BICRO website both in English and Croatian and hardcopy
will be available at HAMAG-BICRO premises for at least two weeks. At the same time call for
public consultation meeting will be issued (through HAMAG-BICRO webpage and direct mail to
different stakeholders) and date and venue of the meeting will be set. HAMAG-BICRO will as
well request written comments and will provide both postal and email address for sending
a
comments and suggestions on EMF. The public consultation meeting is expected to be held before
or latest on March 1, 2015, i.e. prior to appraisal. The EMF will be finalized, according to the
comments from public consultations latest by March 14, 2015 and sent to InfoShop.
During project implementation, the type of environmental due diligence documents for individual
sub-projects would be determined, based on the screening, during the sub-project application
process. The Sub-project beneficiary will prepare the required documents, which will be reviewed
by the PIU, disclosed and consulted according to EMF (prepared for the project), prior to approval
of the sub-project.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:    Name: Paulo Guilherme Correa
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                     Date: 09-Dec-2014
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/    Name: Paloma Anos Casero (PMGR)              Date: 10-Dec-2014
Manager:


