                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC5618

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Central Asia                     Project ID:      P145634
                            Project Name:      Central Asia Road Links - Tajikistan (P145634)
                            Task Team          Cordula Rastogi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          03-Sep-2014                      Estimated        25-Feb-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (90%), Public administration-
                                               Transportation (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Trade facilitation and market access (40%), Rural services and infrastructure
                                               (40%), Regional integration (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     54.00                     Total Bank Financing:         45.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           9.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  45.00
                              Total                                                                        45.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The CARs program is the result of a collaborative effort initiated by respective governments in the
                           Central Asia region which has been developed as a regional, multi-phase program considered as a
                           regional transformational project under IDA17. The program has the overall objective to increase
                           transport connectivity between neighboring countries in Central Asia along priority cross-border road
                         links whilst supporting improvements in road operations and maintenance practices. The road links
                         once rehabilitated will improve access along priority transport connections between major urban
                         agglomerations within the Central Asia region, thereby supporting the creation of an integrated
Public Disclosure Copy




                         economic region across borders. In addition to each country’s capital city, major urban
                         agglomerations include cities such as: (a) Osh city, the second largest city in the Kyrgyz Republic in
                         Osh Oblast, (b) Khujand, the second largest city in Tajikistan within Sugd Oblast, (d) Almaty, the
                         formerly capital of Kazakhstan until 1997 within Almaty Oblast, as well as (e) Andijan (Andijan
                         Oblast), Fergana (Fergana Oblast) and Namangan (Namangan Oblast) in the Ferghana valley.

                         The project development objective (PDO) of the Second Phase of the Central Asia Road Links
                         Program (CARs-2) is to increase transport connectivity between Tajikistan and its neighboring
                         countries along priority cross-border road links whilst supporting improvements in road operations
                         and maintenance practices. The road sections to be financed under CARs-2 prioritize connectivity
                         between the Sugd Oblast in Tajikistan and the Osh and Batken Oblast as they build lateral spurs from
                         the Osh-Isfana axis to the Tajik border.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed CARs-2 will consist of three components:
                         Component 1: Rehabilitation of priority road sections in Sugd Oblast: This component is expected to
                         finance the provision of works and consultants' services for the rehabilitation of up to 85 kilometers
                         of road sections in Sugd oblast. Those road sections will link Tajikistan with its neighboring
                         countries.
                         Component 2: Improvement of road operations and road asset management: This component is
                         proposed to finance the provision of goods, and consultants' services for the improvement of road
                         operations and road asset management.
                         Component 3: Project management and implementation: This component is proposed to finance the
                         provision of goods, consultants' services, and training, operating costs, including a financial audit to
                         support project coordination, implementation, and management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Land acquisition is expected to be minimized to the extent possible as rehabilitation will be
                         undertaken mainly within the existing right of way of the road, but with the possibility of a short new
                         bypass at Isfara city.
                         Project expected locations include:
                         * Kuchkak-Kim-Isfara-Guliston,
                         * Kim-Kanibadam-Kuchkak
                         * Kanibadam-Patar
                         * Dehmoi-Proletarsk –Madaniyat

                         Rehabilitation will be undertaken mainly within the right of way of the existing road. Around Isfara
                         city, there are two options proposed for the alignment: (i) along the existing road through the city,
                         and (ii) a short bypass around the city through an adjacent agricultural field.

                         Risks are limited to the typical impacts associated with road construction and rehabilitation projects.
                         The severity of potential impacts is moderate and mostly limited to the construction period: (i) air
                         pollution and noise from trucks and other construction machinery, and asphalt plants, (ii) soil
                         disturbance during earthmoving and material (gravel/sand/soil) extraction, and (iii) tree-cutting and
                         loss of vegetation, (iv) generation and disposal of construction and household (from construction
                           camps) solid waste, and (v) construction camp management (which will be temporary with only
                           minor and localized negative effects).
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The MOT is responsible for the implementation of all transport and communications related projects.
                           MoT has accumulated substantial knowledge on project management from the implementation of
                           projects financed by other development partners such as the ADB, the European Bank for
                           Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), the Islamic Development Bank (IsDB) as well as Exim
                           Bank of China. An assessment will be undertaken as part of the preparation of the proposed Project
                           to review MOT's capacity to implement this additional Project, in particular the experience of staff
                           working on environmental and social safeguards.

                           In order to comply with environmental and social safeguards requirements of the World Bank the
                           Client is expected to establish a PIU with safeguards capacity. This capacity will draw on the
                           existing expertise of the PIUs working on investment projects of other IFIs, and/or hire individual
                           experts to supervise implementation of the EMPs and RAPs. It is important that the capacity on
                           safeguards created during implementation of existing IFI financed investment projects is maintained.
                           The team recommends to explore the possibility of engaging the same safeguards specialists of PIUs/
                           CPIs and experts hired by construction supervision engineers taking into account the similarity of
                           safeguards requirements (e.g. comparable social and environment safeguards policies of Asian
                           Development Bank which have been extensively applied in the Tajikistan road sector).
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Alexei Slenzak (GENDR)
                           Asli Gurkan (GURDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             OP/BP 4.01 is triggered as the project activities
                           BP 4.01                                             would generate some environmental impact that
                                                                               is typical to road rehabilitation projects. The
                                                                               severity of potential impact is moderate and
                                                                               mostly limited to the construction period: (i) air
                                                                               pollution and noise from trucks and other
                                                                               construction machinery, and asphalt plants, (ii)
                                                                               soil disturbance during earthmoving and
                                                                               material (gravel/sand/soil) extraction, (iii) tree-
                                                                               cutting and loss of vegetation, (iv) generation
                                                                               and disposal of construction and household
                                                                               (from construction camps) solid waster, and (v)
                                                                               construction camp management (which will be
                                                                               temporary with only minor and localized
                                                                               effects). Road rehabilitation will be undertaken
                                                                               mostly within the existing right of way of the
                                                                               road (with the exception of a possible short
                                                                               bypass near Isfara city) and environmental
                                                                               impacts can be mitigated by good construction
                                                                 and housekeeping practices. To address
                                                                 potential environmental impacts the client has
                                                                 conducted an EIA and prepared an EMF as part
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 of the preparatory studies for the proposed
                                                                 works. The EIA and EMF will be disclosed by
                                                                 MOT and public hearings will be organized in
                                                                 specific project locations before appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    Not triggered as the majority of the civil works
                                                                 contains of road rehabilitation within the
                                                                 existing right of way. Based on the site visit by
                                                                 the Project Team, the proposed bypass near
                                                                 Isfara city will be located on areas which do not
                                                                 represent natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    Not triggered as the project activities will not be
                                                                 conducted in the afforested areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    N/A

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    N/A
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    N/A

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Based on the field visit to proposed Project
                         4.12                                    sites, it is likely that some land acquisition
                                                                 impacts will occur. Sites visits, consultations
                                                                 and discussions with officials indicate that
                                                                 likely impacts could include acquisition of land
                                                                 in agricultural use, displacement of roadside
                                                                 vendors, and removal of non-residential
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 structures within the right of way of proposed
                                                                 roads. Land acquisition is expected to be
                                                                 minimized to the extent possible as
                                                                 rehabilitation will be undertaken mainly within
                                                                 the existing right of way of the road, but with
                                                                 the possibility of a short new bypass at Isfara
                                                                 city. A Resettlement Policy Framework will be
                                                                 prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal. Site-
                                                                 specific RAPs as required will be prepared
                                                                 during implementation.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No    N/A

                         Projects on International        No     N/A
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No     Approximately half of the border between
                         7.60                                    Tajikistan and the Kyrgyz Republic has not
                                                                 been officially demarcated. The Tajik
                                                                 government has informed the Bank that there
                                                                 are two bilateral commissions set up between
                                                                                                                                 the Republic of Tajikistan and the Kyrgyz
                                                                                                                                 Republic to resolve border issues as well as
                                                                                                                                 cross-border economic and cultural issues.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 There is no pending international litigation
                                                                                                                                 between the Republic of Tajikistan and the
                                                                                                                                 Kyrgyz Republic regarding border issues
                                                                                                                                 relevant to the proposed project, nor is there
                                                                                                                                 conflicting legislation in the two countries that
                                                                                                                                 impacts the proposed project on the issue of
                                                                                                                                 borders. Certain road sections proposed to be
                                                                                                                                 financed by IDA are in close proximity to the
                                                                                                                                 border with the Kyrgyz Republic. For the
                                                                                                                                 reasons referenced in the preceding paragraph,
                                                                                                                                 the proposed project does not trigger OP/
                                                                                                                                 BP7.60.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-Sep-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The Environmental Management Framework which also includes the Social Impact Assessment
                                      along with the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was be prepared by the client. The
                                      documents will be disclosed and consulted prior to project appraisal. Site-Specific Environmental
                                      Management Plans (EMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared following
                                      preparation of detailed design of the specific road sections. Public consultations on the EMPs and
                                      RAPs in project areas will be organized before works commence.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Cordula Rastogi

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 27-Aug-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                                                                                                  Date: 28-Aug-2014
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
