                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA5868
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Jan-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Jan-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Ukraine                           Project ID:    P144893
                            Project Name:     Improving Health Services for the Population (P144893)
                            Task Team         Paolo Belli
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         17-Nov-2014                       Estimated   04-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GHNDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (90%), Public administration- Health (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Health system performance (50%), Injuries and non-communicable diseases
                                              (40%), Public expenditure, financial management and procurem ent (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     261.30           Total Bank Financing:               215.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 46.30
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   215.00
                              Total                                                                                   261.30
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed “Improving Health Services for the Population” Project seeks to improve the quality of
                           health services in selected Oblasts, with special focus on primary and secondary prevention of
                           cardiovascular diseases and cancer, and to enhance efficiency of the health care system.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 6
                         Project Components

                         Component 1: Improving service delivery at the local level (estimated funding US$ 189.53 million).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Under this component the Project would provide financing to selected Oblasts to carry out
                         investment sub-projects aimed at prevention, early detection and treatment of cardiovascular diseases
                         and cancer and at increasing efficiency of their health care delivery system (“Oblast Sub-projects”),
                         including activities focused on improving primary health care, fighting cardiovascular diseases
                         (CVDs) at the primary and secondary care levels, early cancer detection, and health delivery system
                         rationalization.

                         Oblasts of Ukraine were invited to submit proposals and, after a competitive process, eight Oblast
                         sub-projects were selected. In the first phase, a Committee created by MoH and including
                         representatives of MoF and MoE, as well International experts from the World Bank, preselected 11
                         oblasts -from 22 proposals received. The Committee evaluated Oblast project proposals according to
                         a previously agreed scorecard. In the second phase, the Bank project preparation team engaged with
                         all of the preselected Oblasts to improve their initial proposals. Oblasts were requested to show their
                         ability to build a result and evidence based planning process. Four workshops were conducted in
                         2013 and 2014 to help Oblasts finalize their proposals. Because of the conflict situation and the
                         different degree of readiness of the preselected Oblasts, eight Oblasts were finally selected to start
                         implementation. Oblast proposals are summarized in Annex 2 and 6.

                         The selected Oblasts are Dnepropetrovsk, Poltava, Rivne, Vinnitsa, Volyn, Lviv, Zakarpatya and
                         Zaporizhya, with a budget up to US$ 41 million funded by the Bank, plus at least 10 percent Oblast
                         co-financing. The eight sub-projects in the above Oblasts would start simultaneously, and the three
                         smaller ones (Lviv, Zakarpatya and Zaporizhya) would finish after three years. It is intended that
                         there would be a second round of smaller proposals to cover the last years of implementation, using
                         the savings in all Project components, reallocation across Oblasts, and possibly additional financing.
                         A mechanism for reallocation of Project proceeds from low performing Oblasts to better performing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ones has been agreed, and is described in detail in the Project Operations Manual (POM). If one or
                         more Oblasts fail to implement the agreed activities in a timely manner, funds would be transferred
                         to better performing Oblasts upon decision of the MoH and the Bank.

                         Component 2: Strengthen MoH governance (estimated funding of US $ 20.2 million). All the
                         activities in Component 2 have been clustered around five thematic areas, under the MoH as
                         implementing agency: Payment System Reform, e-Health/Information Systems Development, Public
                         Health, Information and Communication, and Capacity Building. In addition, a decision has been
                         made to bundle the resources of the five subcomponents into a common pool.
                         a.        Payment Systems Reform: a new hospital payment system based on Diagnostic Related
                         Groups (DRGs) would be designed, piloted, and implemented in Ukraine (initial budget: US$
                         9,434,807). ,
                         b.        E-Health Development: the Project would contribute to strengthen the availability of reliable
                         and accurate health information at all levels, and the MoH stewardship role in e-Health development
                         in Ukraine (initial budget: US$ 2,953,165).
                         c.        Public Health: the Project would support the preparation and implementation of a strategy
                         and action plan for development of public health services, including stimulating primary prevention
                         activities against relevant risk factors and strengthening disease surveillance with a focus on NCDs
                         (initial budget: US$ 2,080,000).
                         d.        Information and Communication: the Project would support information campaigns to keep


                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                         up the reform momentum, receive feedback from Project beneficiaries, and it would invest in some
                         specific communication tools, such as developing a web page on the reforms (initial budget: US$
                         1,940,000).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         e.       Capacity Building: the Project would organize and carry out learning activities and events at
                         national level focused on improving management of health services. It would also facilitate
                         continuous learning in the selected Oblasts, through inter-Oblast learning and exposure to
                         international experience in the areas of relevance (initial budget: US$ 3,790,000).

                         Component 3: Project implementation support, and monitoring and evaluation, (estimated funding
                         US $ 4.74 million). This component would support the Project Consultancy Support Unit (PCSU) at
                         national level, responsible for Project implementation support and technical assistance to the Oblasts.
                         In addition, it would sponsor complementary data collection and analysis activities for monitoring
                         results as necessary. The information from the existing Health Management Information System
                         (HMIS) would be complemented through audit of medical records on a sample basis as well as
                         through evidence base d on specific, ad hoc household and facility surveys. In addition, the Project
                         would organize learning events to educate and promote better use of evidence for policy.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in 8 oblasts of Ukraine (Poltava, Dnepropetrovsk, Vinnitsa, Volyn,
                         Rivne, Lviv, Zakarpatya, Zaporizhya). Potential negative impacts of the project are predictable,
                         small-scale and manageable. These potential impacts are associated with rehabilitation and
                         reconstruction of existing premises of hospitals, polyclinics, and primary care centers in sub-projects
                         under Component 1. It is expected that most of the sub-projects will be Environmental Category C
                         (e.g. procurement of medical equipment, small-scale works on renovation, rehabilitation and
                         reconstruction of existing premises). A sub-project involving a new building as a way to optimize the
                         network of emergency cardiac services may require Environmental Category B (Vinnitsa Oblast).
                         Any activities that may cause any permanent or temporary physical or economic displacement will
                         be excluded from the project. Therefore the Involuntary Resettlement Policy OP4.12 is not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexei Slenzak (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment Yes                Most of the sub-projects will be Environmental
                          OP/BP 4.01                                  Category C (e.g. procurement of medical equipment,
                                                                      small-scale renovation) or "Low B" (rehabilitation and
                                                                      reconstruction of existing premises). Vynnytsya sub-
                                                                      project (new construction) will be Environmental
                                                                      Category B and will require preparation of the EMP.
                                                                      Environmental impacts will be limited and site-specific
                                                                      and will be mitigated by good construction and
                                                                      housekeeping practices. Category Low B or C sub-
                                                                      project will require preparation of the EMP Checklist.
                                                                      Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was
                                                                      prepared and will serve as a basis for preparation of
                                                                      EMP for Vynnytsya sub-project and site-specific EMP
                                                                      Checklists for other sub-projects.



                                                                      Page 3 of 6
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP        No
                            4.04
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36            No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09       No

                            Physical Cultural Resources No               Project activities are not expected to have an impact on
                            OP/BP 4.11                                   physical cultural resources. In case project activities
                                                                         take place in the historic buildings, the design
                                                                         documentation will be reviewed and cleared by local
                                                                         governmental body for protection of the cultural
                                                                         heritage. In this case Physical Cultural Resources Action
                                                                         Plan will be prepared for specific project activities. All
                                                                         contracts for works in historic buildings will include
                                                                         provisions for chance finds procedure.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP No
                            4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement No                  The project is not expected to require any land
                            OP/BP 4.12                                   acquisition. Any minor new constructions that may
                                                                         happen under the project will happen on the territory of
                                                                         the health facilities which is not used in any other way.
                                                                         Thus economic or physical displacement of temporary
                                                                         or permanent nature will not be caused by the project.
                                                                         The oblast level implementation units will be trained
                                                                         additionally on OP4.12 to ensure that any potential
                                                                         displacement cases are strictly avoided. The provision
                                                                         for that will be included in the POM.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No

                            Projects on International     No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas    No
                            OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Activities under the project involve small-scale reconstruction/renovation works of existing
                              buildings on a number of sites, in many rayons, cities, towns and villages. By these reconstruction
                              works the existing buildings/premises will be converted into ambulatories of primary health care,
                              or (as one case in the city of Dnipropetrovsk) one floor of existing clinic will be renovated.
                              Existing facilities are being used as health care facilities, or (on some sites in villages) were used
                              in the past as offices or kindergartens or for other public purposes. Reconstruction will involve
                              various works inside the buildings, windows/doors replacement, roofing (if needed), facade works


                                                                          Page 4 of 6
                           and necessary improvement of existing infrastructure on the site. There will be no infrastructure
                           works outside the facility site (power, water, sewerage lines) carried out in the framework of this
                           project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           One subproject (Vinnitsa) envisages construction of a new cardiological center (hospital) on the
                           land plot that has been allocated for this purpose by city authorities. It is expected that the total
                           floor area of this facility will be between 10,000-20,000 sq.m. The land plot is situated within the
                           existing footprint of "medical town" in the city of Vinnitsa, where there are already a number of
                           hospitals, clinics and other associated facilities. Currently this land is not used; most of it is
                           covered with shrubs and trees growing wild.

                           There are no potential large-scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts expected as a result of
                           project activities.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are expected due to anticipated future activities in
                           the project area.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Ministry of Health established the PSCU and hired a designated safeguards specialist with
                           good experience of environmental assessment and public consultations.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           General population in the project area, health care institutions are keay stakeholders of this project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was prepared by the client and will be
                           disclosed and consulted upon by the Client prior to project appraisal.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Oct-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ukraine                                                          17-Oct-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         N/A



                                                                       Page 5 of 6
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Paolo Belli
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                             Date: 06-Jan-2015
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Daniel Dulitzky (PMGR)                         Date: 06-Jan-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 6 of 6
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
