INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA12195
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Mar-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Gambia, The               Project ID:  P154007
Parent       P143650
Project ID:
Project Name: GM Maternal and Child Nutrition and Health Results Project (P154007)
Parent Project Maternal and Child Nutrition and Health Results Project (P143650)
Name:
Task Team       Rifat Hasan
Leader(s):
Estimated       02-Mar-2015               Estimated    24-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GHNDR                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Health (50%), Other social services (50%)
Theme(s):       Nutrition and food security (40%), Population and reproductive health (20%),
Health system performance (20%), Child health (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      5.00            Total Bank Financing:    5.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                5.00
Total                                                                      5.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
Page 1 of 8


﻿A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
A. Proposed Development Objective
The development objective of the project is to increase the utilization of community nutrition and
primary maternal and child health services in selected regions in the Recipient's territory.
B. Current Project Development Objectives - Parent
C. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
Project Description
The additional financing will support food and nutrition security activities, the replenishment of the
reallocation and additional support for Ebola response activities, and the expansion of original
project activities in the MCNHRP (P143650). The MCNHRP is currently being scaled up in the
western half of North Bank Region (NBR-W), the Central River Region (CRR) and Upper River
Region (URR). The additional financing would support new areas in the eastern half of North Bank
Region (NBR-E) and Lower River Region (LRR) which have a total population of approximately
200,000 to be added to the MCNHRP. Overall, the summary of components is as follows:
Component 1: Community Mobilization for Social and Behavior Change
*      Conditional cash transfers to communities and support groups
*      Conditional cash transfer to individuals
*      Social and behavior change communication (SBCC)
Component 2: Delivery of Community Nutrition and Primary Health Care Services
*      Performance-based financing for health facilities
*      Start-up support, including selected health care waste management measures
*      Ebola preparedness and control
*      PHC scale-up
*      Food security-enhanced BFCI scale-up
Component 3: Capacity Building for Service Delivery and RBF
*      Capacity building
*      M&E, operational research and verification
*      Coordination and program management at all levels
*      Performance contracts with RHT, RAD, RBF Committee, and NaNA
The project design is as follows:
COMPONENT 1 - Community Mobilization for Social and Behavior Change (Total US$4.15
million, including: US$1.80 million AF; US$0.91 million IDA; US$1.44 million HRITF): This
component currently supports: (i) results-based financing contracts with communities and VSGs to
increase demand for and utilization of health and nutrition services through counseling and timely
referrals for life-saving health services (e.g., hygiene, sanitation, counseling on infant and young
child feeding, delayed first pregnancy and child spacing, referral of pregnant women and children
with danger signs to health centers); (ii) conditional cash transfers (CCT) to individual women to
Page 2 of 8


﻿increase utilization of timely antenatal care; and (iii) accompanying measures aimed at promoting
behavioral changes and increasing demand to improve household practices related to health and
nutrition through social and behavior change communication (SBCC; which includes technical
advisory services and training).
The proposed change to this component is to expand the scope of the community agreements and the
accompanying measures to include food security indicators and messages. The additional indicators
and messages will relate to the expanded service delivery activities described under Component 2
and cover off-season and diversified food production of vegetables, fruits, ruminants and poultry by
vulnerable households, use of improved vegetable seed and ruminant/poultry race varieties, use of
improved (staple) food storage facilities, adoption of appropriate food transformation technologies,
the establishment of emergency food banks at community level, diversified food intake, the
commercialization of excess production, and increased plot allocation for small-scale food
production to women in vulnerable households. The community RBF contracts will be gradually
expanded to the two additional Regions, NBR-E and LRR, similarly to the expansion in the original
Regions by adding batches of a manageable number of community contracts. The accompanying
measures which refer to comprehensive SBCC strategies will be scaled up to all communities of the
five Project Regions.
COMPONENT 2 - Delivery of Community Nutrition and PHC Services (Total US$6.33 million,
including: US$2.30 million AF; US$1.85 million IDA; US$2.18 HRITF): This Component currently
supports the delivery of nutrition and primary health care services through (i) performance-based
financing (PBF) grants to health centers for the delivery of a predefined package of maternal and
child health and nutrition services at primary and referral health care facilities; and (ii) startup
support for effective service delivery, including the implementation of selected health care waste
management measures. This package is being implemented in NBR-W, CRR and URR. The
proposed changes to this component are:
(a)    PBF package (as described above) expansion to NBR-E and LRR;
(b)    PHC scale-up extended to NBR-E and LRR in support of the current MOHSW strategy; and
(c)    Food security-enhanced BFCI scale-up across the five regions.
PBF Package Expansion: The above package is being implemented in 24 health facilities in NBR-
W, CRR and URR, and the additional financing will expand this to include another 13 facilities
across NBR-E and LRR. Health facilities sign a PBF contract with the MOHSW RBF Committee
and receive quarterly payments corresponding to their achieved performance. A fee-for-service
mechanism, including quantity and quality payments, is being employed with payments triggered
following quantity verification by NaNA. The final amount is determined following quality
verification by RHTs. Health facility can use their payments for material and equipment, training,
consulting services and operating costs, and staff bonuses that will ultimately improve service
delivery. Facilities have sufficient decision space for social entrepreneurship to use the performance
payments to improve the demand and quality of services provided. As part of the RBF contracting
cycle, each health facility develops a business plan which serves as a guide for future investments
and use of payments.
Ebola Preparedness and Control: In the earlier restructuring of this project, US$0.50 million was
reallocated to support implementation of immediate actions in the Ebola Response Plan.
Specifically, social mobilization (e.g. development and distribution of communication materials) and
case management (e.g. health care worker training and preparedness, provision of personal protective
equipment) are being supported through the restructuring. The activities are being supported by
Page 3 of 8


﻿WHO through a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) for technical assistance. The MOU was
signed on February 5, 2015. The AF will add another US$0.25 million to support health system
strengthening efforts to improve Ebola preparedness and control. Activities will address
strengthening the data management system (e.g. review of and training on Integrated Disease
Surveillance and Response, procurement of data cards to expand reliable internet access at regional
level and health facilities) and improving the reporting system (e.g. training of health care workers
on reporting, monitoring and supervision). While the restructuring was focused on immediate
actions, the AF is focusing on broader health system strengthening that is relevant to not only Ebola
but other infectious diseases as well.
Given the evolving nature of the epidemic risk, the Ebola Response Plan is likely to adapt over the
course of the project. Thus, the AF will maintain a degree of flexibility around specific activities to
be financed and will support the evolving needs in consultation with the National Ebola Task Force,
which coordinates all Ebola activities and is comprised of the government and partners. The project
will coordinate closely with the Task Force to ensure that changes in planning are taken into account
for implementation of activities. With the restructuring and AF combined, the Bank will support US
$0.75 million toward the implementation of the National Ebola Response Plan, which will help the
health system not only prepare for a potential epidemic but also mitigate risks to delivery of maternal
and child health and nutrition services, thereby contributing to the PDO. Other donors are also
contributing to the implementation of the Ebola Response Plan (e.g. UNDP, UNICEF, and WHO).
PHC Scale-Up: The government's Primary Health Care (PHC) Strategy indicates services are to be
delivered through three levels of care: (i) the primary level consisting of a network of village health
posts of community health workers, (ii) the secondary level consisting of a network of minor and
major health centers, and (iii) the tertiary level providing more specialized services and functioning
as a referral service for the secondary level. However, financing has increasingly prioritized the
tertiary level, resulting in an operationally weakened and under-funded PHC system and inadequate
linkages between communities and the health sector. The government has adopted a policy to
revitalize PHC, and the current project is supporting this already. The AF in Component 2 will
support the PHC scale-up to NBR-E and LRR to strengthen community-level structures and the
linkages to health facilities according to agreed-upon criteria for scale-up. Given the early onset of
the hungry season, particular focus will be put on the treatment response to active case finding for
acute malnutrition. The current coverage of the treatment of severe and moderate acute malnutrition
is low and needs to be beefed up through active screening. The PHC scale-up will also facilitate the
community-RBF expansion.
Food security-enhanced BFCI Scale-Up: The Baby Friendly Community Initiative (BFCI) scale-up is
supported in the current project. The AF expands the current BFCI scale-up in terms of scope and
scale (i.e. expanding to the new regions of NBR-E and LRR). In terms of scope, the AF will support
an enhanced version of the BFCI to strengthen local food and nutrition security by building on the
experiences of the previous Rapid Response Nutrition Security Improvement Project and the current
MCNHRP. Activities that will be added to the BFCI will collectively address both (i) the immediate
household food crisis and (ii) medium-term resilience. Activities aimed at the immediate response
include: active screening for early signs of malnutrition and provision of treatment at community
level for cases of moderate acute malnutrition and through inpatient and outpatient basis at health
centers for severe acute malnutrition with our without complications respectively; the targeted
promotion and enhancement of off-season diversified household and community food production
through backyard and community gardens; small livestock husbandry; and use of improved seed
varieties and animal races. Activities aimed at building resilience at the household and community
Page 4 of 8


﻿levels include promotion and use of appropriate food production, storage and transformation
technologies; planting of fruit trees and establishment of child-focused community food banks for
use during nutritional emergencies. With the recognition that community needs vary, a community
diagnostic will be applied to determine feasibility of specific interventions in each community.
The most affected regions for food and nutrition insecurity are LRR, NBR, CRR and URR (inhabited
by approximately 770,000 people in 91,000 households, or 46 percent of the total population). The
most vulnerable people to food and nutrition insecurity shocks are women and children. According to
the 2014 gender assessment by the World Bank, women generally have limited control over
resources but play essential roles in the production of food, the consumption in the household and the
reproduction of the family. Therefore, the immediate beneficiaries of the food security-enhanced
BFCI scale-up will be women and children in food and nutrition insecure households and
communities. The food-security enhanced BFCI scale up will use community organization structures
to identify eligible beneficiaries (pregnant women and mothers of young children in vulnerable
families), who will receive support for the small-scale food security interventions (described in
greater detail in Annex 2).
Activities in Components 1 and 2 (specifically PHC and BFCI scale up) are aimed primarily at
bridging the critical gap between communities and the services they need. In the current community
RBF scheme, in order for a community to be contracted, it must have both PHC and BFCI structures
in place. The PHC and BFCI scale-up supported by the AF in Component 2 will enable more
communities to be eligible for the RBF contracts of Component 1. By building on the ongoing
activities and existing implementation arrangements, the AF allows expanding the scope of the
project at the community level to include food security and scale to include the two new regions.
COMPONENT 3 - Capacity Building for Service Delivery and Results-Based Financing (Total US
$3.20 million, including: US$0.90 million AF; US$0.92 million IDA; US$1.38 million HRITF): The
additional financing will also support ongoing capacity building for service delivery and RBF at both
community and facility levels. The same activities will continue from the original project (capacity
building, M&E, coordination and program management at all levels, and performance contracts).
However, the scale and intensity will need to be greater due to both the geographic expansion of
current activities to two new regions and expansion of scope to now include food security. In the
original project, performance contracts were signed with the PIC, NaNA, MOHSW RBF Commi ttee
and the Regional Health Teams. With the additional food security activities that will be implemented
at community level, the AF will also support performance contracts with the Regional Agriculture
Directorates (RAD) for monitoring and oversight.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project is being implemented in selected Regions of the Recipient's Territory. The selection of
Regions is based on their relative performance on the key nutrition and health outcomes as well as
food security indicators.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         New activities implemented would not modify the
Page 5 of 8


﻿Assessment OP/BP 4.01                safeguard arrangements of the original Project, which had
triggered the Environmental Assessment policy OP4.01
due to the potential for increased medical waste and is
being mitigated by a nationally validated Health Care
Waste Management Plan (HCWMP).
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
New activities implemented would not modify the safeguard arrangements of the original Project,
which had triggered the Environmental Assessment policy OP4.01 due to the potential for
increased medical waste and is being mitigated by a new nationally validated Health Care Waste
Management Plan (HCWMP). The new food security activities refer to small-scale, household-
and community-based interventions that do not trigger OP4.01 on environmental assessment. The
implementation of Ebola prevention and control activities is not expected to increase the
production of medical wastes beyond the original project, and the expansion of RBF activities to
other regions do not trigger additional safeguards - both are adequately covered by the HCWMP
and would reinforce ongoing implementation of the HCWMP. Since the original project was
approved, the Government has also prepared HCWM Standard Operating Procedures that are
acceptable to the Bank. The Plan and Policy have been disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop.
The proposed changes are not expected to have any significant or irreversible environmental or
social impacts. In fact, the activities (information, education and communication; improvement of
food and nutrition security; health care worker training; provision of personal protective
equipment) would have positive environmental and social impacts by supporting and
strengthening communities and the health system.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Page 6 of 8


﻿in the project area:
N.A.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N.A.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project design incorporates the safe and responsible handling and disposal of medical waste
through several measures. Additionally, the quality verification tool, a supervision checklist is
administered on a quarterly basis, includes verification of medical waste measures by the facility.
Indicators of medical waste handling are therefore being monitored in every facility on a regular
basis. Poor performance on the facility quality tool score impacts the level of payment a facility
service provider will receive, so facilities that perform better on waste management practices
receive higher payments. This acts as an incentive to health workers to adopt good waste
management practices and ensure staff adheres to the guidelines. The project management team
and the Regional Project Implementation Committee play an important role in monitoring this
aspect of the program. The World Bank safeguard specialist on the team provides additional
guidance when required.
The Health Care Waste Management Plan (HCWMP) has been revised, updated and disclosed.
The HCWMP was publicly disclosed in country on January 30, 2014 and in the Infoshop on
January 22, 2014 under the original project. The HCWMP and newly developed HCWM Standard
Operating Procedures have also been disclosed for the AF both in-country (February 24, 2015) and
in the Info-Shop (March 2, 2015). Implementation of the HCWMP was discussed and agreed with
the client and will be closely monitored during project supervision.
New activities implemented would not modify the safeguard arrangements of the original Project,
which had triggered the health care waste safeguard and is being adequately mitigated by the
HCWMP. The implementation of the proposed changes are not expected to increase the
production of medical wastes beyond the original project which are adequately covered by the
HCWMP. Thus, the proposed changes are not expected to have any significant or irreversible
negative environmental or social impacts. In fact, the activities would have positive environmental
and social impacts by supporting and strengthening communities and the health system.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The institutions to be involved in the implementation of this project, i.e., the Ministry of Health
and Social Welfare (including the Regional Health Teams and Health Facilities) and WHO, have
the capacity to deal with the rather manageable medical waste expected from the facilities to be
supported under the project.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                24-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             02-Mar-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 7 of 8


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Gambia, The                                               24-Feb-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[   ]   NA[X]
report?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Rifat Hasan
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name:                                      Date:
Practice Manager/     Name:                                      Date:
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


