                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA11239
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Nov-2014, 21-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Belarus                         Project ID:    P147760
                            Project Name:     Forestry Development Project (P147760)
                            Task Team         Andrew Michael Mitchell
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         19-Nov-2014                     Estimated   27-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GENDR                           Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            GEF Focal         Multi-focal area
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Forestry (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Other environment and natural resources management (65%), Climate change
                                              (15%), Water resource management (5%), Biodiversity (5%), E nvironmental
                                              policies and institutions (10%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      43.44           Total Bank Financing:             40.71
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                              0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                40.71
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                     2.73
                              Total                                                                                43.44
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)


                                                                    Page 1 of 6
                              A. Project Development Objective(s)
                              The Project Development Objective is to enhance silvicultural management and re/afforestation,
                              increase the use of felling residues and improve the public good contribution from forests in
Public Disclosure Copy




                              targeted forest areas.
                              B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                              The Project Development Objective is to enhance silvicultural management and re/afforestation,
                              increase the use of felling residues and improve the public good contribution from forests in
                              targeted forest areas.
                          3. Project Description
                         1.       The proposed forestry development project has three main components:

                         i)       Improving silviculture and the sustainability of forest management: through increasing the
                         intensity of silvicultural thinning of young and middle-aged stands; piloting the enhancement of
                         biodiversity values of forest and also in developing resistance of forest to climate change through
                         silvicultural interventions; increasing the use of logging residues for production of woody biomass
                         (this will be complementary to the newly approved Biomass District Heating Project); and improving
                         the quality of seedling production for afforestation and reforestation. The increase in thinning
                         intensity in young and middle aged stands, and the utilization of woody biomass that would
                         otherwise be left in the forest will create additional skilled and semi-skilled employment
                         opportunities in rural areas over and above the current situation. Creation of semi and semi-skilled
                         rural jobs will help contribute to the economic development of the rural areas, which are currently
                         becoming more and more depopulated as people move to the cities looking for employment. Creating
                         better jobs in rural areas will help maintain the village populations and increase the prosperity of the
                         rural poor;

                         ii)     Improving forest fire prevention, monitoring, detection and suppression: will include
                         increasing prevention activities (raising public awareness, use of mineralized strips on the forest
Public Disclosure Copy




                         boundaries with agriculture and communities), use of new technologies (video and communications)
                         to improve monitoring, surveillance and detection rates and provision of fire-fighting equipment to
                         help extinguish the fires once started. ;

                         iii)    Building the capacity for sustainable forest management: through enhancing the forest
                         management information system (including forest carbon monitoring); updating the ‘Strategy of
                         Adaptation of Forestry to Climate Change until 2050’; development of and training in the use of
                         advanced technologies; and developing appropriate management approach for the rational use of
                         radioactively contaminated forest.

                         2.      Project implementation will be mainstreamed within a Ministry of Forestry subsidiary
                         enterprise. The UE (Unitary Enterprise) “Bellesexport” of the Ministry of Forestry has been
                         designated as the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) for the new project. UE “Bellesexport”,
                         founded in 1995, promotes the sale of the domestic timber products in foreign markets as well as
                         procurement of international equipment for the State Forest Enterprises.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will be implemented at the territory of 87 state-owned SFEs across the country in Brest,
                         Vitebsk, Gomel, Grodno, Minsk, and Mogilev oblasts.


                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                         Most forest in Belarus is located in rolling hillsides and gentle terrain. Ground conditions can be
                         boggy and soils are frequently peaty. To avoid damage to soils and ground conditions it is necessary
                         to use the correct forest machinery for the location and at the correct time of year and ground
Public Disclosure Copy




                         conditions. This project is all about enhancing sustainability of forest management and improving its
                         environmental performance.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexei Slenzak (GENDR)
                         Jennifer Shkabatur (GSURR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The Project triggers OP 4.01 Environmental
                         BP 4.01                                             Assessment and is assigned environmental
                                                                             Category B (Low B). The Project will not have
                                                                             significant and/or irreversible adverse
                                                                             environmental impacts. Overall, project
                                                                             implementation will have positive environmental
                                                                             effects and will outweigh negative environmental
                                                                             impacts. An Environmental Impact Assessment
                                                                             and Environmental and Social Management Plan
                                                                             was prepared which highlights necessary
                                                                             mitigation measures to avoid or minimize
                                                                             negative impacts. EMP checklists will be
                                                                             prepared for works under Component 1 (sub-
                                                                             component 1.4) on as needed basis.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                  Yes             OP 4.36 is triggered because the project will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             support forest management and enhance its
                                                                             environmental performance. As of today, all
                                                                             State Forest Enterprises (SFEs) participating in
                                                                             the Project were certified to PEFC standards .
                                                                             Additionally, 70 SFEs have Forest Stewardship
                                                                             Council (FSC) forest management and chain of
                                                                             custody certificates (as of September 25, 2014).
                         Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No              N/A
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No              N/A

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No              All project activities will be implemented within
                         4.12                                                state owned nurseries and/or state owned forest
                                                                             Funds and thus no resettlement issues are
                                                                             anticipated.




                                                                     Page 3 of 6
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No              N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              It is important to highlight that the ultimate objective of the project is to improve silviculture and
                              enhance sustainability of forest management.
                              The potential physical environmental impacts from project activities under sub-components 1.1
                              and 1.2 will include impacts associated with the use of multiple-function machinery during felling
                              operations, including mechanical damage of trees and vegetation and operation of other machinery
                              (e.g. wood chippers, chip trucks, rigs for slash removal). However, these impacts are standard for
                              forestry operations and generally will be less damaging in comparison with impacts caused by
                              outdated machinery that is being used today. Application of multiple-function machinery
                              (harvesters and forwarders) will allow use forest resources more efficiently and shift to more
                              environmentally sustainable forest use, including wider application of selective timber cutting,
                              while producing the same volumes of tree harvest.

                              For the purposes of modernization of forest nurseries at 30 State Forest Enterprises under sub-
                              component 1.3 the project will procure equipment for planting seeds, green-houses, refrigeration
                              equipment for storage of seedlings and watering systems. SFEs may select specific equipment they
Public Disclosure Copy




                              need, for example Kobrinsky and Luninetsky SFEs will get greenhouses and watering systems,
                              while Rechitsky and Borisovsky SFEs will receive refrigeration equipment for storage of
                              seedlings. Typically, nurseries and greenhouses are located at the footprint of utility space (i.e.
                              administration building, storages, garage, guesthouse, canteen, etc.) of the SFEs. In case the
                              expansion of the nurseries will be needed, this will take place within the utility space. The
                              potential environmental impacts may include small-scale civil works on re-arrangement and
                              preparation of space for new equipment and/or greenhouses.

                              Also, under Component 1 twenty (20) trucks for wardens will be provided to 6 SFE. The trucks
                              will be kept and maintained at the designated parking space of SFEs. Impacts are expected to be
                              minimal.

                              Under Component 2 thirty (30) fire-fighting trucks will be procured and supplied to 30 SFEs.
                              Impacts are expected to be minimal.

                              Under Component 3 the project will finance development and maintenance of a decision support
                              system “Radioactive Contamination of Forests. RadFor”, to be performed by the State Institution
                              “Bellesozaschita” in partnership with forestry enterprises, as well as improvement of the system of
                              protective measures and optimization of radiological monitoring activities in the forest fund.
                              Activities under this component will bring improvements (environmental and radiological safety


                                                                         Page 4 of 6
                           will be enhanced) in the area of handling forests contaminated by Chernobyl radioactive fallout.

                           As all project activities will be implemented on state-owned lands, OP 4.12 is not triggered and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           there are no adverse social impacts that should be addressed.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Potential indirect and/or long-term environmental impacts will be positive due to environmentally
                           sound forest management, healthier young stands due to selective thinning operations and
                           improved quality of seedlings and composition of tree species due to introduction of container-
                           grown methods of seeds growing in the nurseries. Long-term effects of improved management of
                           radioactively-contaminated forests will be positive.

                           The project is likely to have a positive social impact on the forestry sector, as it will provide
                           improved training opportunities to forestry sector employees and contribute to the creation of
                           higher skilled jobs.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The borrower has prepared the Environmental Impact Assessment and Environmental and Social
                           Management Plan (EIA/ESMP), which highlights mitigation measures to avoid or minimize
                           potential negative effects. The staff of the State Forest Enterprises (SFEs) will be trained on the
                           fundamentals of environmentally sound operation of machinery (harvesters, forwarders, wood
                           chopping equipment) to be procured under the project. Regular maintenance and check-ups of the
                           machinery will be made by SFEs to ensure environmentally sound operations. As described in the
                           ESMP, the project will include a range of information provision and consultation activities to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           engage all interested stakeholders in the preparation and implementation of the project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Population of the project region and of Belarus broadly, staff of SFEs participating in the project,
                           Ministry of Forestry.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         29-Oct-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      12-Nov-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.


                                                                      Page 5 of 6
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Andrew Michael Mitchell
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/       Name: Kulsum Ahmed (PMGR)                          Date: 21-Nov-2014
                            Manager:




                                                                        Page 6 of 6
