                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA7906
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Tajikistan                         Project ID:    P132652
                            Project Name:      TAJIKISTAN AGRICULTURE COMMERCIALIZATION PROJECT
                                               (P132652)
                            Task Team          Sandra Broka
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       17-Mar-2014                           Estimated   30-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: ECSAR                                  Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Agricultural extension and research (32%), General agriculture, fishing and
                                              forestry sector (15%), Public administration- Agricultur e, fishing and forestry
                                              (1%), SME Finance (14%), Microfinance (38%)
                            Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (50%), Rural markets (30%),
                                              Rural services and infrastructure (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      25.92           Total Bank Financing:                   22.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           3.92
                              IDA Grant                                                                                   22.00
                              Total                                                                                       25.92
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to increase the commercialization of farm and agri-business



                                                                       Page 1 of 11
                         products, by improving the performance of selected value chains and productive partnerships through
                         increased access to finance and strengthened capacity of project beneficiaries.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.      The project will increase the commercialization of agricultural products by using a coherent
                         and complementary approach, addressing all the main aspects of this effort, by: increasing the
                         capacity of farmers, traders, agri-business and agro-processors to engage in agricultural markets
                         through access to knowledge and technical assistance; improving access to investment finance; and
                         strengthening critical elements of the institutional framework and sector’s academic knowledge base
                         required to support commercial activity. Particular emphasis will be given to strengthening the ability
                         of the new generation of small-scale, private farmers to engage in market activity. The project will
                         have the following components:

                         Component I: Technical Assistance in Support of Commercialization (US$6.95 million, all IDA)

                         2.      This component will contribute to the project’s development objectives by improving the
                         technical knowledge and skills of participants in key agricultural value chains and productive
                         partnerships. Support will be provided in the form of group-based interventions (training) and
                         individual technical assistance (advisory services). An estimated 12,500 people will benefit,
                         including male and female heads of small-scale farms, and management and staff of agri-business
                         enterprises and agro-processors.

                         3.      Value Chain/Productive Partnership Development (estimated US$2.5 million, all IDA). The
                         project will support building of a number of value chains under the project (for more information on
                         the chains please see Annex 2). All of these commodity-based VCs: (i) have potential for growth, (ii)
                         are accessible to small farmers, (iii) are generally considered to be profitable or have the potential to
                         be profitable, and (iv) involve high value commodities with export potential, or have considerable
                         potential for import substitution. The various components of this activity will include market/demand
                         research for the specific type of product to be sold, training of the chain participants, technical advice
Public Disclosure Copy




                         on inputs and technologies, sales and marketing advice, etc.

                         4.       Training and Advisory Services (estimated US$4.45 million, all IDA). At the producer level
                         training will focus on voluntarily organized groups of dekhan and household farmers with up to 2 ha
                         of agricultural land per shareholder/farm member. It will be delivered in three modules: Integrated
                         Production Management (IntPM), Post-Harvest and Storage (PHS), Quality, Processing and
                         Marketing (QPM), and adherence to the national legislation of child and forced labor. The training
                         will be complemented by the establishment of a network of demonstration plots, in order to conduct
                         comparisons/testing between conventional and modern production practices. On the marketing side,
                         participation of farmer groups in trade fairs and other events will be supported. A separate training
                         window will be designed for women beneficiaries (and interested men) as the main household
                         caretakers. In addition to the above-mentioned subjects of interest, it will include household nutrition
                         subjects.

                         5.      For larger, more commercially-oriented enterprises - agro-processors and agri-business
                         enterprises, demand driven training and advisory services will be provided on a range of subjects,
                         including new technologies, food safety and quality standards, development of linkages with
                         producer organizations, marketing, export requirements, preparation of business plans and
                         investment proposals for productive linkages etc. This training will be done in coordination with IFC,
                         especially in Sughd, to ensure that this training complements IFC’s activities, still allowing IFC to


                                                                       Page 2 of 11
                         charge a fee to their selected project participants. Attendance at trade fairs will be supported and
                         mentoring services provided to help these agri-businesses to understand market requirements. Agro-
                         input dealers will receive training on business practices, sourcing and financing of farm inputs, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         awareness and application of quality and safety regulations.

                         Component II: Access to Finance for Agri-Business Enterprises and Small-Scale Commercial Farms
                         (US$15.32 million, including US$11.4 million IDA)

                         6.       The component will support commercialization of the agricultural products by improving
                         access to medium-term finance for larger agri-business enterprises and by providing start-up capital
                         in the form of grants for small-scale farms involved in productive partnerships, as well as by
                         ensuring availability of financing for value chain support, which often requires short-term financing
                         (such as, for contract farming schemes and post-harvest handling activities). Potential investments
                         include: improved on-farm technology, storage, processing, new products, marketing, quality
                         enhancement and food safety. An estimated 350 sub-financings (sub-loans, leases and grants) are
                         expected to be provided under the component.

                         7.       Credit Line for medium-term investment loans/leases, and support to value chains (US
                         $11.17 million, including US$8.0 million IDA). The credit line will ensure access to finance for
                         agricultural producers and their association, agro-processors and other agri-businesses involved in
                         the selected value chains and other credit-worthy productive partnerships. The credit line will support
                         the following products: (i) medium-term loans and leases for investment of up to 7 years, to finance
                         modern technological plant and equipment; and (ii) value chain financing products for value chain
                         and productive linkage support. The maximum exposure per beneficiary will be of up to US
                         $400,000, however, the total amount for financing of one entire value chain (all links/participants)
                         may be up to US$1 million. The credit line will be provided through the commercial banking sector
                         and micro-finance institutions which have qualified for participation in the project through a due
                         diligence process.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         8.      Commercialization Grants (US$3.75 million, including US$3.0 million IDA).
                         Commercialization grants will be provided to support investment (storage, agricultural machinery,
                         trading equipment, small-scale processing equipment and other equipment for value addition) and
                         input needs (such as high quality seed and fertilizer) by smaller, poorer farmers working in producer
                         groups or productive partnerships who do not have the ability to qualify for a commercial loan. The
                         commercialization grants will be up to US$35,000 per partnership. At least 20% contribution from
                         own resources will be required as well as engagement in activities to develop and strengthen linkages
                         along the value chain. The beneficiaries of grant program will be subject to a rigorous, transparent
                         selection process, based on detailed operational guidelines. The international TA firm recruited under
                         Component I will assist with the implementation of this program.

                         9.      Capacity building for PFIs (US$400,000, all IDA). The PFIs will receive training on
                         applicability of the new financial products in lending for value chain and productive partnership
                         development activities, assessing the suitability and effectiveness of these new financial products,
                         and on mitigation of the related risks. This training will be complemented by IFC’s specialized agri-
                         risk management and lending tools, incl. leasing. In addition, all PFI lending staff will have to
                         undergo Environmental Safeguard Training.

                         Component III: Institutional Capacity Building and Project Management (US$3.65 million, all IDA)



                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                         10. This component will strengthen the critical elements of the institutional framework and sector’s
                         academic knowledge base required to support commercial activity.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         11. Support to the Educational Establishments in the Agriculture Sector (US$850,000, all IDA).
                         Under this activity, the Tajikistan Agrarian University and two Agricultural Colleges will receive
                         support towards curriculum modernization and re-orienting towards the issues faced by the new
                         generation of mixed, small-scale farms and commercial agri-business enterprises. Support to the
                         University will consist of: (i) study tours by university staff to review agricultural education curricula
                         in western universities; (ii) a project-financed contract to twin the Agrarian University with one of
                         these universities, to design and implement curriculum reform; (iii) staff training to facilitate
                         understanding and delivery of new course material; (iv) support for the preparation or acquisition of
                         new texts and teaching materials; and (v) support for the existing “correspondence” learning
                         program, to re-train former graduates based on the new curriculum. At the colleges, the project will
                         support expansion of the farmer training program by financing measures to update their curricula,
                         teaching material, equipment and facilities.

                         12. Market Information System for Farmers and Agribusinesses (US$200,000, all IDA). The project
                         will support the establishment of a public-private partnership between the National Statistics Agency
                         (TAJSTAT) and a number of private service providers on delivery of commercial market information
                         to farmers and agribusinesses via SMS, through TA related to the following activities: (i) training
                         and guidance to TAJSTAT on ways to improve the quality of price data collected; (ii) the
                         formulation and negotiation of an appropriate contractual relationship between TAJSTAT and
                         private sector service providers; (iii) transformation of the database into a format that is readily
                         useable by service providers; (iv) the design of services and applications suited to the needs of
                         farmers, agri-business enterprises and other rural clients; and (v) the addition of further relevant
                         information to the data base. Guidance on how to use this information base will also be incorporated
                         into the training programs implemented under Component I.

                         13. Support for Policy and Regulatory Reform (US$350,000, all IDA). This sub-component will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strengthen the MOA’s capacity for policy and regulatory reform by funding selected studies on
                         critical issues relevant to the commercialization of agriculture: (i) the design of a viable, inclusive
                         training and extension system, which facilitates both public and private sector activity (ii) the impact
                         of current tax policy on farm input use, farm input markets and farm output; (iii) alignment of the
                         current regulatory environment for fertilizer and agricultural chemicals with international standards,
                         and staff training on the implementation of these standards; and (iv) the modernization of food
                         quality and safety standards.

                         14. Project Management (US$2.25 million, all IDA). This component will support the two
                         implementing units for the project implementation, as well as establishment and maintenance of
                         GRM. The project’s Technical Assistance components (i.e., I and III, as well as the
                         Commercialization Grant Program) will be implemented under the auspices of the Ministry of
                         Agriculture, where a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established for these purposes,
                         staffed by consultants. It will also implement the relevant procurement, financial management and
                         Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) activities, including the baseline study, mid-term and final impact
                         surveys for the project. A PMU set up recently under the auspices of the Ministry of Finance for the
                         purposes of implementing donor-financed credit lines, will implement the Access to Credit
                         Component (II). Additional staff, as necessary, will be hired in the PMU to ensure efficient
                         implementation and M&E of the Credit Line component.



                                                                       Page 4 of 11
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project will be implemented countrywide with most of beneficiaries expected to be from Khatlon,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sughd and the Raions of Republican Subordination.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Svetlana K. Sharipova (ECSSO)
                         Arcadii Capcelea (ECSEN)
                         Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes             This policy is triggered as the project will support
                          BP 4.01                                           a series of activities which will generate some
                                                                            environmental and social impacts. While the
                                                                            project will provide many environmental and
                                                                            social benefits such as increased food security and
                                                                            farmers income, proposed activities under
                                                                            component 2 that would provide access to finance
                                                                            for commercial farms and agribusinesses as well
                                                                            as matching grants supporting different types of
                                                                            sub-projects (improved on-farm technology,
                                                                            storage, processing, new products, marketing,
                                                                            quality enhancement and food safety), may also
                                                                            cause some negative impacts related to: (a)
                                                                            increased pollution of ground and surface waters
                                                                            due to processing of agricultural products; (b)
                                                                            solid wastes during processing of agricultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            products; (c) noise and air pollution; (d) health
                                                                            and safety hazards at the agro-processing
                                                                            factories; etc. To address these adverse impacts
                                                                            the Borrower prepared an Environmental
                                                                            Management Framework (EMF) which specifies
                                                                            the EA requirements for sub-projects and
                                                                            matching grants to be supported under the second
                                                                            component. This document covers the following:
                                                                            (a) rules and procedures for environmental
                                                                            screening; (b) guidance for preparing sub-roject
                                                                            EIA and/or simple EMPs as well as of EMP
                                                                            Checklist; (c) possible mitigation measures for
                                                                            different types of sub-projects and
                                                                            matching grants; and (d) requirements for
                                                                            monitoring and supervision of implementing of
                                                                            EIA/EMPs requirements. The proposed training
                                                                            and extension to be provided under the
                                                                            components I and III of the project will include
                                                                            various aspects of ensuring environmental
                                                                            sustainability of different types of agricultural


                                                                    Page 5 of 11
                                                                     investments. In this regard the EMF provides
                                                                     advice on what environmental issues should be
                                                                     integrated in the curriculum for the proposed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     agricultural training and extension activities.
                                                                     While the training and information dissemination
                                                                     activities will be focused mostly on post
                                                                     harvesting investments, they will also cover also
                                                                     key environmental safeguards issues during
                                                                     agricultural production such as mineral fertilizers
                                                                     and pesticides management through Integrated
                                                                     Pest Management approach, soil and water
                                                                     resources conservation (a PMP is incorporated in
                                                                     the EMF). Under the capacity building activities
                                                                     to be provided for participating
                                                                     financial institutions a special training will be
                                                                     devoted to rules and procedures of sub-project
                                                                     EAs. Per WB requirements the EMF was
                                                                     consulted in the country and disclosed at the
                                                                     Bank's Infoshop on March 13, 2014.

                                                                     The ACP will not support cotton sub-sector.
                                                                     However, some project beneficiaries may be
                                                                     involved in cotton production. To address the
                                                                     potential risk of use of cotton-picking practices
                                                                     that do not comply with the national labor
                                                                     legislation. The social assessment reviewed such
                                                                     practices. On the basis of findings of the SA, the
                                                                     project operational manual will include provisions
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     to prevent the use of child and forced labor. The
                                                                     social assessment has undergone public
                                                                     consultation and will be disclosed by March 31,
                                                                     2014.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No            This policy will be not triggered as the project
                                                                     will support investments only in the settlements
                                                                     or on existing agricultural lands. The EMF
                                                                     provides guidance and criteria for sub-projects
                                                                     screening on this OP and all those which might
                                                                     trigger the policy will be excluded from the
                                                                     project financing.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No            This policy will be not triggered as all project
                                                                     activities will be implemented in the existing
                                                                     settlements and there will be no support for wood
                                                                     harvesting activities.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes           This OP 4.09 is triggered as the project may
                                                                     finance purchasing of pesticides and and/or
                                                                     proposed project activities that could lead to their
                                                                     increased usage. A separate Pest Management


                                                             Page 6 of 11
                                                                        Plan was not needed, but the Environmental
                                                                        Management Framework includes a section
                                                                        describing both measures which will be used to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        ensure compliance with national laws and World
                                                                        Bank requirements relating to pesticide purchase
                                                                        and use, and also measures to promote Integrated
                                                                        Pest Management (IPM) approaches and safe
                                                                        pesticide handling and disposal practices to
                                                                        reduce human and environmental exposure.
                                                                        Additionally, the EMF includes a list of eligible
                                                                        pesticides in the country and guidance on their
                                                                        use. Any proposed financing for purchase of
                                                                        pesticides will require a no objection from the
                                                                        WB.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No           N/A
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No           A screening determined that there are no
                                                                        Indigenous Peoples' as per the World Bank's
                                                                        policy in this area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No           The project will not finance activities which
                         4.12                                           involve the involuntary taking of land resulting in
                                                                        loss of shelter, loss of assets or access to assets, or
                                                                        loss of income sources or means of livelihood
                                                                        whether or not the affected persons must move to
                                                                        another location. In addition, the project will not
                                                                        finance the involuntary restriction of access to
                                                                        legally designated parks and protected areas
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        resulting in adverse impacts on the livelihoods of
                                                                        the displaced persons.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No           N/A

                         Projects on International         No           OP 7.50 is not triggered as the project will not
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                           finance any sub-projects which may affect
                                                                        international waterways including: irrigation
                                                                        projects; projects involving discharging waste
                                                                        waters directly in the international waterways;
                                                                        abstraction or diversion of international waters;
                                                                        projects related to discharging waste materials in
                                                                        a location that could impact on international
                                                                        waters; construction of any dams that might affect
                                                                        international waters hydrological regime). These
                                                                        requirements represent screening criteria
                                                                        specified in the EMF and to be applied by the
                                                                        PFIs.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No            N/A
                         7.60



                                                                Page 7 of 11
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              In accordance with the Bank’s safeguard policies and procedures, including OP/BP/GP 4.01
                              Environmental Assessment, the project category is B. As during appraisal it is not possible to
                              identify which subproject or grant will be financed, an Environmental Management Framework
                              (EMF) was prepared, which specifies rules and procedures for grants and sub projects EA. The
                              project is not expected to have any significant or irreversible environmental and social impacts.
                              The access to finance component will provide grant and on-lend to farmers and business related to
                              agriculture production and post-harvest activities which might include: improved on-farm
                              technology, storage, new products, marketing, distribution and cooling facilities, processing,
                              agricultural machinery, trading equipment, small-scale processing equipment and other equipment
                              for value addition and input needs (such as high quality seed and fertilizer), etc. Their potential
                              adverse environmental impacts might be summarized as follows: (a) agricultural production: soil
                              erosion, loss of soil productive capacity, soil compaction, soil pollution, surface and underground
                              water pollution, health and environmental risks associated with agro-chemicals use, loss of
                              biodiversity; (b) agro-processing: contribution to surface water pollution, wastes generation, odor;
                              (c) manufacturing: air pollution, waste waters, solid waste generation; (d) construction: soil and air
                              pollution; acoustic, aesthetics impacts, etc. All these impacts will be site specific and temporary
                              and are expected to be easily mitigated through sound project design and implementation
                              practices. The majority of grants and sub projects would fall under the Category B which might
                              cause limited impacts, for which the Bank requires a simple Environmental Assessment and/or a
                              preparation of an Environmental Management Plan. It is also expected that many of sub projects
                              will not have environmental impacts at all and will fall under the Category C projects. The EMF
                              specifies the project will not finance projects: (a) located in protected areas, critical habitats or
                              culturally or socially sensitive areas; and (b) which might increase the amount of water abstracted
Public Disclosure Copy




                              from existing rivers or those which would have any other impact on the water source or local
                              hydrological regime and these are considered as screening criteria to be applied during the
                              selection of sub projects to be financed.

                              In terms of broader social issues the project will not finance any activities which involve the use of
                              forced labor and/or forced child labor. Appropriate mitigation measures have been included in the
                              project design, including provisions in the grant and loan agreements, requirements for regular on-
                              site monitoring, beneficiary training on national legislation, and the integration of a grievance and
                              feedback mechanism.

                              As the project may finance the purchasing of fertilizers/pesticides as well as may create conditions
                              which may lead to increased use of pesticides even if not financed by the project, among other
                              important potential project risks are health risk as well as the risks of undermining the
                              sustainability and productivity of the agro-ecological system (e.g., destroying natural enemies of
                              crop pests; causing development of pesticide resistance among pests, etc.). Thus the OP 4.09 is
                              triggered.

                              As all proposed activities are likely to be implemented within the existing agricultural land and
                              settlement boundaries, the proposed project will likely not have an impact on wildlife and natural
                              habitats and thus, OP/BP 4.04 (Natural habitats) is not triggered. It is also expected there will be


                                                                         Page 8 of 11
                           no impact on physical cultural resources, which are generally not placed in the vicinity of
                           agricultural land. Therefore OP/BP 4.11 "Physical Cultural Resources" is not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project will not finance any activities that result in OP 4.12 impacts. Under Component 2 the
                           project will finance loans and grants that may be used for activities including the purchase of
                           technological plants, the expansion of orchards and the establishment of greenhouses, however
                           these activities are expected to be undertaken on land that is privately held and where no informal
                           users are present. The project will employ the use of an environmental screening to ensure that
                           sub-projects with potential OP 4.12 impacts will not be financed. In addition, staff at the
                           Participating Financial Institutions (e.g. loan officers) and at the Project Management Unit will be
                           trained to ensure that they have the relevant skills set to properly screen, appraise, and monitor
                           subprojects.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The expected cumulative impact of the activities which might be supported by the proposed
                           project is expected to be mostly positive and includes improved knowledge on best agricultural
                           and agro-processing practices, with consequent improvements in the status of the environment in
                           the country.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The task team has analyzed the possible implications of a "no project" scenario and concluded that
                           in the absence of the proposed Bank financing there is an increased probability for negative
                           economic and social consequences in the country, stemming from the deterioration of country's
                           macroeconomic situation and increased poverty in rural areas.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           In order to address potential safeguards issues the borrower prepared an Environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Management Framework (EMF). The document outlines environmental assessment procedures
                           and mitigation requirements in line with both national and Bank policies for the grants and
                           subprojects which will be supported by the project. It provides details on procedures, criteria and
                           responsibilities for subprojects preparing, screening, appraisal, implementing and monitoring. The
                           document also includes Environmental and social Guidelines for different types of proposed
                           subprojects providing analysis of potential impacts and generic mitigation measures to be
                           undertaken for subprojects in agricultural production and agro-processing sectors at all stages -
                           from identification and selection, through the design and implementation phase, to the monitoring
                           and evaluation of results. The EMF includes also a section describing both measures which will be
                           used to ensure compliance with national laws and WB requirements relating to pesticide purchase
                           and use, and measures to promote Integrated Pest Management (IPM) approaches and safe
                           pesticide handling and disposal practices to reduce human and environmental exposure.
                           Additionally the EMF includes a list of eligible pesticides in the country and guidance on their use.
                           The project also will support training, technical assistance and demonstration in support of the
                           IPM program. Lastly, the EMF provides an analysis of the EA institutional capacity of the
                           implementing agencies along with the proposed technical assistance to adequately implement the
                           EA requirements for the grants and sub projects to be supported.

                           Institutional capacity for environmental and social management will be established in the PIU to
                           be created by the MoA through recruitment of an environmental specialist. His/her main goal


                                                                     Page 9 of 11
                           would be to support implementation and monitoring of the project in conformity with the EMF.
                           The project will also provide his/her capacity building activities to ensure efficient implementation
                           of EMF provisions. Such training will be provided also for PFIs by hiring a specialized company
Public Disclosure Copy




                           with the experience in the domain.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The draft summary EMF was disseminated to the Ministry of Agriculture, Committee for
                           Environmental Protection, and other relevant ministries for their review and comments, and also,
                           on February, 18, 2014, the Executive Summary of the document was posted on website of the
                           Regional Environmental Centre for Central Asia (www.carecnet.org) for its access to wide public.
                           On February 28, 2014, a consultation on Draft Environmental Management Framework was
                           organized. After the consultation, draft EMF document was revised to consider inputs from
                           consulted parties. The final EMF was posted on the website of the Ministry of Agriculture on
                           March 10, 2014 and submitted to the World Bank Infoshop on March 13, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   13-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      28-Feb-2014
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tajikistan                                                       14-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   13-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tajikistan                                                       14-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector          Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?



                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                             Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Sandra Broka
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)                    Date: 17-Mar-2014




                                                                      Page 11 of 11
