                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA7335
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Pakistan                          Project ID:    P146451
                            Project Name:     Sindh Global Partnership for Education Project (P146451)
                            Task Team         Margo A. Hoftijzer
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         10-Feb-2014                       Estimated   30-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    SASED                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Primary education (50%), Secondary education (25%), Public administration-
                                              Education (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (80%), Other public sector governance (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        66.00           Total Bank Financing:   0.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    0.00
                              Education for All Supervising Entity                                                       66.00
                              Total                                                                                      66.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project supports the implementation of the Sindh Education Sector Support Program (SESP).
                           The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the institutional capacity to generate,
                           disseminate and use information to support the implementation of key reforms under SESP.

                           Progress towards the achievement of the PDO will be measured by the following indicators:

                                                                      Page 1 of 5
                         1. Number of districts for which monitoring data of at least 70% of schools is collected by DGME.
                         2. Number of districts for which monitoring data is analyzed and disseminated to ELD management
                         and district administrators.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Number of Districts which submitted HRMIS reports to ELD.
                          3. Project Description
                         The SESP identifies improvements in governance and service delivery, with a particular emphasis on
                         strengthening accountability at all administrative levels of the education system as well as for
                         teachers, as priority areas to achieve the higher level objectives of improving equitable access to and
                         quality of education in an effective and financially sustainable manner. Consequently, the focus of
                         SGPE interventions is to provide the underpinnings for these improvements in governance and
                         accountability through the provision and dissemination of reliable, regularly available information,
                         including through enhanced use of technology, across key internal and external stakeholders.

                         Specific areas that are proposed to be included in the project are:

                         1. Sindh School Monitoring System (SSMS). The SSMS will collect, analyze, and disseminate data
                         on key school-level indicators, including student enrollment and teacher presence. To promote
                         governance and accountability, data collection will take place on a monthly basis to allow monitoring
                         of trends and ‘real-time’ response to identified weaknesses.
                         2. Human Resources Monitoring and Information System (HRMIS): The SGPE will support the
                         design and roll-out of an automated HRMIS for ELD which will address the very substantial
                         weaknesses currently constraining effective management of teaching and non-teaching staff.
                         Supporting the design and roll-out of a Human Resource Management Information System (HR-
                         MIS) would allow streamlining processes for personnel-related decision making.
                         3. Communications: ELD will strengthen its communication and consultation activities with internal
                         and external stakeholders to promote the design, implementation, and monitoring of key reforms
                         under SESP. An intensified and structured approach to information dissemination and
                         communications is expected to contribute to raising public awareness and support for the overall
Public Disclosure Copy




                         SESP and key reforms under SESP; promoting social accountability; and to the understanding of and
                         support for key reforms by internal stakeholders.

                         S-GPE is to follow the same approach as previous Bank financed operations, i.e. comprise a large
                         results-based component (Component 1: Systems Strengthening component) and a smaller TA
                         component (Component 2: Program Support component). Disbursement of the results-based
                         component will be upon achievement of agreed results and against expenditures made in agreed
                         Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEP).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project activities will be located in the Sindh province. No physical works, construction,
                         reconstruction or rehabilitation activity is envisioned as part of the project. The project activities
                         would be located in urban, semi-urban and rural areas of Sindh with an existing population base and
                         residential and commercial infrastructure.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Fouad Muhammad Khan (SASDI)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)


                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        No               No physical works, construction, reconstruction
                            BP 4.01                                              or rehabilitation activity is envisioned as part of
                                                                                 the Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               No physical works, construction, reconstruction
                                                                                 or rehabilitation activity is envisioned as part of
                                                                                 the Project.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               No physical works, construction, reconstruction
                                                                                 or rehabilitation activity is envisioned as part of
                                                                                 the Project.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No               No physical works, construction, reconstruction
                                                                                 or rehabilitation activity is envisioned as part of
                                                                                 the Project.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               No physical works, construction, reconstruction
                            BP 4.11                                              or rehabilitation activity is envisioned as part of
                                                                                 the Project.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No               Indigenous groups have not been identified in the
                                                                                 areas to be covered by the Project.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               No physical works, construction, reconstruction
                            4.12                                                 or rehabilitation activity is envisioned as part of
                                                                                 the Project.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               No dams involved in project

                            Projects on International        No                  N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  N/A
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              There are no potential safeguards issues or impacts expected to arise out of project activity. No
                              physical works, reconstruction, rehabilitation or design or analysis for such activities will be
                              carried out under the project.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              No significant indirect or long term impacts on the environment are expected to arise from project
                              activity in the province. The trend of rapid urbanization in project area is expected to continue in
                              the future due to both private and public sector initiatives and activities irrespective of project
                              interventions.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Since the project is not expected to have any environmental impacts, no alternatives need to be
                              considered specifically to minimize or avoid impacts.


                                                                         Page 3 of 5
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           As there are no expected safeguard policy issues arising from project activity, the borrower need
Public Disclosure Copy




                           not take additional specific measures to address safeguards policy issues on the project activities.
                           In general, the Government of Sindh and its various extensions develop instruments and
                           implement them to comply with both the Bank safeguard policies and local environmental
                           legislation. The Sindh Environmental Protection agency regulates the implementation of local
                           environmental protection laws.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           As there are no expected safeguard policy issues arising from project activity, there are no direct
                           key stakeholders associated with safeguard issues, and thus no mechanisms for consultation or
                           disclosure are required.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         N/A
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                          Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the             Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                          be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                          issue, been prepared
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the OP?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?



                                                                      Page 4 of 5
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Margo A. Hoftijzer
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                     Date: 03-Mar-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Herbert Acquay (SM)                          Date: 03-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 5 of 5
