                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA7727
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Ecuador                            Project ID:    P147951
                            Project Name:     EC Prosaneamiento Program Support Project (P147951)
                            Task Team         Oscar E. Alvarado
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         31-Mar-2014                        Estimated   04-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    LCSWS                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (20%), General
                                              water, sanitation and flood protection sector (80%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (60%), Pollution management and
                                              environmental health (20%), Rural services and infrast ructure (10%), Water
                                              resource management (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     350.00           Total Bank Financing:                244.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                106.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   244.00
                              Total                                                                                   350.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objectives (PDO) for the proposed Project are to increase sustainable
                           access to water supply and sanitation services in participating GADs (Gobierno Autónomo



                                                                      Page 1 of 10
                         Descentralizados) and to strengthen institutional capacity for improved management and delivery of
                         these services at the national and local level.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Pre-investment (US$20 million): This Component will finance the preparation of
                         studies for investment sub-projects, which includes, inter alia, technical studies, pre-feasibility
                         studies, feasibility studies and environmental and social assessments. The component will also
                         finance the specialized independent supervision of such studies (“fiscalización de estudios’). The
                         GoE has recently decided to undertake a massive effort to generate the required pre-investment
                         studies for sub-projects at the local level if the PROSANEAMIENTO Program is to meet its
                         ambitious goals and has requested Bank’s support to advise and finance the preparation of
                         investment sub-projects. It is expected that the pre-investment studies will be undertaken by
                         specialized national and international consulting firms. BdE would be in charge of coordinating with
                         the local GADs for the preparation of the studies and their contracting, duly assembled in groups
                         attending to hydrological and geographic variables. Annex 2 provides further detail on the current
                         strategy for the implementation of this component.

                         Component 2: Municipal Water Supply and Sewerage Infrastructure (US$ 311.2 million): This
                         Component will finance the carrying out of subprojects for the construction and rehabilitation of
                         primary and secondary water and sewerage systems, including, inter alia, transmission, distribution
                         and collection networks, water treatment plants, pumping stations and main collectors, wastewater
                         treatment plants and discharge infrastructure, and household water and sewerage household
                         connections and meters. This component will also finance the specialized independent supervision of
                         construction activities (“fiscalización de obra”). Works will be financed through a combination of
                         direct grants from the National Government through BdE to each participating GAD, credit resources
                         from loans from BdE to the GAD, and in some cases municipal and water and sanitation (WSS)
                         utilities’ own sources.

                         Component 3: Technical Assistance, Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Autonomous Decentralized Government Municipalities and Service Providers (US$ 10 million): This
                         component will finance consultancy services, studies, equipment and capacity building activities to
                         BdE and GADs and/or their municipal utilities to strengthen the existing administrative, technical,
                         financial, commercial, and operational capabilities at the GAD level and bring service providers to
                         reasonable levels of management, operational efficiency and financial viability. Technical assistance
                         for the strengthening of GADs and /or their municipal water utilities will be provided through
                         BEDE's existing Technical Assistance Program, the PATGES (Programa de Gestión de Servicios).
                         This Component includes the following subcomponents:
                         (a)      Design of Tools for Technical Assistance and Institutional Capacity Building: the
                         development of conceptual models and tools to facilitate the implementation of the institutional
                         strengthening programs of GADs and/or their utilities, comprising operational, commercial,
                         administrative and financial efficiency activities and technical assistance to carry out assessments to
                         identify main managerial issues in the water and sanitation services and consequently prepare
                         institutional strengthening programs (ISP) at GAD and/or utility level;
                         (b)      Strengthening of technical capacity for the provision of potable water and sewerage services
                         within participating municipalities and service providers: capacity building and training activities for
                         BdE and the GAD and/or their utilities in the implementation of models and other tools designed for
                         management improvement;
                         (c)      Institutional strengthening sub-projects (for participating municipalities and service
                         providers): technical assistance, goods and equipment for the GAD and/or their utilities for the


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         implementation of their institutional strengthening programs for water and sanitation services.

                         Component 4: Project Management and Administration within BdE (US$ 7 million): This component
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will finance activities associated with overall Project management by BdE, including project-related
                         audits, monitoring and evaluation activities, equipment and training to strengthen implementing
                         entities, as well as individual consultants. It will include support to BdE related to the management of
                         environmental and social issues and safeguards and fiduciary aspects.

                         Component 5: Technical Assistance, Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for
                         SENAGUA (US$1.8 million): This component would finance technical assistance and systems
                         required to strengthen SENAGUA and the WSS Sub-secretary’s capacity to carry out its functions
                         with regards to the water supply and sanitation sector. The component will be directly executed by
                         SENAGUA. In particular, it will focus on four lines of action: (i) Accompanying the launching of
                         the regulatory function; (ii) WSS policies and norms and technical assistance to GAD/service
                         providers; iii) Information Systems; and iv) Administrative Costs (audits, reporting, operating costs
                         of a small Project Management Unit within SENAGUA).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will involve various sub-projects (works) to be implemented in various municipalities in
                         Ecuador. The specific sub-projects and municipalities are not known at this time.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Jose Vicente Zevallos (LCSSO)
                         Martin Henry Lenihan (LCSSO)
                         Carlos Vargas Bejarano (LCSEN)
                         Robert H. Montgomery (LCSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project is classified as environmental
                          BP 4.01                                             category B per OP/BP 4.01, as the infrastructure
                                                                              sub-projects (approximately 40 to 50) involve
                                                                              relatively standard water-related works with no
                                                                              likely significant or long-term environmental or
                                                                              social impacts and that cannot be readily
                                                                              prevented or mitigated with standard measures.
                                                                              The primary anticipated potential negative
                                                                              environmental and social impacts associated with
                                                                              the construction works could include erosion or
                                                                              sedimentation due to earth works, temporary
                                                                              small-scale construction work sites, noise and
                                                                              dust from equipment and earthworks, potential
                                                                              spills of petroleum based products, worker health
                                                                              and safety, storm water runoff into water courses,
                                                                              and traffic risks and nuisances.

                                                                              Since the specific sub-projects are not known, an
                                                                              Environmental Management Framework (EMF)


                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                                                                     has been developed. The EMF is based upon the
                                                                     existing Banco del Estado (BdE) procedures
                                                                     related to environmental and social issues and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     instruments and procedures developed in
                                                                     conjunction with previous financing by IDB and
                                                                     CAF for similar types of projects/works. The
                                                                     EMF includes a mechanism to screen out sub-
                                                                     projects that would be classified as Category A
                                                                     under OP/BP 4.01 or could involve significant
                                                                     conversion or degradation of critical natural
                                                                     habitats or forests. The EMF also includes
                                                                     procedures for development of appropriate
                                                                     environmental instruments (e.g., environmental
                                                                     analysis/assessment, environmental management
                                                                     plans, etc.), incorporation of environmental
                                                                     aspects into construction contracts, environmental
                                                                     supervision of works, reporting, and public
                                                                     consultation/participation.

                                                                     For Component 2, the EMF includes the
                                                                     consideration of environmental and social aspects
                                                                     as part of sub-project feasibility and design
                                                                     studies. This will help these studies better
                                                                     incorporate environmental and social
                                                                     considerations and thus the Bank to support the
                                                                     Client in integrating sustainability principles. The
                                                                     EMF includes development of standard TORs for
                                                                     EIAs for potential Category A studies (note: no
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Category works are to be financed) and such
                                                                     TORs and EIAs should be reviewed by approved
                                                                     by BdE and No Objection provided by the Bank.

                                                                     The EMF also includes responsibilities related to
                                                                     environmental management, approach for review/
                                                                     evaluation of potential projects for financing,
                                                                     environmental aspects in contracts, supervision of
                                                                     environmental aspects during construction, and
                                                                     training for relevant project actors (BdE staff,
                                                                     GAD, and contractors).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           Given the type of works to be performed under
                                                                     the anticipated subprojects, there should be no
                                                                     significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                     natural habitat and it is unlikely that there will be
                                                                     any significant protected areas in the direct area
                                                                     of influence of the sub-projects. There may be
                                                                     some limited trees or vegetation to be removed
                                                                     and either replanted or new ones planted. Any



                                                             Page 4 of 10
                                                                         needed assessment or mitigation measures will be
                                                                         considered within OP/BP 4.01 and the specific
                                                                         EMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            Given the nature and characteristics of the sub-
                                                                         projects to be financed, it is not anticipated that
                                                                         any forests will be affected.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project does not involve the purchase or use
                                                                         of significant quantities of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The exact locations of the projects are not known
                         BP 4.11                                         at this stage. Given the type of works to be
                                                                         performed, no anticipated significant impacts on
                                                                         physical cultural resources are anticipated.
                                                                         However, work contracts will include, as a
                                                                         minimum, chance find procedures and sub-project
                                                                         screening will include an assessment of any
                                                                         potential impacts on physical cultural resources.
                                                                         The needed measures will be considered within
                                                                         the EMF under OP/BP 4.01 and the specific EA
                                                                         instruments (e.g., EMP with chance finds
                                                                         procedures).
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           This policy will be triggered given the Project’s
                                                                         national scope and potential to benefit Indigenous
                                                                         peoples, which according to the last census, make
                                                                         up at least 7% of the population (maybe up to
                                                                         40% depending on the definition applied), and
                                                                         more likely a higher percentage of the poor. An
                                                                         Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         has been prepared and distributed to indigenous
                                                                         peoples groups at a national level, disclosed prior
                                                                         to appraisal and presented in a consultation
                                                                         meeting with indigenous peoples and civil society
                                                                         organizations. The IPPF outlines the screening
                                                                         criteria to identify sub- projects where specific
                                                                         social assessments and Indigenous Peoples Plans
                                                                         (IPPs) should be prepared to ensure that WSS
                                                                         investments are designed to effectively serve
                                                                         these populations needs and practices. Indigenous
                                                                         peoples often have customs and practices around
                                                                         water collection, use, and sanitation that vary
                                                                         greatly from non-indigenous peoples. Adequately
                                                                         designed WSS infrastructure has important
                                                                         health, subsistence, and economic benefits.
                                                                         Experience demonstrates the risk of wasted
                                                                         resources and conflict (where WSS infrastructure
                                                                         goes unused, poorly maintained or destroyed by
                                                                         communities) when WSS investments are not



                                                                 Page 5 of 10
                                                                                  adequately designed to address specific customs
                                                                                  and needs.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes              Because the project will involve the construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4.12                                                  of new infrastructure, as well as the rehabilitation
                                                                                  of existing networks it is possible that
                                                                                  expropriation may be necessary and that informal
                                                                                  users occupying municipal land or the right of
                                                                                  way may be displaced. A Resettlement Policy
                                                                                  Framework (RPF) has been prepared and
                                                                                  disclosed prior to appraisal that focuses
                                                                                  specifically on the types of impacts typical to this
                                                                                  type of project. This framework includes an
                                                                                  analysis of the possible impacts of the type of
                                                                                  sub-projects supported, procedures for screening
                                                                                  for these impacts, a comparison of the legal and
                                                                                  institutional framework in Ecuador with the
                                                                                  provisions of OP 4.12, a comprehensive list of
                                                                                  entitlements for project affected people, steps for
                                                                                  the preparation of resettlement action plans, as
                                                                                  well as procedures for grievance redress and
                                                                                  monitoring and evaluation.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            Yes              The Project will not support the construction or
                                                                                  significant rehabilitation of large dams. There is
                                                                                  some potential for individual sub-project to rely
                                                                                  on the services of existing dams and/or
                                                                                  construction/rehabilitation works with small
                                                                                  dams. Any needed assessment or mitigation
                                                                                  measures is included as part of the EMF
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  developed associated with OP/BP 4.01.
                            Projects on International        Yes                  Notification to riparian countries will be done
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                  before Negotiations.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   The Project will not be implemented in areas
                            7.60                                                  known to involve disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project does not contemplate any large scale, significant and/or irreversible environmental
                              impacts. The sub-projects involve relatively standard water-related works that can be readily
                              prevented or mitigated with standard measures. Because the project will finance the construction
                              of water and sanitation infrastructure, it is possible that sub-projects to be financed will require the
                              acquisition of land, or the removal of land affixed assets. Therefore, the World Bank policy on
                              involuntary resettlement applies. Also, due to the national scope of the program, and the fact that
                              over 7% (rising up to 40% depending on the definition applied) of Ecuador’s population are
                              indigenous, the indigenous peoples policy of the World Bank is triggered. However, because the


                                                                          Page 6 of 10
                           works will be small scale in nature, there will not be any large scale, significant or reversible
                           impacts, either in terms of resettlement, or negative impacts on indigenous communities.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                           The long term and indirect impacts of this project are considered positive and beneficial, which
                           include benefits to public health, improved wellbeing and quality of life of targeted communities,
                           and improvement of environmental conditions due to proposed development of adequate water
                           supply, sewerage and wastewater treatment infrastructure. Given the type of municipal water-
                           related sub-projects that will be financed, there are presently no identified potential indirect and/or
                           long term significant negative environmental or social impacts.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Associated with the EA instruments (and/or feasibility studies) to be developed for each sub-
                           project as required by the Project EMF, potential alternatives will be evaluated to help avoid or
                           minimize adverse environmental and social impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Banco del Estado (BdE) will be responsible for the overall EMF implementation. At the sub-
                           project level, participating GADs and municipal utilities/service providers will be responsible for
                           contracting the pre-investment, construction of the works, and the independent supervision. BdE
                           has experience with similar procedures to the EMF associated with previous projects/programs
                           financed the IDB and CAF. BdE has an environmental specialist in each of the 6 regional offices.
                           BdE has established an agreement with the Ministry of Environment, which is responsible for
                           issuing the environmental permits for the projects financed under PROSANEAMIENTO, which
                           includes provision of resources for the Ministry to hire staff to provide the review of sub-project
                           applications for environmental permits. The EMF includes various activities to improve capacity
                           related to environmental management, including training of BdE staff, GADs, and consultants and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           contractors that could be hired by the GADs.

                           The implementing agency has prepared a draft resettlement policy framework, designed to
                           minimize potential land acquisition and resettlement impacts, and ensure affected people are
                           properly compensated and assisted in the land acquisition or resettlement process. An Indigenous
                           Peoples Planning Framework has also been prepared, to ensure indigenous peoples communities
                           affected by the project will benefit from free, prior, and informed consultation, that social
                           assessments and indigenous peoples plans will be prepared as required, and that indigenous
                           communities will receive culturally appropriate benefits under the project. Both resettlement
                           policy and indigenous peoples planning frameworks were considered appropriate because the
                           project will finance multiple sub-projects that have yet to be identified by the implementing
                           agency. Capacity in BdE to implement both the resettlement policy and indigenous peoples
                           planning framework is limited. Currently, there is only one social development specialist working
                           on these issues, and a range of other activities within the institution. The capacity of individual
                           municipalities to address both these issues is very mixed. Some of the larger municipalities have
                           significant capacity including experienced citizen participation, planning and valuation-cadaster
                           teams. However, smaller municipalities are unlikely to have the necessary human resources to
                           prepare resettlement and indigenous peoples plans without intensive support. Therefore, the Bank
                           task team will work intensively with both BdE and individual municipalities to provide timely and
                           intensive implementation support for the completion of these instruments. Part of the Project


                                                                      Page 7 of 10
                           Component 1 will be used to enhance the capacity of GADs and contractors/consultants related to
                           sub-project environmental and social assessments, as well as environmental and social
                           construction management and supervision. Part of Project Component 4 will include support to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           BdE related to the management of environmental and social issues and safeguards and fiduciary
                           aspects
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The draft EMF was disclosed and consulted on. Changes that were received and incorporated
                           related to clarifying BdE environmental specialist roles and responsibilities, clarification on
                           training programs, and clarification on BdE loan application process related to environmental
                           aspects. As applicable to the specific sub-project, the EMF establishes mechanisms for
                           consultation and disclosure. For social safeguards, key stakeholders include indigenous peoples
                           groups, as well as the municipalities responsible for implementing the resettlement policy and
                           indigenous peoples planning framework. The RPF was disclosed by the client prior to appraisal
                           and includes procedures for consultation during the preparation and finalization of site-specific
                           resettlement action plans. The IPPF was distributed to national level and specialized organizations
                           representing indigenous peoples issues, and a consultation meeting was attended by
                           representatives of a range of different indigenous and civil society organizations in the offices of
                           BdE (April 11 2014) . Overall, the IPPF and RPF were well received by the consultation meeting
                           participants. Comments provided and incorporated into the frameworks related to the need to
                           empower indigenous communities to manage their own systems, to recognize the role of
                           indigenous people in managing water resources, and to update the legislative framework.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        31-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     16-Apr-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        04-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        24-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     31-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ecuador                                                            04-Apr-2014
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        24-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     31-Mar-2014




                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ecuador                                                           04-Apr-2014
                           Comments: Subsequent to disclosure on BdE website, the framework was discussed during a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         Civil Society Stakeholder meeting held on April 11 2014.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?



                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                             Have dam safety plans been prepared?                             Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                             Bank?
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Oscar E. Alvarado
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                           Date: 25-Apr-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Wambui G. Gichuri (SM)                          Date: 25-Apr-2014




                                                                      Page 10 of 10
