INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA9050
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jan-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Bangladesh                  Project ID:  P149493
Project Name: Bangladesh Urban Resilience Project (P 149493)
Task Team       Marc S. Forni
Leader(s):
Estimated       25-Jan-2015                 Estimated    24-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General public administration sector (100%)
Theme(s):       Natural disaster management (70%), Urban planning and housing policy (30%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     173.00             Total Bank Financing:   173.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
O
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                 173.00
Total                                                                       173.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to strengthen the capacity of GoB agencies to efficiently and
effectively respond to recurrent as well as large-scale emergency events and to improve construction
permitting and audit processes in Dhaka and Sylhet.
3. Project Description
The project comprises five components briefly described below.
Page 1 of 10


﻿Component A: Reinforcing the Country's Emergency Management Response Capacity - US$110
million
O
An emergency management system will be put in place that will mobilize the resources at all levels
and assign roles and responsibilities more efficiently. The system will be guided by international
standards and principles of emergency management and in conformity with national laws and
guidelines incorporated in the Disaster Management Act of 2012 and SOD 2010. The overall goal is
to design and operationalize an integrated emergency management system in Bangladesh that will
enable the country to plan and respond to both common, everyday emergencies as well as major
disasters in an organized and effective manner. The success of a more effective emergency
management system will be measured based on the attainment of the EMAP certification, which is
the international standard for emergency management systems.
For this purpose, the Project will: (1) set up emergency operations centers (EOCs) and other response
facilities in line with international standards; (2) outfit them with modem interoperable emergency
communication systems and response equipment; and (3) support the proposed emergency
management system with a robust and sustained capacity development program that establishes and
trains a cadre of emergency management professionals for Bangladesh that are on par with their
international peers.
The following activities will be implemented under Component A:
*      Renovate and outfit national-level Disaster Risk Management (DRM) facilities (Component
Al, US$ 2.3M)
*      Build, renovate and outfit local-level City Corporation and Fire Service and Civil Defense
(FSCD) DRM facilities in Dhaka and Sylhet (Component A2, US$ 8.0M)
* Supply, install and integrate specialized Emergency Management and Communications
Technology (ECT) equipment for DRM and emergency response within national-level and local-
level agencies (Component A3, US$ 47.5M)
* Supply specialized search and rescue equipment to local-level agencies involved in DRM
(Component A4, US$ 39.5M)
 *    Provide Training, Exercises and Drills (TED) to national-level and local-level agencies
involved in DRM (Component A5, US$ 12.7M)
Component B: Vulnerability Assessment of Critical and Essential Facilities - US$12 million
The objective of this component is to develop the consensus-driven analytical foundation required
for longer-term investments to reduce risk in the built environment of Dhaka, Sylhet and other cities
in Bangladesh. It concentrates on two activities, the first of which is an assessment of the
vulnerability of the built environment in Greater Dhaka to earthquakes and other major hazards,
focusing on essential and critical facilities and infrastructure. The assessment will establish the
patterns of vulnerability of the cities, understand the hotspots, and serve as a basis for a long term
vulnerability reduction in Greater Dhaka. The second activity is the development of risk-sensitive
land use planning as a practice in Bangladesh. This will be informed by an understanding of the
hazards, vulnerability, and risk facing urban centers, and by clearly stated consensus-driven disaster
risk management (DRM) objectives and policies.
The following activities will be implemented under Component B:
*      Conduct a vulnerability assessment of critical and essential facilities and lifelines
Page 2 of 10


﻿(Component B1, US$ 6.6M)
*      Support the development of a risk-sensitive land use planning practice in Dhaka (Component
B2, US$ 5.4M)
O
Component C: Improved Construction, Urban Planning and Development - US$41million
The objective of Component C is to put in place the institutional infrastructure and competency to
reduce long-term disaster vulnerability in Dhaka. It would address both the existing built
environment as well as future development. The overall scheme for component C covers four areas
of investment: (1) create a unit within RAJUK to support the integration of risk information into
development planning; (2) put up the infrastructure and processes to ensure an efficient and integral
mechanism for land use and zoning clearance, permitting and approval of site and building plans; (3)
improve competency through professional accreditation, trainings, continuous education, as well as
forums; and (4) strengthen building code implementation and enforcement.
The following activities will be implemented under Component C:
*      Create and operationalize an Urban Resilience Unit (URU) in RAJUK (Component C1, US $
23.4M)
*      Establish an electronic construction permitting system (Component C2, US$ 8.7M)
*      Set up a professional accreditation program for engineers, architects and planners
(Component C3, US$ 4.7M)
*      Improve building code enforcement within RAJUK jurisdiction (Component C4, US$ 4.2M)
Component D: Project Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation - US$10 million
The URP will have an implementation structure to engage relevant ministries that will focus on
DRM, emergency response, vulnerability assessment, risk-sensitive land use planning and
management, and institutional strengthening. The objective of Component D is to provide necessary
funding for project coordination, monitoring and evaluation. It will also ensure periodic evaluation of
the investment program to highlight the outputs and outcomes in support of a longer-term investment
program.
The Project Coordination and Monitoring Unit (PCMU) will be charged with the responsibility of
a        developing mechanisms to track and analyze the Project's effects, including the resulting actions of
key stakeholders, particularly the City Corporations. The Project will also undergo an independent
mid-term review and end-of-project evaluation. In addition, activities under the Bank's Governance
and Anti-Corruption Action Plan (GAAP) will be implemented under this component. This PCMU
has already been established under the Emergency Cyclone Recovery and Restoration Project
(ECRRP) and is fully operational.
Activities that will be supported under this component include: i) overall support of the activities of
the Project Steering Committee (PSC) and the PCMU; ii) support of activities related to overall
progress, monitoring and evaluation, compliance with the Project's safeguard and fiduciary
requirements, and capacity development; iii) support of communication and promotional activities
reflecting project contributions and stakeholder expectations; iv) procurement of vehicles, office
furniture, and information technology equipment for the PCMU; v) operating costs of the PCMU; vi)
hiring of experts and specialists to reinforce the staffing and technically support the mission of the
PCMU; and vii) strategic studies.
Page 3 of 10


﻿Component E: Contingent Emergency Response - US$ 0 million
Following an adverse natural or man-made event that causes a major disaster, the Government may
request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to this component (which presently carries a zero
O
U         allocation) to support response and reconstruction. This component would allow the Government to
request the Bank to reallocate project funds and designate them as Immediate Response Mechanism
funds to be engaged to partially cover emergency response and recovery costs. This component could
also be used to channel additional funds should they become available as a result of the emergency.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
All physical works under Component A will take place within urbanized areas in Dhaka and Sylhet.
The precise location is not yet known and confirmation is subject to further dialogue with the client.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Md. Akhtaruzzaman (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment Yes          This policy is triggered as the project will conduct
OP/BP 4.01                            upgrade or construction of emergency management
infrastructure and will purchase and store equipment to
be used during disaster. An Environmental Management
Framework (EMF) has been prepared to address this
policy.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No           No impact on natural habitats is expected at this stage of
4.04                                  the project design as the project location for
construction is expected to be within the urban areas.
However, the environmental screening will provide due
diligence to identify any impact on natural habitat.
O
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The project activity is focused on urban area. Any
physical intervention in the forested area will not be
supported.
Pest Management OP 4.09  No           This policy is not triggered due to the project
description.
Physical Cultural Resources No        Since the locations for construction is yet not identified
OP/BP 4.11                            and is expected to be in the office boundary, no impact
on Physical Cultural Resource is expected to trigger.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP  Yes         The country's tribal peoples with indigenous language
4.10                                  and culture are concentrated in the Chittagong Hill Tract
(CHT) districts namely Rangamati, Khagrachari and
Bandarban under Chittagong Division. They are also
dispersed in small proportions in the plain districts. The
project's physical interventions will be concentrated in
Dhaka and Sylhet City Corporations where tribal
peoples with indigenous language and culture are living
in small proportions including Garo, Chakma, Marma,
Monipuri, Khssia and others.
Page 4 of 10


﻿The project approach will be to avoid any adverse social
impact on the tribal peoples but they will be covered for
enhanced benefits through inclusive design, construction
and operation.
Given that the sites for physical interventions are not
identified at this stage and the design will be developed
during implementation, the executing agency is
developing a Social Management Framework (SMF) as
a guide for social assessment, inclusive planning and
participatory management of social risks including
social safeguards. The SMF includes a tribal peoples
planning framework (TPPF) for assessment and
management of tribal issues during implementation of
the project. TPPF will offer grievance management with
due consideration of the traditional grievance
management system of the tribal peoples.
Involuntary Resettlement  Yes          Project interventions will generate long-term benefits in
OP/BP 4.12                             term of disaster resilience in Dhaka and Sylhet City
Corporations. All constructions are expected to be on
existing or available public land without any
encumbrances. However, in critical circumstances,
additional private land can also be acquired and public
land can be resumed from private uses causing
involuntary displacement. Land may also be obtained
for project use through voluntary donation by
communities commensurate to national legislations and
Bank policy.
Given that the sites for physical interventions are not
identified and the design will be developed during
implementation, project impacts triggering involuntary
resettlement will be known only during implementation.
The executing agency is therefore developing the SMF
for the project. The SMF includes, among others, a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to deal with
social impact assessment and preparation of
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), where involuntary
displacement of people will be involved. Social
Management Plan (SMP) will be prepared and
implemented for all interventions for inclusive
communication, participation, voluntary donation of
land, and grievance management.
The SMF will include an inclusive Grievance Redress
Mechanism (GRM) to answer to queries, receive
Page 5 of 10


﻿suggestions and address complaints and grievances
related to the project.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No          This policy is not triggered due to the project
o                                               description.
Projects on International  No          This policy is not triggered due to the project
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   description.
Projects in Disputed Areas  No         This policy is not triggered due to the project
OP/BP 7.60                             description.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project activities which may trigger environmental safeguard issue are upgrading or
construction of emergency management infrastructure and purchase of new safety and disaster
equipment to strengthen the resource of the Fire Services and Civil Defense Agency (FSCD) and
Emergency Operations Center (EOC) for City Corporation (CC) of Dhaka and Sylhet. The
environmental impacts due to the infrastructure development (small scale construction/upgrading
buildings to accommodate a National Coordination Center, a National Disaster Management,
Research and Training Institute, Emergency Operations Centers and Control Rooms etc.) and due
to the installation of new safety equipment of the FSCD, handling, use and disposal of
dysfunctional equipment are likely to be short-term, site-specific, non-sensitive or reversible, and
in every case, mitigation measures can be designed to overcome or reduce the negative
environmental impacts . Considering the level of possible impact, the environment assessment
(OP/BP 4.01) policy has been triggered for the proposed operation and the project is classified as
"Category B". The project may consider retrofitting of public building (hospital, office,
educational institution etc.) in future. In that case environmental risk associated with the
O
U           investment will be reviewed through an environmental assessment.
The overall social impacts are expected to be positive. The project overall is environmentally
beneficial since the development objective of the project is to reduce the vulnerability of exposed
people and assets to disaster risk and to improve municipal capacity to respond effectively to
disasters. The construction of emergency operations centers proposed will require due diligence to
be in place and environmental management action will need to be incorporated into the investment
planning process.
The physical infrastructures - mainly buildings - are proposed in the metropolitan cities of Dhaka
and Sylhet. The constructions will expectedly be on existing or available lands in these urban
areas. Only in critical circumstances of unavailability of vacant public land, additional private
lands can be acquired and public lands can be resumed from private uses. Given the urban areas
are densely populated; displacement of people may not be avoided fully. In the event land
acquisition or population displacement cannot be avoided, participatory and transparent processes
would be followed in accordance with the Bank's operational policy guidelines. However, land
acquisition is not anticipated under the project. In the case that it is necessary, the National
regulatory framework will be followed for documentation of transfer of government owned and
donated land.
Page 6 of 10


﻿2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The project overall is socially and environmentally beneficial since the development objective of
the project is to reduce the vulnerability of exposed people and assets to disaster risk and to
improve municipal capacity to respond effectively to disasters. The construction of emergency
operations centers proposed will require due diligence to be in place and environmental
management action will be incorporated into the investment planning process.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The project location is still not identified and the list of equipment to be purchased is not yet
prepared and finalized. Environmental and Social Safeguard concern will be a determining factor
to choose the exact location and the type of equipment to be purchased.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An EMF for the Project has been prepared for the current phase. The EMF highlights relevant
general policies and guidelines, Environmental Code of Practice of the project design and
implementation. Under Component B of the Project to support long-term building retrofitting and
code, a Strategic Environment Assessment (SEA) will be developed. The SEA will give guidance
on the environmental consideration of the building code.
The project's social aspects were identified and remedial measures to mitigate social risks are
being designed on the basis of a Social Assessment, and an accompanying Social Management
Framework (SMF). The SMF has been reviewed and cleared by the Bank and was disclosed
locally and at Bank Infoshop on January 13, 2015. Given the nature of the interventions, the
involuntary resettlement policy (OP 4.12) is being triggered to accommodate any unforeseen
requirements for the acquisition of private land and any public land from private uses.
The project is to be implemented by three implementing agencies, DNCC within the
MoLGRD&C, RAJUK within the MoHPW, and DDM within the MoDMR. The DCCs have
implemented Bank-supported projects, including a component of the ongoing Clean Air and
Sustainable Environment (CASE) Project and the closed Dhaka Urban Transport Project (DUTP).
The DCCs were split into two in December 2011 and, since then, DNCC and DSCC have
coordinated in implementing CASE, with the CASE PIU located within DSCC. DDM is currently
implementing one of the components of the Emergency Cyclone Recovery and Restoration Project
(ECRRP) and a component of the Safety Net Systems for the Poorest Project. Only RAJUK has
not implemented a Bank-supported project and has limited experience implementing other donor-
funded projects. The already established ECRRP PCMU, under the guidance of a PSC, and with
oversight from the Ministry of Planning, will also be responsible for overall project coordination,
management, monitoring, evaluation and overseeing strategic studies and training.
PIUs will be established in each of the lAs for day-to-day execution of the project components.
These PIUs will include social and environmental safeguards compliance management. Each IA
will appoint an environmental safeguard focal person, and the PCMU will have an Environmental
Specialist with an environmental background to strengthen the project execution at present and in
the future. The Environmental Specialist will be responsible for providing support for
environmental compliance in the project activities and coordination of the multi-agency setup. S/
He will share biannual reports with the project coordination committee. S/He will ensure
Page 7 of 10


﻿contractors provide due diligence in following the environmental safeguard concerns. A Social
Development Officer with a social science background will be engaged to strengthen the social
management capacity of the PIUs.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The population in the urban areas pf Dhaka City is particularly exposed to disaster risks and is
therefore the prime beneficiary of the project. Other beneficiaries include staff in municipal public
organizations in Dhaka and Sylhet, in addition to members of engineering, construction and urban
planning professional communities. The urban share of the total population of 150 million people
amounted to approximately 29 percent in 2013, compared to 21 percent 20 years earlier. By 2050
the population will have grown to 200 million, and 52 percent will live in urban areas With 7
million people living in the jurisdictional boundaries of Dhaka City Corporations, and 15 million
in the wider Dhaka metropolitan area, the greater Dhaka area is particularly at risk. Sylhet is the
third largest city in Bangladesh. The primary stakeholders of the project include the residents of
DNCC and DSCC and the Sylhet City Corporation including the likely project affected persons.
Secondary stakeholders include the city commuters, visitors, transporters, government and private
sector offices, service providers, including conservancy services for electricity, gas, water, waste
disposal and sewage, fire service, traders, and elected representatives. The other stakeholders
include businessmen groups like contractors, sub-contractors and suppliers during the construction
period.
The likely affected persons locally, their communities and other stakeholders are being consulted
through group meetings and personal contact. The communities are being informed, closely
consulted, and encouraged to participate in the project design and implementation. The opinion of
the different levels of stakeholders regarding the project were sought and considered in preparation
of SMF and EMF. Consultation with the stakeholders will be continued during implementation of
the project. During the implementation phase, the communities will be sought to provide
cooperation from various stakeholders in the decision-making and implementation of
environmental and social management plans. Through public consultations, the communities and
affected persons will be informed that they have a right to grievance redress from the
implementing agencies.
o
Disclosures. The EMF and SMF, including stakeholder consultation deliberations, will be
*           available with the PMUs in both English and Bengali. Impact Assessment checklists and the
simple social screening matrix, prepared as a part of the project preparation, will also available
with the PMUs. The EMF and SMF will be translated in Bengali language and disseminated
locally. In accordance with the Bank's disclosure policy, the EMF and the SMF have been
uploaded in the official websites of the implementing agencies and in the Bank InfoShop. Any
subsequent EMP/SMP/RAP will be discussed locally with the stakeholders and disseminated
widely and made available on the project's portal and in the Bank InfoShop before award of civil
works contract.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              07-Dec-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           13-Jan-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 8 of 10


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Bangladesh                                               13-Jan-2015
Comments:
O
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              07-Dec-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           13-Jan-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Bangladesh                                               13-Jan-2015
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              07-Dec-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           13-Jan-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Bangladesh                                               13-Jan-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [  ] No [ X]  NA[]
1 report?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes[  ] No[X]  NA[  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Page 9 of 10


﻿Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ x] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
a          measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Marc S. Forni
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name:                                      Date:
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


