                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA8350
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Jan-2014, 21-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:    P145586
                            Project Name:      China Partnership for Market Readiness (P145586)
                            Task Team          Gailius J. Draugelis
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                             Estimated   30-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General energy sector (60%), General industry and trade sector (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          8.60               Total Bank Financing:          0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    0.60
                              Partnership for Market Readiness                                                            8.00
                              Total                                                                                       8.60
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed PDO of this recipient executed technical assistance grant project is to enable China to
                           design a national carbon emissions trading scheme.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project has two components:



                                                                        Page 1 of 5
                         Component 1: Enabling Design of Key Building Blocks for a National Emissions Trading Scheme
                         (ETS) (indicative grant financing: US$6.5 million): The component will support technical assistance,
                         studies, including policy research and analysis, and workshops that aim to assist the DDC in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         developing the key ETS building blocks. Generally, the studies under each sub-component will
                         involve a series of activities that will lead to recommendations for each building block. Stakeholder
                         consultation will be built into the process to ensure relevant governmental agencies, industries and
                         civil societies’ inputs and comments are taken into account. This component consists of seven sub-
                         components:

                         Sub-component 1.1: Development of Methodologies for Coverage, Cap, Allocation and
                         Supplementary Mechanisms (indicative grant financing: US$2.0 million). This sub-component is to
                         provide analytical support on identifying the sectors, and the type of greenhouse gas (GHG) of the
                         ETS. The sub-component will propose recommendations on (a) cap setting methodology and
                         program; (b) an initial allowance allocation methodology; (c) price containment mechanism options;
                         and (d) offset mechanism, including options for basic requirements for linking national ETS with
                         other systems.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Development of a Legal Framework and Oversight System (indicative grant
                         financing: US$1.0 million). The proposed sub-component will provide analytical support for
                         identifying (a) a management system governing the national emissions trading market; (b) a basic
                         legal framework for the national ETS, including administrative rules; (c) a market oversight and
                         compliance system plan, including scope, designated authorities, targets and rules; and (d) treatment
                         of participants and trading products.

                         Sub-component 1.3: Development of a Data Collection and MRV System (indicative grant financing:
                         US$0.8 million). The technical assistance will provide analytical support for proposals on data
                         management, GHG emission accounting standards of enterprises and verification guidelines on
                         selected sectors.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 1.4: Development of an ETS Registry (indicative grant financing: US$0.5 million).
                         The activities will provide analytical support to special topics that would refine the framework of a
                         national registry that has been already developed, e.g. addressing issues of relationship between the
                         national and local registries (i.e. clarifications of functions of registry at both the national and local
                         levels).

                         Sub-component 1.5: Research on Participation of State-owned Enterprises (indicative grant
                         financing: US$0.3 million). This sub-component will provide analytical support to assess barriers
                         and propose measures to facilitate inclusion of State Owned Enterprises in the national ETS. State-
                         Owned-Enterprises (SOEs) are considered in China as special enterprise groups with distinctive
                         characteristics.

                         Sub-component 1.6: Research on Power Sector Issues for a National ETS (indicative grant financing:
                         US$0.3 million). The component will provide supplementary analytical support for special topics
                         relating to the inclusion of the power sector in the national ETS including in areas of scope, cap
                         setting methodology, MRV and other supporting policies that would be needed to include effective
                         participation of the power sector in the ETS.

                         Sub-component 1.7: Provincial Level Enterprise and Economic Data Collection and Consultation
                         (indicative grant financing: US$1.6 million). Provincial engagement will be essential for improving

                                                                        Page 2 of 5
                           the design of the ETS prior to its roll out. In addition to local engagement activities in other
                           subcomponents, this sub-component will support complementary data collection, analysis, and
                           stakeholder consultation in provinces. A wide potential scope of activities, such as economic and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           energy data collections and projections or participation of provincial representatives in national
                           consultations, will be tailored to address specific needs to facilitate feedback and vet design aspects
                           of the ETS.

                           28.      Component 2: China PMR Synthesis Report, Consultations and Project Management
                           (indicative grant financing: US$1.5 million): This component will support: (i) project management,
                           including incremental operating costs, (ii) stakeholder and expert consultations; (iii) workshops and
                           study tours; and (iv) a synthesis report for the project summarizing proposals and analysis supporting
                           the national ETS scheme design. The component will finance consulting services and consultation
                           expenses to ensure appropriate quality control is provided for terms of reference and outputs.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           This is a national technical assistance project with no physical footprint, nor will it lead to
                           subsequent physical investments.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Peishen Wang (EASIN)
                           Aimin Hao (EASCS)

                            6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management


                                                                          Page 3 of 5
                         A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           Associated Safeguards Risks. The technical assistance project funds the design of a national
                           carbon emissions trading scheme, which will assist mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions in a
                           cost-effective manner. Project activities are policy research and analysis, technical studies,
                           workshops and training to enable China to design a national carbon emissions trading scheme. The
                           project does not include any physical works, nor will it result in any immediate direct physical
                           investments. The project is likely to have minimal or no adverse impacts. It is anticipated to have
                           positive impacts. Therefore, the project was classified as Category C during the PCN review and
                           clearance of the project as per OP4.01.

                           No separate safeguards instrument is required. As a result, the Bank’s safeguard policy does not
                           require a formal environmental assessment to be produced. However, the counterpart will be
                           asked to incorporate directly environmental and social safeguards policies into the relevant project
                           activities such as sub-component 1.1. and sub-component 1.2. Screening for the application of
                           safeguards policies will be done for each sub-components studies and term of reference developed
                           as needed. The key Terms of Reference will be reviewed by the Bank.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           See section 1.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           See section 1.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The borrower and involved agencies have very good to limited knowledge and experience in
                           applying the World Bank policies. The Bank will ensure when reviewing TOR that the adequate
                           safeguards expertise is associated to activities and studies taking into account safeguard policy
                           issues.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project design aims to enable China to design national carbon emissions trading scheme that
                           will cap carbon emissions, a mitigation instrument that is expected to control carbon emissions in
                           China. As such, the studies will investigate design options based on international and domestic
                           experience. The project design includes through its studies workshops, interviews and analysis that
                           incorporates views of relevant stakeholders that may be involved in the emissions trading scheme.
                           The final outcome of the project is a proposal by the NDRC Department of Climate Change to the
                           Vice Chairman of NDRC. The proposal is expected to be processed through an internal vetting
                           process involving a wide range of central government agencies.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         19-Apr-2014
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      21-Apr-2014


                                                                     Page 4 of 5
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                              Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                            "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Comments:
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Gailius J. Draugelis
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Iain G. Shuker (SM)                        Date: 21-Apr-2014




                                                                         Page 5 of 5
