                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA9811
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-May-2014, 27-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Jamaica                           Project ID:    P147665
                            Project Name:      Jamaica Foundations for Competitiveness and Growth (P147665)
                            Task Team          Thomas A. Vis
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          05-May-2014                       Estimated   25-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSPF                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Industry and trade (15%), SME Finance (30%), Agro-
                                              industry, marketing, and trade (15%), General industry and trade sector (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Regulation and competition policy (10%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
                                              support (45%), Export development and competitiveness (4 5%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      50.00           Total Bank Financing:                    50.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     50.00
                              Total                                                                                     50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To strengthen the business environment in Jamaica for private sector investment.
                            3. Project Description
                           Specific project components include:


                                                                      Page 1 of 11
                         Component 1: Enhancing competition in the business environment (US$ 3.1 million). This
                         component will provide technical assistance (TA) and implementation support to address critical
Public Disclosure Copy




                         business regulation and procedural issues that constrain firm entry, operation and expansion,
                         competition, and trade and logistics. Priority reform needs have been identified in collaboration with
                         a wide range of public and private stakeholders, particularly JAMPRO in its role as Secretariat of the
                         National Competitiveness Council (NCC) charged with overseeing the business reform agenda. The
                         project will finance the following five priority activities, led by JAMPRO in coordination with
                         relevant regulatory agencies:

                         (a) TA to help streamline the development approvals and construction permitting process. The
                         construction industry (together with real estate, renting, and related business activities) represents
                         about 18% of GDP, but a key step in the process—application for a development approval—can take
                         anywhere from eight to eighteen months, with the longest delays experienced by commercial
                         projects.
                         (b) Training and public outreach to increase the use of new institutions related to access to finance,
                         specifically the moveable collateral registry and the credit information bureau. Further support will
                         be provided to implement the recently tabled insolvency law, including outreach and training for
                         insolvency professionals on the new legal framework.
                         (c) TA to support regulatory reforms related to the legal framework for the Port Community System
                         (PCS), a critical component of the LHI that provides an electronic single window to increase
                         efficiency in port operations.
                         (d) Legal and regulatory development for the new SEZ regime to replace the Export Free Zone
                         regime being phased out per WTO compliance criteria, with a focus on including pro-competition
                         regulatory elements to minimize market distortions.
                         (e) TA to build the capacity of the Fair Trading Commission (FTC) to support its work proactively
                         advocating for enhanced and fair competition in the economy.

                         Component 2: Facilitating strategic private investments (US$ 17.6 million). This component will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         finance studies and TA to enable the government to prepare and close large strategic investment
                         transactions with private sector participation. Strategic sectors include sectors such as agribusiness,
                         energy, information and communications technology, logistics, transportation (airports, ports, etc.),
                         social sector PPPs (such as health and education), tourism, and water and sanitation. DBJ will be the
                         LCA for this component given its current responsibility for PPPs and privatizations within GOJ.
                         Assistance provided through this component may be implemented in close coordination with the IFC
                         to benefit from IFC’s PPP transaction expertise. Specific activities to be financed include:

                         (a) Component 2A: Project preparation facility (PPF) (US$ 8.5 million). The PPF will finance studies
                         and TA to facilitate strategic transactions such as infrastructure and social sector PPPs, divestments,
                         and other strategic investments. Such studies and TA will include pre-feasibility, feasibility,
                         financial, legal, environmental, and social as needed to bring strategic transactions to market. The
                         criteria for selection of individual projects to benefit from a PPF-financed study and TA will include
                         the potential to have a significant impact on growth and jobs and readiness for the transaction to be
                         closed quickly. DBJ will work directly with MDAs that currently own and/or control infrastructure
                         and other assets to bring private investment transactions to the market. Applications for studies and
                         TA will be drafted by the MDAs themselves, with support provided by DBJ when requested. The
                         applications will be submitted to the PPF Management Board (consisting of representatives of DBJ,
                         PIOJ, JAMPRO, line ministries as appropriate, and members of two private sector organizations),
                         which will recommend individual studies and TA for approval and funding to the overall Project

                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                         Steering Committee, with a no-objection required from the Bank.

                         (b) Component 2B: TA and studies for investment support (US$ 9.1 million). The project will also
Public Disclosure Copy




                         finance TA and studies complementary to the PPF to increase GOJ capacity for strategic project
                         origination, planning, and implementation, including:
                         (i)       Project origination and investment generation support for JAMPRO. This will include
                         funding for investment facilitation of projects supported by the PPF, as well as support for project
                         packaging for key private investment deals.
                         (ii) Project pre-commissioning and contracting support, including funding three additional senior
                         attorneys in the Attorney General’s Chambers to increase capacity to review key transaction
                         documents and provide negotiation support.
                         (iii) Contract management support to improve ex-post monitoring to ensure investors have delivered
                         against contracts and investment plans.
                         (iv) Financing for three critical sector planning studies: a Master Plan for the LHI with an industry
                         analysis for SEZs, a redevelopment plan for downtown Kingston, and a tourism-agribusiness demand
                         and linkages study. These studies will increase GOJ’s capacity to adequately prepare and implement
                         investment and linkages plans for these sectors and development needs. PIOJ will be responsible for
                         these stu dies given its overall coverage of policy and planning issues, with close technical
                         collaboration with relevant ministries.

                         Component 3: Supporting SME capabilities and finance (US$ 23.2 million). This component will
                         provide support directly to SMEs by funding a combination of supply chain learning, skills
                         upgrading, and finance. This component will be implemented by DBJ, with specific activities to
                         include:

                         (a) Component 3A: SME supply chain support and skills upgrading (US$ 7 million). The project will
                         finance matching grants and TA to upgrade the capabilities of SMEs in specific eligible supply
                         chains to meet the purchasing needs of large buyers. Eligible supply chains include all productive
                         sectors that can generate high job multipliers from invested resources, such as agriculture and agro-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         processing, light and heavy manufacturing, and logistics services. A private contracting firm will be
                         hired to manage the implementation of this sub-component. Specific activities to be financed include:
                         (i)       TA will be provided facilitate group problem-identification processes by applicant SMEs
                         and a large buyer in a supply chain. An applicant group of firms will submit a proposal for skills
                         upgrading needs, including a non-binding offtake agreement of potential increased purchases from
                         SMEs by the large buyer, and identifying anticipated benefits such as new jobs created. This TA will
                         help the firms produce a ‘supply chain business plan’, which will identify specific quality upgrading
                         needs of individual firms and expected benefits along the supply chain.
                         (ii) Based on acceptable supply chain business plans, the project will provide matching grants to
                         individual firms to co-finance learning and skills upgrading to help SMEs meet the quality standards
                         in the supply chain and increase sales to large buyers. A wide range of local providers of training
                         services exists in Jamaica, and enabling flexible purchasing of relevant services is expected to spur
                         local demand-driven supply. Co-financing will be provided by individual firms receiving the
                         business development services, with a range of co-financing amounts depending on the size of firms
                         with an emphasis on getting maximum participation in the program.
                         (iii) The project will also finance TA to continue the initial group facilitation process as required,
                         evolving into a public-private dialogue (PPD) mechanism to help resolve broader implementation
                         bottlenecks such as specific regulatory and administrative barriers or the failure of existing public
                         support schemes to reach intended beneficiaries.



                                                                     Page 3 of 11
                         (b) Component 3B: SME finance (US$ 16.175 million). The project will fund a line of credit (LOC)
                         through DBJ for on-lending to approved financial institutions (AFIs) for loans to SMEs. Given
                         ongoing tight liquidity in Jamaica, the LOC will provide critical access to finance for SMEs broadly,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         including for SMEs participating in the skills upgrading program. MOFP will absorb the exchange
                         rate risk for ultimate repayment of this funding, enabling DBJ to on-lend in local currency and
                         mitigate market liquidity constraints. AFIs may request funding for on-lending through two
                         modalities: a) for individual credits to SMEs, or b) for a revolving credit line to fund eligible credits
                         with ex-post review by DBJ, to facilitate the ease of on-lending. Banks will pay a commitment fee
                         for the unused part of the revolving credit line (as funds can only be used once an eligible credit has
                         been approved by the institution), and remaining balances can be canceled by DBJ in case the line is
                         not used. These design aspects will stimulate use of funds under the LOC, although only the highest-
                         rated banks in the financial system will be able to access the facility under this modality. (See
                         Annexes 2 and 7 for additional details on the LOC and on financial markets in Jamaica.)

                         Component 4: Project implementation and M&E (US$ 6.1 million), including:

                         (a) Component 4A: Project management and implementation (US$ 4.5 million). This sub-component
                         will fund all project management and operational costs associated with the project. These costs will
                         include technical and fiduciary staff at PIOJ to establish a Project Execution Unit (PEU); technical
                         coordination staff at DBJ and JAMPRO; and routine project audit and evaluation expenses.

                         (b) Component 4B: TA for communications and productivity evaluation (US$ 1.6 million). The
                         project will finance TA to support PIOJ’s implementation and evaluation of the project.
                         Communications and outreach activities will be funded to generate public support for the project as
                         well as for the overall productivity and growth agenda of GOJ. TA will be provided to PIOJ and the
                         Jamaica Productivity Center (JPC) to conduct at least one evaluation study of the impact on SMEs of
                         the skills upgrading and loans component, using elements of randomization to the extent possible.
                         The project will also support the Statistical Institute of Jamaica (STATIN) to upgrade the quality of
                         private sector data for broader GOJ impact evaluation and policy making by funding a national
Public Disclosure Copy




                         business census, which will enable proper subsequent annual sampling of firms to monitor
                         productivity changes.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Component 1 of the project intends to improve the existing complex construction permitting process,
                         which could indirectly affect environmental aspects if revisions/updates were to reduce the adequate
                         consideration of potential environmental impacts in the permitting process. The potential risk for
                         these environmental impacts is considered relatively limited.

                         Component 2 includes prefeasibility, feasibility, sector planning, and other studies for infrastructure.
                         The intent of this TA is to finance studies needed to bring large projects to commercial and financial
                         close and to guide GOJ planning processes. The project will only finance studies, not actual
                         investment project works. The potential risk is if these studies do not adequately address
                         environmental impacts and risks. While some limited risk is present since these studies will be for
                         projects with more significant potential impacts (i.e., large infrastructure), this risk is offset by the
                         value-added of having these studies better incorporate environmental and social considerations,
                         thereby enabling the Bank to support GOJ in integrating sustainability principles within sub-projects
                         regardless of whether the construction is financed by the Bank.



                                                                       Page 4 of 11
                         Recognizing that there are a variety of study types with varying degrees of environmental
                         implications, a three-tiered impact assessment approach will be adopted:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In order to provide overarching guidance and a framework for future assessments, regional scoping
                         and planning documents funded by the project such as the Master Plan for the LHI will include an
                         identification of environmental and social assessment needs, definition of TOR elements for future
                         assessments, and an estimation of costs to complete those studies for LHI-related projects (which
                         may include airports, new manufacturing and warehouse facilities, aircraft repair facility, drydocks,
                         container terminals, and a rail system). This high-level integrated approach to environmental and
                         social assessment within the Master Plan will provide guidance, direction, and input for future more
                         detailed assessments if and as they are subsequently proposed, whether or not such studies are funded
                         by the Bank.

                         The “second tier” of assessments that may be funded by the project would consist of in-depth
                         Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) for specific potential investment
                         transactions. ESIAs would be specified to include thorough analysis of regional and cumulative
                         effects, social assessment needs, extensive consultation (including NEPA and in-country authorities),
                         biological resource assessment, and other elements as identified in the scoping-level first-tier
                         assessments. The second tier of assessments would be specified to comply with World Bank
                         Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities and would provide due-diligence information
                         consistent with Equator Principles to meet private investor needs. Specifically, “Performance
                         Standards” means the Bank’s Performance Standard 1 (Assessment and Management of
                         Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts) dated July 1, 2012, the Equator Principles Performance
                         Standard 2 (Environmental and Social Assessment) dated June 4, 2013 and the associated
                         performance standard in both documents determined to be applicable during the assessment process.

                         The third and final tier of assessment would be directed towards in-country NEPA permitting and
                         would essentially repackage the ESIAs to incorporate final technical details, and serve to pre-scope
                         and streamline the final detailed design/permitting. This third tier could be funded with project loan
Public Disclosure Copy




                         financing as a near-final step in the project preparation process; or it could be conducted by the
                         owners of infrastructure or other assets involved in the transaction process, but benefitting from any
                         scoping document or second-tier assessments previously funded by the project.

                         The benefit of this approach is that it will satisfy the need for an assessment of potential regional
                         impacts in large planning studies funded by the project, but without including unnecessary details for
                         future project elements which could substantially change or never materialize. It would also reduce
                         reputational risk to the Bank by presenting an integrated approach at the early planning stages and
                         providing guidance for future assessments to meet Bank policy and safeguards requirements. Finally,
                         the adequate treatment of environmental aspects will reduce risk during technical assi stance related
                         to project origination, commissioning and ex-post contract management.

                         The Operational Manual will include requirements for ESIAs funded through the PPF to comply with
                         the protocols set out in the regional planning and scoping studies, including World Bank
                         Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities and Equator Principles standards with public
                         consultation, cumulative impact assessment, and incorporation of relevant environmental policies
                         and legislation of the Government of Jamaica. In this way, any environmental and social concerns of
                         offshore investors will be addressed proactively, in a manner supportive of NEPA protocol, in a
                         comprehensive and transparent fashion, and significantly advancing project preparation and
                         permitting time.

                                                                      Page 5 of 11
                         Component 3 will provide loans to SMEs. The projects carried out by SMEs that receive financing
                         for working capital or specific project investments could have negative environmental impacts. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         SMEs eligible will include a range of sectors, but there is some desired focus on agroindustries, ICT,
                         and logistics, and could be located anywhere in Jamaica. On average these are credits are expected to
                         be in the US$ 100,000 to 300,000 range to SMEs (defined as less than 1.5 million USD gross income
                         per year), and thus there is a low potential for sub-project investments to have moderate or high
                         potential significant impacts. The types of SME activities could include tourism, agroprocessing,
                         agricultural production, energy, manufacturing, warehousing, IT, or services.

                         To address potential impacts from Component 3 activities, DBJ will use an Environmental Policy
                         and Management System (EPMS) to screen applications, determine whether additional
                         environmental investigation is required, and document the appraisals, as well as summarize and
                         report the results in these risk management activities. DBJ developed an EPMS in 2011 for another
                         World Bank-funded project (Energy Security and Efficiency Enhancement), and DBJ has updated
                         and reissued this internal guidance document, which has been included in the EPMS for this project.
                         AFIs who receive a line-of-credit will be required to adhere to the standards and protocols of DBJ’s
                         EPMS at a minimum.

                         Initial screening against an exclusion and referral list is first performed, using information provided
                         in the credit application. Projects classified as Category A under World Bank OP/BP 4.01 are not
                         eligible for financing under Component 3, as well as those on the IFC Exclusion List. The screening
                         checklist further identifies those projects for which no further environmental investigation is
                         required, and those for which the application process requires additional investigation. The checklist
                         requires that the applicant provide information pertaining to local (Parish) permits and national
                         (NEPA) permits; further, DBJ requires that all applicable permits be obtained prior to disbursement.
                         If further environmental and social investigation is required, then DBJ will assign an Investment
                         Officer and conduct a site visit. Roughly 40% of DBJ’s portfolio of over 1,000 loans has included
                         such site visits as part of the application process, often conducted jointly with AFIs. The inclusion of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         expanded evaluations of environmental and social aspects will be conducted by staff of the Strategic
                         Services section of the Bank (who will also support the financing of studies under Component 2).
                         Environmental and social investigation may be cursory or detailed as required, and the results and
                         evaluation of risk will be summarized in the credit documentation. DBJ will perform monitoring and
                         reporting through annual reports to include the nature of the loans, environmental and social
                         screening and risk evaluations, and a summary of the portfolio’s performance with respect to
                         environmental and social aspects. SMEs will be obliged to comply with relevant environmental and
                         social requirements as established in their sub-loan agreements, per the Operational Manual.

                         DBJ requires that all projects must comply with relevant GOJ policies as required by the National
                         Environment and Planning Agency (NEPA), which include permits and/or environmental and social
                         impact assessments whenever appropriate. DBJ will require that AFIs adhere at a minimum to the
                         environmental and social management standards as detailed in the EPMS for screening, appraisal,
                         and reporting. The EPMS and the associated environmental and social requirements will be included
                         in the project Operational Manual.

                         Component 4 includes capacity building and technical assistance by World Bank. PIOJ will have a
                         qualified environmental consultant on retainer to assist with the PPF relative to evaluation of TORs
                         for ESIAs on large infrastructure projects. The existing DBJ system will be adapted and improved
                         through World Bank supervision, training support and capacity building, including the addition of an

                                                                      Page 6 of 11
                         environmental and social risk management specialist in the Strategic Services section of DBJ.

                         The World Bank environmental safeguard specialists will provide periodic supervision and training
Public Disclosure Copy




                         relative to the identification and management of environmental risk in project evaluation and
                         implementation. The World Bank will assist DBJ to identify appropriate external training
                         opportunities for environmental screening and environmental management for AFI project officers,
                         field supervision staff, small and medium enterprise development officers and selected community
                         representatives to familiarize them with the principles and procedures.

                         Permitting through NEPA will be checked as part of all supervision and monitoring actions. A permit
                         or license may be suspended or revoked if any of its terms or conditions is breached, or if the holder
                         fails to submit any documents and information as NEPA may require. The undertaking of a
                         prescribed activity without the holding of an appropriate Permit will bring substantial penalties, on
                         conviction in a court of law. Environmental monitoring reports may be required by NEPA as a
                         condition of an Environmental Permit. In such cases, the Bank will also review these reports during
                         the periodic supervision missions.

                         Regarding consultation, the draft EMF for the project was disclosed for public consultation by PIOJ
                         prior to appraisal, a public consultation was held subsequently with key stakeholders, and the final
                         EMF will be disclosed on the World Bank website. Continued consultation of future projects would
                         occur through ESIAs compliant with Equator Principles and World Bank Performance Standards for
                         Private Sector Activities and using in-country systems through NEPA for projects under the PPF
                         (Component 2). The Master Plan for the LHI will lay out public consultation elements for high-
                         visibility large infrastructure projects to encourage transparency and broad stakeholder engagement,
                         and will define the consultation plan for environmental and social aspects.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Jose Vicente Zevallos (LCSSO)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Michael J. Darr (LCSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             Component 2 (PPF-related) studies will have no
                         BP 4.01                                             direct environmental impacts, but future
                                                                             investments associated with project activities may
                                                                             have indirect environmental implications; and,
                                                                             Component 3 (SME-related) may fund activities
                                                                             with direct impacts. Accordingly, OP/BP4.01 is
                                                                             triggered and a three-tiered assessment strategy
                                                                             will be adopted. First, for major studies such the
                                                                             Master Plan for the Logistics Hub Initiative
                                                                             (LHI), the Downtown Kingston Revitalization
                                                                             Plan, or privatization of government assets in the
                                                                             tourism industry, scoping-level assessments
                                                                             would be included within each study to guide
                                                                             TORs for future ESIAs (second tier) which will
                                                                             comply with World Bank Performance Standards
                                                                             for Private Sector Activities and Equator
                                                                             Principles, including assessment of cumulative


                                                                     Page 7 of 11
                                                                    impact and public consultation requirements. The
                                                                    third tier of assessments would be EIAs
                                                                    subsequently modified and finalized for in-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    country permitting through the environmental
                                                                    policies and legislation of the Government of
                                                                    Jamaica, and would be facilitated by the previous
                                                                    studies but not funded directly by the Bank.
                                                                    Financing of SMEs will include agricultural
                                                                    processing, manufacturing, tourism and other
                                                                    activities with environmental implications;
                                                                    therefore, DBJ will employ an Environmental
                                                                    Policy and Management System, which has been
                                                                    adapted and improved for the types of projects
                                                                    under consideration, and will require AFIs to
                                                                    conduct screening, appraisal and reporting. To
                                                                    capture these environmental management
                                                                    elements, an Environmental Management
                                                                    Framework (EMF) has been prepared. The draft
                                                                    EMF was publicly disclosed prior to appraisal,
                                                                    and a consultation was subsequently held with
                                                                    key stakeholders to receive comments. A final
                                                                    EMF including any comments received will be
                                                                    disclosed on the World Bank website.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No           This policy is not triggered, as the project will not
                                                                    finance activities that have a direct impact on
                                                                    natural habitats. As part of the EMF, all
                                                                    environmental analysis conducted related to
                                                                    studies to support subsequent private investment
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    activities (PPF-related orSME-related) will
                                                                    exclude those with any significantly potential
                                                                    impacts on natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No           This policy is not triggered, as the project will not
                                                                    finance activities that have a direct impact on the
                                                                    management of forests or forest-dependent
                                                                    communities. As part of the EMF, all
                                                                    environmental analysis conducted related to
                                                                    studies to support subsequent private investment
                                                                    activities will exclude those with significantly
                                                                    potential impacts of the investments on forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No           This policy is not triggered, as the EMF will
                                                                    include provisions regarding the procurement or
                                                                    use of pesticides. All EIAs conducted related to
                                                                    studies to support subsequent private investment
                                                                    activities, and the environmental considerations
                                                                    regarding loans to SMEs, will adhere to
                                                                    requirements in the EMF regarding the
                                                                    investments to purchase or use pesticides.


                                                            Page 8 of 11
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No             This policy is not triggered, as the project will not
                            BP 4.11                                           finance activities that have a direct impact on
                                                                              physical cultural resources. All environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              analysis conducted related to studies to support
                                                                              subsequent private investment activities will
                                                                              consider the potential impacts of the investments
                                                                              on physical cultural resources as appropriate,
                                                                              including chance finds procedures as described in
                                                                              the EMF.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No             This policy is not triggered, as there are no
                                                                              indigenous peoples as defined under OP 4.10 in
                                                                              Jamaica.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No             This policy is not triggered, as the project will not
                            4.12                                              finance activities that will directly cause
                                                                              involuntary resettlement or require land
                                                                              acquisition. All social analysis conducted related
                                                                              to studies to support subsequent private
                                                                              investment activities will consider the potential
                                                                              need for land acquisition associated with the
                                                                              investments, as well as the situation of land
                                                                              ownership and occupation.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No             This policy is not triggered, as the EMF will
                                                                              exclude any project related to large or high hazard
                                                                              dams.
                            Projects on International          No             This policy is not triggered, as the project will not
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                              finance activities that have a direct impact on
                                                                              international waterways. All analysis conducted
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              related to studies to support subsequent private
                                                                              investment activities will consider the potential
                                                                              impacts of theinvestments on international
                                                                              waterways as appropriate.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No               This policy is not triggered, as the project will not
                            7.60                                              finance any activities in disputed areas as defined
                                                                              under the policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Component 2 (the PPF) would fund ESIA studies for large projects, which would be scoped first
                              in the LHI Master Plan and Downtown Kingston Redevelopment Plan and subsequently prepared
                              in accordance with World Bank Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities and Equator
                              Principles; final permitting through in-country systems (facilitated but not funded by the Bank)
                              would also require EIAs for any major projects. Potential impacts from Component 3 (related to
                              SME lending) would be minor and manageable through DBJ screening, appraisal, and reporting as
                              well as use of in-country systems for local and national permitting.


                                                                      Page 9 of 11
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           There are no anticipated direct long-term impacts which could be attributed to the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Potential indirect impacts of the project would be addressed through scoping and ESIAs funded by
                           Component 2 (the PPF), including regional scale and cumulative impacts in accordance with
                           WBG standards. Any direct impacts of small projects by SMEs would be addressed through the
                           DBJ Environmental Policy and Management System.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           It is possible that alternatives exist to some of the major interventions being studied (e.g. the LHI).
                           Alternative analysis would be considered in the context of preliminary scoping (through Master
                           Plan preparation) and direct funding of any ESIAs for those activities.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           An EMF has been prepared which includes separate environmental management elements for
                           Component 2 (PPE-related) and Component 3 (SME-related) activities. For PPF-related activities
                           (Component 2), the PIOJ will ensure that adequate consideration of environmental aspects is
                           included in all TORs. This shall include, for example in feasibility studies, the adequate
                           consideration of environmental and social aspects (impacts, risks and benefits) as part of any
                           alternative analysis, public participation in the preparation of the study as relevant, and specific
                           conclusions and recommendations regarding environmental management for the project
                           development and implementation. The TOR for any ESIA or similar study shall require that such
                           study comply with (1) all applicable Jamaica environmental regulatory requirements and (2)
                           World Bank Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities and any applicable requirements
                           in Equator Principles. The PIOJ plans to have a qualified environmental specialist on retainer to
                           manage environmental aspects of the PPF including TOR development, ESIA review, and ex-post
                           contract management. For SME-related activities (Component 3), screening and management
Public Disclosure Copy




                           would use the DBJ Environmental Policy and Management System included in the EMF, which
                           was adapted from a previous DBJ project. DBJ plans to staff an environmental specialist to
                           support its SME portfolio.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The EMF for the project was disclosed for public consultation prior to appraisal, a consultation
                           was subsequently held with key stakeholders, and the final EMF will be disclosed via the World
                           Bank website. Additional disclosure and consultation regarding future Component 2 projects
                           would occur, as applicable, through ESIAs conducted following World Bank Performance
                           Standards for Private Sector Activities, as well as EIAs conducted by others for NEPA permitting.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                           10-Apr-2014
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                        27-Jun-2014
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                      Page 10 of 11
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Jamaica                                                           14-May-2014
                              Comments: The Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was disclosed in country by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                            PIOJ via website announcement, announcing that public comments are welcome. A
                                            follow-up consultation was held in country with stakeholders to receive comments
                                            on the EMF.
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Thomas A. Vis
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Subrahmanya Pulle Srinivas (SM)              Date: 27-Jun-2014



                                                                      Page 11 of 11
