                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC1138

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Dec-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Jan-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Egypt, Arab Republic of         Project ID:      P152961
                            Project Name:     Cairo Municipal Solid Waste Management Project (P152961)
                            Task Team         Ibrahim Khalil Dajani
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         11-Jan-2016                     Estimated        31-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSURR                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Solid waste management (80%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and
                                              flood protection (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Other urban development (50%), Pollution management and environmental
                                              health (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    150.00                   Total Bank Financing:        150.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      150.00
                              Total                                                                      150.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support the improvement of Municipal
                           Solid Waste Management in the targeted areas in Cairo Governorate.
                           C. Project Description
                           39.    The Project will support a combination of: (i) strategic infrastructure investments in MSWM
                         (i.e. collection, transport, intermediate processing, and sanitary disposal), (ii) institutional
                         strengthening and capacity building that should greatly enhance Cairo’s oversight of solid waste
                         issues in the years to come, as well as (iii) skills and technology development. The total cost of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project is estimated to be US$150 million to be financed through an IBRD loan to Cairo
                         Governorate. The loan would be guaranteed by the Ministry of Finance (MoF). The Project
                         components and their subcomponents are as follows:

                         Component 1: Upgrading of Solid Waste Management Facilities around Cairo Governorate. This
                         component will support improvements to solid waste management transfer and sanitary disposal
                         systems capacity and efficiency through financing of the following short-term and long-term
                         investments, including: (i) rehabilitation and sanitary closure, or, conversion of selected dumpsites
                         into strategically equipped waste transfer stations; (ii) planning, construction and operation of a new
                         sanitary landfill and supplying of solid waste management equipment (for collection and for the new
                         MSWM facilities); (iii) pavement of access roads to the new landfill and transfer stations; (iv)
                         composting facility upgrades and the targeting of organic waste from vegetable markets; and (v) and
                         the preparation of a feasibility study for an eco-park designed to facilitate higher rates of, and safer,
                         recyclable materials recovery and processing.

                         The proposed approach assumes that many of the current collection challenges are linked to the
                         inadequacy of current transfer station locations, which drive up costs by forcing haulers to spend
                         extra time traversing local traffic to tip loads rather than collecting waste. This approach also seeks
                         to consolidate waste processing and disposal services at larger facilities where quality control can be
                         closely monitored. With the proper facility design and use of modern sorting and turning equipment,
                         higher rates of organic waste recovery will occur, delivering significant material diversion and
                         environmental quality benefits. New waste collection vehicles will also be procured under this
                         project for use by the new collection contractors, a provision identical to the current contract.

                         Component 2: Capacity Building and Public Awareness: This component will support the
                         streamlining and enhancement of the institutional, monitoring, and financial management capacities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of the municipal solid waste management enabling and oversight agencies within the Egyptian
                         government and Cairo Governorate. To enable improvements in Cairo’s waste policy and delivery
                         infrastructure, the following technical assistance activities are envisaged: (i) comprehensive analysis
                         of current national and local institutional environment for solid waste management services; (ii)
                         public management systems reform, including review of existing system costs and tariff structure;
                         development of new tariff structuring guidelines; implementation of new tariff systems in Cairo
                         Governorate and development of a financial Management Information System to support enhanced
                         cost recovery levels; (iii) introduction of Management Information Systems (MIS) to support
                         rationalization of service delivery and provision of timely information to support real-time decision
                         making. This could include developing and implementing a Geographic Information System (GIS) -
                         based fleet monitoring and logging systems on a pilot basis; developing a pilot waste collection
                         management plan, development of performance-based tariff collection procedures; review of the
                         existing private sector service delivery contracts; (iv) technical and design studies and standards
                         development for landfill operation, transfer operations, composting and other processing facilities.

                         This component will also support (iv) the development and implementation of public awareness
                         activities and Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) to enhance citizen engagement, based on the
                         concept of co-responsibility among citizens, operators, and government entities. In particular,
                         community-based monitoring tools (scorecards, web or ICT based reporting mechanisms (such as the
                         use of text messaging and social media platforms such as Facebook) could be used as means to
                         assess and provide feedback on the quality of local solid waste management services in Cairo. A
                         functioning project GRM would ensure that clarifications about the project are responded to,
                         problems with implementation are resolved, and complaints and grievances are addressed efficiently
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and effectively.

                         Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E): This component will
                         finance arrangements required to support the successful management, monitoring, and evaluation of
                         all Project activities, including: (i) the establishment of a Project Technical Operations Unit (TOU) at
                         the Cairo Governorate that would rely primarily on key staff of the SWM departments; (ii)
                         consultants to support the core functions of the TOU and help build staff capacity through on the-job-
                         training related to coordination and facilitation, fiduciary (procurement and financial management),
                         environmental and social safeguards supervision, monitoring and evaluation (M&E)); (iii) Project-
                         related incremental operating costs for the TOU, and (iv) other independent consultancies, including
                         citizen satisfaction surveys, implementation of the Project Environmental and Social Impact
                         Assessment (ESIA), RAP/Abbreviated RAP, and Beneficiary Assessments.

                         40.     Expected Environmental and Social Safeguards issues:

                         •        Preliminary Stakeholder Consultations and Key Issues: meetings and preliminary
                         consultations with a range of governmental and non-governmental stakeholders, including
                         representatives of the informal sector from the Zaballeen community and related NGOs in Manshiyet
                         Nasr underscored the wealth of knowledge stakeholders have about solid waste management
                         challenges and opportunities in Cairo. A key area that was emphasized is the need to adequately
                         accommodate local communities’ expectations and optimize waste utilization. The lack of efficiency
                         of the current collection system is one key challenge resulting in a high level of dissatisfaction
                         among the local community. Similarly, a lack of clear regulation on waste transfer from street
                         containers is resulting in waste piles on the street posing health hazards, poor aesthetics and traffic
                         disruption across Cairo. Stakeholders also emphasized a need for building on the lessons learnt from
                         the previous experience, particularly in the area of engaging the informal sector groups of waste
Public Disclosure Copy




                         collectors.

                         •       At present, there are no institutionalized mechanisms for service recipients/residents to share
                         their concerns about local solid waste issues in Cairo. Discussions with various stakeholders
                         supported the view that strengthening channels of communication between citizens and the state
                         about service delivery was important. This includes the need for effective communication campaigns
                         dealing with subject matters related to household and community levels of waste management and
                         disposal; issues related to public littering; and awareness-raising on macro level environmental and
                         health consequences linked to effective solid waste management.

                         •        Environmental and Social Impact Assessment: Preparation of an environmental and social
                         impact assessment (ESIA) covered by the Bank’s Operational Policy 4.01 covering Environmental
                         Assessment is required for this project. The ESIA will analyze potential environmental and social
                         impacts under the project and will propose mitigation measures to manage adverse impacts that may
                         arise. It will also propose measures to augment positive environmental and social effects under the
                         project. A Social Impact Assessment (SIA) will also be prepared in order to ensure setting a
                         comprehensive approach for managing social issues related to the project. Through the SIA, a
                         dialogue will be established with the Government for designing sustainable approaches to address the
                         social aspects including an integrated manner for dealing with the Project Affected Persons (PAPs).
                         The SIA results will be integrated in the ESIA report. The need to ensure that a qualified and
                           reputable consulting firm is employed to prepare the ESIA and SIA was underscored to the
                           Government counterparts. The ESIA process will therefore include thorough consultations
                           (conducted in local languages) with all concerned stakeholders in the Cairo Governorate to elicit
Public Disclosure Copy




                           their views and inputs on the potential impacts of the project, and any proposed mitigation measures.
                           The ESIA will need to be disclosed locally and on the Bank InfoShop before Project Appraisal. In
                           the meantime, the Bank shared with H.E. Cairo Governor and his team sample consultant Terms of
                           Reference (ToR) for the ESIA and SIA.

                           •        Involuntary Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy: The World Bank’s Operational
                           Policy 4.12 covers potential adverse impacts related to land acquisition and the need to relocate
                           households and communities due to project effects. For the proposed SWM project, an early
                           assessment is that the potential groups that might be affected includes owners or users of land
                           (potentially including waste pickers) that are needed for the project on a temporary or permanent
                           basis during the course of constructing or expanding/rehabilitating landfills, transfer stations, and
                           setting access roads to any of these facilities. Under adverse social and economic impacts, the
                           livelihoods of waste pickers utilizing existing dumpsites (if any), which may be adversely affected by
                           the dumpsite closure financed by the project. In the meantime, according to Cairo Governorate and
                           CCBA, the land that has been identified for sanitary waste management facilities near Belbis is in a
                           publicly-owned area in the desert. The possibility of triggering OP 4.12 will be carefully examined
                           through the SIA and decisions on preparing RAP/ARAP will be confirmed. The scope of the RAP/
                           ARAP should cover direct social and economic impacts on owners or users for the land needed to
                           establish the disposal facilities and the associated access roads. In case the rehabilitation or closure of
                           existing disposal sites and/or transfer station results in preventing certain groups from obtaining their
                           livelihoods, RAP/ARAP should be also prepared for these groups.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will support activities in Cairo Governorate. The location of the proposed new municipal
                           solid waste management system/facilities is expected to be near Belbis, east of Cairo Governorate.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Cairo Governorate has not been exposed to the World Bank Safeguards Policies. In addition to the
                           introduction made by the task team to selected members of the Governorate, it is expected that the
                           Technical Operations Unit that will be established by the Governorate will be staffed with qualified
                           personal including specialists/consultants with good understanding and working experience with the
                           WB Safeguards Policies.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Africa Eshogba Olojoba (GENDR)
                           Amal Nabil Faltas Bastorous (GSURR)
                           Chaogang Wang (GSURR)
                           Esma Kreso (GENDR)
                           John R. Butler (GSURR)
                           Mohammad Farouk Ibrahim Kandeel (GTCDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment       Yes   This is a category A project due to its possible
                         OP/BP 4.01                           impacts on the environment due to its proximity to
                                                              urban population, Nile basin system and groundwater
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              aquifer. An Environmental and Social Impact
                                                              Assessment is currently being prepared by the Client
                                                              (independent consultant), and will adequately
                                                              identify all associated environmental and social
                                                              impacts and propose adequate mitigation measures
                                                              and monitoring parameters. The ESIA report will be
                                                              developed following guidelines for a World Bank
                                                              Category A project and will be disclosed in-county
                                                              and the Infoshop prior to Appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    TBD   The feasibility study prepared by the client will
                                                              identify whether any of the project facilities are
                                                              located near natural protectorates or areas of
                                                              biodiversity importance while the ESIA report will
                                                              provide adequate mitigation measures, in case
                                                              project activities are near such areas. The triggering
                                                              of this policy will be revised in the Appraisal stage
                                                              ISDS following findings of the ESIA.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No

                         Physical Cultural Resources    TBD   The feasibility study that will be prepared by the
                         OP/BP 4.11                           client will identify whether any of the project
                                                              facilities are located near areas of cultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              importance while the ESIA report will provide
                                                              adequate mitigation measures in line with Egyptian
                                                              measures on protection of cultural heritage, in case
                                                              project activities are near such areas. The triggering
                                                              of this policy will be revised in the Appraisal stage
                                                              ISDS following findings of the ESIA.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No
                         4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   TBD   Triggering this policy remains to be determined at
                         BP 4.12                              this stage for the following reasons: i) The land
                                                              needed for construction of landfills will be desert
                                                              land owned by the state. It is not clear if there are
                                                              any people to be affected by the land acquisition
                                                              before its location is finally determined; ii) The
                                                              rehabilitation of transfer stations and closure of
                                                              dumpsites may affect some people, such as the waste
                                                              pickers, but it is not clear how these people will be
                                                              affected; iii) it is not clear if the additional land plots
                                                              (1,000 – 4,000m2) that will be needed across Cairo
                                                                                                                        for the development of new transfer stations may
                                                                                                                        have potential impacts on livelihood. The SIA will
                                                                                                                        be carried by the client to assess the nature and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        significance of the social and economic impacts of
                                                                                                                        the project and will provide a justification for
                                                                                                                        triggering the policy. If policy is triggered, a
                                                                                                                        Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or an Abbreviated
                                                                                                                        Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) will need to be
                                                                                                                        prepared, approved and disclosed in-country and at
                                                                                                                        the Infoshop prior to appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No

                                 Projects on International      No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      Although the long-reaching negative impacts of a do-
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                nothing alternative may have implications on the
                                                                                                                        Nile basin system and groundwater aquifer, there
                                                                                                                        will be no activities that will directly impact the Nile
                                                                                                                        or any other international waterways.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 23-Nov-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The preparation of the ESIA (including a Social Impact Assessment) is expected to be launched in
                                      May 2015, Draft ESIA by November 2015 and Final ESIA by November 2015. If required, RAP/
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      ARAP will follow the same timeline.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ibrahim Khalil Dajani

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards                             Name: Nina Chee (RSA)                                                                             Date: 30-Dec-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/                               Name: Nina Bhatt (PMGR)                                                                           Date: 06-Jan-2015
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
