                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA7292
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Gambia, The                        Project ID:    P125024
                            Project Name:      Commercial Agriculture and Value Chain Management Project (P125024)
                            Task Team          Kadir Osman Gyasi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          21-Jan-2014                        Estimated   18-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTA1                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Crops (30%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (30%), Agricultural extension
                                              and research (20%), Irrigation and drainage (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Trade facilitation and market access (30%), Water resource management (30%),
                                              Other rural development (20%), Rural markets (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      16.00           Total Bank Financing:                   16.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                   16.00
                              Total                                                                                       16.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Development Objective for the Commercial Agriculture and Value Chain Management Project
                           (GCAV) is to improve productivity and access to market of targeted agricultural commodities for
                           smallholders in the Project Area.        To achieve this objective the project will support targeted
                           investments to remove critical constraints, improve productivity and build organizational and

                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                         institutional capacities, both private and public, along the value chains of the targeted commodities.
                         In particular, the project will: (i) rehabilitate irrigation infrastructure to enhance the resilience of
                         agricultural production systems to climate change-induced weather shocks in selected areas; (ii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         rehabilitate/build commercial post-harvest infrastructure to facilitate processing and marketing of
                         agricultural products (iii) support strengthening of the technical, institutional, managerial and
                         marketing capacities of smallholders and their organizations, as well as other stakeholders involved
                         in agricultural production and value chains, to more effectively operate in a market-driven
                         environment; and (iv) provide institutional-strengthening support to improve the governance of
                         Gambia National Agricultural Investment Plan. The selected value chains are rice and horticulture
                         (vegetables), for which accessible markets exist and productivity gains are achievable through
                         adoption of proven technologies.
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed project would support interventions designed to help the agriculture sector improve
                         productivity and build resilience against weather-related shocks, while improving market access to
                         provide incentives for farmers to produce more. It will seek to maximize the limited Grant resources
                         by: (i) focusing project support on limited number of commodity value chains that are both important
                         in terms of food security and nutrition, and have significant development potential to respond to
                         market opportunities, and in limited geographical areas with suitable agro-climatic conditions; (ii)
                         focusing project activities in each selected value-chain on resolving the binding constraints on
                         productivity, quality, and value-addition; (iii) ensuring a fair balance between required hardware as
                         well as software investments to adequately address identified constraints; (v) linking investments
                         supported under the project to the establishment of sustainable financing mechanisms with improved
                         governance of internally generated resources within the supply chains actors and their associations to
                         finance operation and maintenance and future capital investments; and (vi) coordinating with similar
                         projects supported by other development partners, in terms of design and implementation, to leverage
                         support in critical areas on the value chains and avoid duplication and enhance development
                         outcomes of interventions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project would have three inter-related components would include: (1) support to
                         development of irrigation and productive infrastructure; (2) support to value chain development; and
                         (iii) project administration and institution building to support overall sector coordination, to facilitate
                         the implementation of the country National Agricultural Investment Program (GNAIP).

                         Priority in project interventions will first be given to areas with the most favorable agro-climatic
                         conditions to selected commodities and demonstrated potential for production. Rice interventions
                         will cover the Central River Regions (CRR - North and South) of the country, while horticulture
                         value chains development activities will be in located in the West Coast region. Depending on the
                         final resources allocation, the Project coverage may be extended to other regions. Rice and
                         horticulture (vegetables) have been identified as priority crops, given their potential to achieve both
                         commercial and social development objectives as these crops are mostly cultivated by women and
                         can improve small farmers’ food/nutrition security and cash generation opportunities. The project
                         scope in terms of specific crops/vegetables to be covered could evolve depending on farmers’ needs
                         and market potential.


                         Component 1: Support for development of irrigation and key productive infrastructure

                         This component would support critical public and private infrastructure needs to enhance the


                                                                        Page 2 of 9
                         resilience and competitiveness of the agricultural sector. The objective of this component is to
                         support the rehabilitation and/or improvement, and management of tidal irrigation schemes and key
                         small-scale productive infrastructures to address key constraints in the agricultural production system
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in order to improve productivity, and to further develop and increase the efficiency of key value
                         chains through improved access to markets. The component, will seek to improve basic irrigation
                         infrastructure facilities and required management systems to strengthen the country’s resilience to
                         climatic shocks for enhanced production of rice and vegetables, upstream, as well as postharvest
                         management infrastructure downstream the value chains to improve quality and enhance
                         competitiveness of domestically produced rice, in particular. In Furtherance of this the project will
                         support and promote private sector investments (through various models of public-private
                         partnership) for improving value-adding infrastructure and support services to increase marketed
                         output and reduce postharvest losses. The objectives of this component will be pursued under the
                         following two subcomponents: (i) irrigation development; (ii) farm production improvement support;
                         (iii) promoting/leveraging private sector investments in agri-business; (iv) support access to key
                         productive assets; and (v) improving the agricultural investment climate.


                         Component 2: Support to value chain management

                         The objective of this component is to develop and strengthen the institutional capacity of farmer-
                         basedorganizations, the professional associations of private sector participants in the value chain; to
                         scale up best practices and support farmers’ and private sector participants’ sub-projects to address
                         key constraints and exploit the opportunities to improve the productivity, processing, and marketing
                         of selected commodities; and to strengthen marketing and agri-business development through
                         engagement with private sector stakeholders.

                         The project would facilitate the establishment, development and operation of private productive
                         partnerships among producer organizations; processing and marketing entrepreneurs, as well as
                         public and private sector agencies providing development support services to the target value chains
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (through public support provided on the basis of transparent procedures), improve private service
                         delivery supporting such partnerships In doing so the project would strengthen the technical,
                         institutional, managerial and marketing skills of some 60,000 smallholders and their organizations, as
                         well as of services providers and other stakeholders involved in agricultural production and value
                         chains, to more effectively operate in a market-driven environment. The component would take a
                         gender and vulnerable group sensitive approach to capacity building and provide support to
                         improved nutritional status among rural households in project affected districts. The support under
                         this component will be provided through the following two sub-components: (i) Strengthening the
                         capacity of the associations of value chain participants; (ii) Linking producers to markets; and (iii)
                         improving agricultural investment climate and service delivery.



                         CComponent 3: Project Administration and Institution Building

                         46.     The objective of this component is to develop and strengthen the overall implementation
                         capacity of the project coordination unit (PCU), while providing support to the MoA for the overall
                         coordination of the GNAIP. This component comprises the following four sub-components: (a)
                         Project management, (b) Impact monitoring and evaluation; (c) Project communication; and (d)



                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         Support to Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) for the implementation of the Gambia National
                         Agricultural Investment Plan (GNAIP).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture in coordination with ministries of
                         Regional Administration, lands and traditional authority, water resources, trade and industry. The
                         proposed interventions will be implemented primarily in Central and Upper River regions of the
                         Gambia. The project will also extend to other areas with justified economic potential for women
                         groups to engage in vegetable cultivations. The priority commodities proposed to be covered by the
                         project are rice and vegetable. The project scope in terms of specific crop vegetables to be covered
                         could evolve depending on farmers’ needs and market potential.

                         The project is expected to rehabilitate about 2000 ha of irrigable land and expected to reach 60,000
                         rice and vegetable farmers over the duration of the project. The irrigation investment to be financed
                         by the proposed project will focus on water use efficiency through rehabilitation of existing tidal
                         irrigation facilities, and training users on efficient water use and management systems.

                         The Project is triggering the following safeguards policies: OP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment, OP
                         4.09 - Pest Management, OP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement, and OP 7.50 - Projects on International
                         Waterways.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Demba Balde (AFTCS)
                         Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             This policy is triggered because the project is
                          BP 4.01                                             going to implement activities that will have some
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              negative environmental impacts, however these
                                                                              impacts are expected to be site-specific and
                                                                              relatively minor. The irrigation activities,
                                                                              infrastructure development for agro-processing
                                                                              facilities and other civil works, as well as the
                                                                              agriculture activities and the use of land could
                                                                              have some environmental considerations. The
                                                                              borrower has prepared an Environmental and
                                                                              Social Management Framework (ESMF) since the
                                                                              specific sites are not going to be identified prior
                                                                              to project preparation.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             Yes             The Pest Management policy is triggered because
                                                                              of the potential use of fertilizer. The Government




                                                                      Page 4 of 9
                                                                         has prepared the pest management plan, which
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            was publicly disclosed in January 2014.
                         BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The project may require additional land for the
                         4.12                                            irrigation rehabilitation activities, and the other
                                                                         civil works outlined in the project appraisal
                                                                         document. The development of infrastructure and
                                                                         agro-processing facilities by the private sector, as
                                                                         well as the development of tidal irrigation system
                                                                         may all require land acquisition or expansion of
                                                                         existing facilities that could have impact on
                                                                         assets, access and livelihoods. Since the project
                                                                         intends to select these sites and the private sector
                                                                         will be coming on board after project approval, it
                                                                         is likely that specific locations for these civil
                                                                         works may not be known and therefore the
                                                                         borrower has prepared a resettlement policy
                                                                         framework to outline the mechanism for
                                                                         addressing involuntary resettlement related
                                                                         impacts from project activities. The RPF was
                                                                         publicly disclosed in the Bank InfoShop on
                                                                         January 27, 2014.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International         Yes           Project activities will involve investments to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            maintain tidal irrigation infrastructure along the
                                                                         Banks of the River Gambia. The River Gambia,
                                                                         from which the water would be drawn for
                                                                         irrigation, takes its source from the Futa Jallon
                                                                         highlands in the Republic of Guinea, and travels
                                                                         through The Gambia into the Atlantic Ocean. It is
                                                                         thus an international waterway for purposes of OP
                                                                         7.50. However, interventions were found to fall
                                                                         within notification exception provided for in
                                                                         paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50. According to that
                                                                         subparagraph, an exception to the riparian
                                                                         notification requirement may be provided when
                                                                         the proposed activities are: (a) for any ongoing
                                                                         schemes, involving additions or alterations that
                                                                         require rehabilitation, construction, or other
                                                                         changes that in the judgment of the Bank (i) will
                                                                         not adversely change the quality or quantity of
                                                                         water flows to the other riparians; and (ii) will not
                                                                         be adversely affected by the other riparians’



                                                                 Page 5 of 9
                                                                                 possible water use. The subparagraph explains
                                                                                 further that this exception applies only to minor
                                                                                 additions or alterations to the ongoing scheme;
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 and that it does not cover works and activities that
                                                                                 would exceed the original scheme, change its
                                                                                 nature, or so alter or expand its scope and extent
                                                                                 as to make it appear a new or different scheme.
                                                                                 An exception to the riparian notification
                                                                                 requirement was provided by the RVP on
                                                                                 February 11, 2014.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              It is likely that in the establishment of processing facilities small pieces of land may be required
                              and this could have the potential of crop losses and therefore some livelihoods. But these are
                              expected to be site specific and manageable.
                              Similarly, it is not expected to induce significant adverse environmental and social impacts, and it
                              was rated as a category B. Some of the planned activities such as rehabilitation of tidal irrigation
                              schemes, construction of processing facilities, and productive sub-projects may, however, have
                              localized, remediable environmental impacts.

                              Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), Environmental and Social Management Framework
                              (ESMF) and Pest Management Plan (PMP) instruments have been been prepared to avoid,
Public Disclosure Copy




                              minimize or mitigate potential impacts.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Some potential long term impacts that could result from irrigation expansion include: (a) land and
                              soil erosion; (b) soil, water and air pollution from agro-processing; (c) bio-diversity loss through
                              conversion of natural habitat to farm land; (d) spread of waterborne disease; (e) spread of HIV/
                              AIDS; (f) possible depletion of the groundwater resources, and, therefore, the need for continuous
                              monitoring of the recharge characteristics of aquifers; and (g) possible adverse effects on socially-
                              disadvantaged groups, such as women. However, such impacts are expected to be minimized with
                              diligent implementation of the project safeguards instruments, including continuous public
                              consultations, preparation of ESIAs/ESMPs and, when needed, RAPs.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              The project alternatives were reviewed, and it was concluded that the following characteristics of
                              the subprojects will be beneficial for minimizing adverse impacts:
                              (i) Focusing project support on the rehabilitation of of existing tidal irrigation schemes, and build
                              local capacity in irrigation management to efficiently utilize the systems sustainably, and to limit
                              the conversion of potential natural habitats to farms; (ii) promote social inclusiveness, targeting
                              project support on women and youth. It expected women would constitute at least 60 percent of


                                                                         Page 6 of 9
                           the project's direct beneficiaries; and (iiii) promote health and nutrition education. The project
                           alternatives will also be reviewed in detail during preparation of site-specific ESIAs.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Borrower has prepared environmental and social management framework (ESMF), which
                           will become an integral part of the PIM. This ESMF will be used to screen activities and
                           subprojects to identify those that will need to undergo full or partial environmental and social
                           impact assessment. The ESMF includes procedures for resolving possible conflicts arising from
                           competition to access the scarce water and land resources in the project zone and for
                           systematically reviewing issues related to the safeguard policies of the Government and the Bank.

                           The Borrower has also produced an RPF and a PMP a, drafts of which have also been prepared by
                           the Borrower. Drafts of the ESMF, RPF, and PMP were discussed in a public forum with
                           stakeholders and the general public for inputs before finalization. The ESMF, RPF and PMP were
                           disclosed in country on January 28, 2014 and in the Bank Infoshop on January 27, 2014.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders include: Producer organizations (including women and youth group); Civil
                           Society Organization; National Environment Agency (NEA); Ministry of Environment and
                           Forestry; Ministry of Fisheries and Water Resources; Department of Water Resources; Ministry of
                           Lands and regional Government. Consultations and public fora are have been initiated to create
                           stakeholder awareness of the potential social and environmental impact of the proposed
                           intervention. Stakeholders' vies were solicited for the finalization of the initial draft that have
                           submitted to the NEA and the Bank for review.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        05-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     27-Jan-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Gambia, The                                                        28-Jan-2014
                           Comments: Disclosed at following location: National Environment Agency (NEA) Library,
                                         Banjul; National Library, Banjul; University of The Gamb Library (Banjul); Ministry
                                         of Agriculture, Quadrandle, (Banjul); Office of the Governor of the Central River
                                         Region
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        05-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     27-Jan-2014




                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Gambia, The                                                        28-Jan-2014
                           Comments: Disclosed at following location: National Environment Agency (NEA) Library,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         Banjul; National Library, Banjul; University of The Gamb Library (Banjul); Ministry
                                         of Agriculture, Quadrandle, (Banjul); Office of the Governor of the Central River
                                         Region;
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     No
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        05-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     27-Jan-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Gambia, The                                                        28-Jan-2014
                           Comments: Disclosed at following location: National Environment Agency (NEA) Library,
                                         Banjul; National Library, Banjul; University of The Gamb Library (Banjul); Ministry
                                         of Agriculture, Quadrandle, (Banjul); Office of the Governor of the Central River
                                         Region;
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways


                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader: Name: Kadir Osman Gyasi
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                     Date: 24-Feb-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Martien Van Nieuwkoop (SM)                      Date: 24-Feb-2014




                                                                       Page 9 of 9
