                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSR9030
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Colombia                                     Project ID:           P101279
                            Project Name:       Solid Waste Management Program Project (P101279)
                            Task Team           John Morton
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           12-Dec-2008                                  Estimated   04-Aug-2009
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GSURR                                        Lending     Sector Investment and
                                                                                             Instrument: Maintenance Loan
                            Sector:           Solid waste management (100%)
                            Theme:            City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                           No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:         31.50                Total Bank Financing:                                  20.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                              11.50
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                 20.00
                              Total                                                                                                 31.50
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The proposed Project development objective is to improve public health and the quality of basic solid
                           waste management services in Colombia. Specifically, the P                                  roject
                           aims to: (i) reduce exposure to pollutants and disease vectors associated
                           with solid waste by financing the closing of open-air dumps; (ii) promote comme


                                                                                  Page 1 of 9
                         rcial and operational modernization in the sector through the development of reg
                         ional landfills and the associated optimization of collection, transport and tra
                         nsfer services within regional SWM systems; (iii) reinforce incentives for the c
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ontinued transition to the ?specialized operator? model for SWM in the country:
                         (iv) strengthen the regulatory framework in the sector and build capacity amongs
                         t national, regional and local actors in its appropriate application; (v) deepen
                         efforts to encourage waste minimization, recycling and source separation in the
                         context of commercially viable regional operations; and (vi) reduce poverty an
                         d vulnerability amongst waste pickers through the development of appropriate soc ial inclusion and
                         economic transition programs.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The proposed Project development objective is to improve public health and the quality of basic solid
                         waste management services in Colombia. Specifically, the P                                  roject
                         aims to: (i) reduce exposure to pollutants and disease vectors associated
                         with solid waste by financing the closing of open-air dumps; (ii) promote comme
                         rcial and operational modernization in the sector through the development of reg
                         ional landfills and the associated optimization of collection, transport and tra
                         nsfer services within regional SWM systems; (iii) reinforce incentives for the c
                         ontinued transition to the ?specialized operator? model for SWM in the country:
                         (iv) strengthen the regulatory framework in the sector and build capacity amongs
                         t national, regional and local actors in its appropriate application; (v) deepen
                         efforts to encourage waste minimization, recycling and source separation in the
                         context of commercially viable regional operations; and (vi) reduce poverty an
                         d vulnerability amongst waste pickers through the development of appropriate soc ial inclusion and
                         economic transition programs.
                         3. Project Description
                         The project was restructured to expand the types of investments and allocate loan funds for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         institutional strengthening and project management to help the project reach its intended project
                         development objective and help confront the challenges faced by the solid waste sector. More
                         specifically under Component 1, eligible investments were expanded to include complementary
                         investments in collection and treatment technologies and to cover investments in smaller landfills;
                         Component 2 and 3 are now funded through loan resources and include activities related to skill
                         development for human resources, technical and entrepreneurial strengthening for landfill operators
                         and undertaking of studies on a national level (Component 2); and project management (Component
                         3).

                         The revised project description is as follows:

                         Component 1: Development of and Investments in Solid Waste Disposal Systems: (i) Carrying out
                         and supervising investments in solid waste management infrastructure consisting of civil works,
                         equipment and services in support of the rehabilitation, construction, and/or expansion of landfills,
                         waste treatment systems (including associated waste collection, transfer and transport systems and
                         biogas management systems) in selected sites, and the closing of non-sanitary open-air landfills. (ii)
                         Provision and supervision of technical advisory services for the development of solid waste
                         management Investments, including with respect to their regionalization, engineering designs,
                         environmental impact assessments, social assessments and other related studies and (iii)
                         Development and implementation of social inclusion, skills building and entrepreneurial programs


                                                                          Page 2 of 9
                         for waste pickers to mitigate potential adverse impact on their livelihoods as may be caused by the
                         closing of open-air dumps and, in connection therewith, the provision of financing for the carrying
                         out of the resettlement and compensation processes in respect of any potential loss of property or
Public Disclosure Copy




                         income arising out of solid waste management investment.

                         Component 2: Institutional and Technical Strengthening in Solid Waste Management: (i) Provision
                         of advisory services to strengthen the technical, operational and commercial capacity of solid waste
                         management operators; (ii) Carrying out studies to strengthen the management of solid waste at the
                         national level.

                         Component 3: Project Management: Supporting MVCT’s technical, environmental,
                         communication, administrative, and fiduciary capacity in managing the administrative and financial
                         aspects of the Project, through the financing of goods, consultants’ services, Training and Operating
                         Costs, including the financing of Project audits, evaluations and other related Project management
                         activities.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project is a framework operation under which specific investments are identified during
                         implementation. Eligible projects have been identified in the Departments of Caldas, Meta,
                         Santander, Narino, Risaralda, Guaviare and Putumayo with the possibility of further projects being
                         identified in the future. The Project has defined framework technical, financial, economic, social and
                         environmental guidelines applied to the identification of eligible projects, including their location.
                         Some of the project sites may have nearby closed areas of the landfill or areas that are currently in
                         operation. The project design considers the impacts of these areas looking at the site in a
                         comprehensive manner and developing associated environmental measures. Some sites have
                         informal waste pickers operating for which social inclusion plans are needed.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Carlos Vargas Bejarano (GENDR)
                         Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto (GURDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              This policy is applied considering the impacts
                          BP 4.01                                             generated during the execution of the
                                                                              construction works and the closure of open
                                                                              dumpsites as well as as part of operation. The
                                                                              principal environmental impacts relate to i)
                                                                              sanitary and nuisance impacts related to the solid
                                                                              waste facilities; ii) potential impacts on soil and
                                                                              wáter quality near the site; iii) emisions of gases
                                                                              and odors; and iv) altered landscape. The project
                                                                              is considered a Category A project due to the
                                                                              impacts related to landfill investments. The
                                                                              environmental assessment procedures are
                                                                              outlined in the Environmental and Social
                                                                              Assessment Framework and comply with World
                                                                              Bank and Colombia policy.



                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           This policy is triggered as a precaution, in the
                                                                         event that a landfill should be located near
                                                                         important natural habitats. Decree 838 ibn
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Colombian law prevents direct location or impact
                                                                         conditions at important natural habitats. However,
                                                                         in the unlikely event an ecosystem or natural
                                                                         habitat should be indirectly affected , the policy
                                                                         requires preparation, appraisal and supervision of
                                                                         subproject investments that take into account the
                                                                         views of the groups involved, including non-
                                                                         governmental organizations and local
                                                                         communities that are affected by projects
                                                                         financed by the Bank that are related to natural
                                                                         habitats, as stated in Policy 4.04. This
                                                                         participation could generate measures of
                                                                         conservation and management of protected areas
                                                                         and other natural habitats as well as monitoring
                                                                         and evaluation of specific projects.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            The project will not have any impact on forested
                                                                         areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            No utilization, promotion or acquisition of
                                                                         pesticides is foreseen during road construction
                                                                         under the project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           This policy is trigger as a precaution in the event
                         BP 4.11                                         of finding and / or affecting cultural resources
                                                                         related to subprojects that incorporate transfer
                                                                         stations. The Colombian regulations set
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         restrictions and prohibitions to locate and build
                                                                         landfills in areas of cultural heritage.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            The project does not affect communities of
                                                                         indigenous peoples as characterized in OP 4.10.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           During implementation of the project no cases of
                         4.12                                            population resettlement have been identified,
                                                                         however, a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                         (RPF) was prepared as part of the Environmental
                                                                         and Social Management Framework in the event
                                                                         it may be encountered. Informal recyclers may be
                                                                         affected by the project works. t has been agreed
                                                                         with the MVDT will need to develop a Social
                                                                         inclusion Plan that would be implemented with
                                                                         the local authorities and according to the content
                                                                         and scope to be agreed with World Bank
                                                                         specialists. These Social Inclusion Plans are
                                                                         included in projects that identify the presence of
                                                                         informal recyclers directly related to sanitary
                                                                         landfills as part of the preparation.



                                                                 Page 4 of 9
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No               The project does not support the construction or
                                                                                  rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
                                                                                  investments which rely on the services of existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  dams.
                            Projects on International        No                   The project does not take place or impact any
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                  international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   The project does not take place in any disputed
                            7.60                                                  areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               In general the project aims to prevent, reduce, control and mitigate environmental impacts related
                              to inadequate solid waste disposal practices on the ground and will support the municipalities and
                              operators to improve the environmental conditions of operation of existing landfills and contribute
                              resources to mitigate environmental liabilities of the operation.

                             Environmental Assessment Policy (OP-4.01): This policy is applied considering the impacts
                             generated during the execution of the construction works and the closure of open dumpsites as
                             well as as part of operation. The principal environmental impacts relate to i) sanitary and nuisance
                             impacts related to the solid waste facilities; ii) potential risks to soil and wáter quality near the site;
                             iii) emissions of gases and odors; and iv) altered landscape.

                             Natural Habitats Policy (OP-4.04) This policy is triggered as a precaution, in the event that a
                             landfill should be located near important natural habitats. Decree 838 in Colombian law prevents
Public Disclosure Copy




                             direct location or impact conditions at important natural habitats. However, in the unlikely event
                             an ecosystem or natural habitat should be indirectly affected , the policy requires preparation,
                             appraisal and supervision of subproject investments that take into account the views of the groups
                             involved, including non-governmental organizations and local communities that are affected by
                             projects financed by the Bank that are related to natural habitats, as stated in Policy 4.04. This
                             participation could result in measures of conservation and management of protected areas and
                             other natural habitats as well as monitoring and evaluation of specific projects

                             Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP-4.12): During implementation of the project no cases of
                             population resettlement have been identified, however, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                             was prepared as part of the Environmental and Social Management Framework in the event it may
                             be encountered. Subprojects have involved works on or adjacent to operating landfill areas that do
                             not require new land acquisition. Social Inclusion Plans are included in projects that identify the
                             presence of informal recyclers directly related to sanitary landfills as part of the preparation. A few
                             subprojects (4) have informal recyclers active on site or nearby and require social inclusion plans.
                             Lessons from implementation have indicated that social inclusion plans are the responsibility of
                             the municipalities in coordination with landfill operators. For this reason, Social inclusion Plans
                             would be implemented with the local authorities and according to the content and scope outlined
                             in the ESMF.




                                                                          Page 5 of 9
                           Physical and Cultural Resources Policy (OP-4.11), This policy is trigger as a precaution in the
                           event of finding and / or affecting cultural resources related to subprojects that incorporate transfer
                           stations. The Colombian regulations set restrictions and prohibitions to locate and build landfills in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           areas of cultural heritage.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             In the medium and long term, the project will benefit mainly in terms of (i) Public Health, (ii)
                           Well-being and quality of life of the inhabitants of municipalities (iii) protection of bodies of water
                           and soil and (iv) ambient air quality. Additionally, the rehabilitation and improvement works of
                           operational sanitary landfills will enable operators to correct and remedy weaknesses that have
                           negative environmental impacts, such as lack of intermediate and final cover, leachate treatment,
                           environmental monitoring, lack of machinery; and manage closed cells. The project also foresees
                           training of sanitary landfill operators to support them in carrying out requirements stated in
                           operating manuals and environmental management plans required by the Environmental Permits.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             In terms of locations for new sanitary landfills, the Colombian Environmental Legal Framework
                           sets out the conditions that must be met for evaluation of alternatives in the selection of landfill
                           sites (Decree 838 of 2015). Additionally, there are aeronautical restrictions for location and
                           operation (Civil Aeronautics Resolution No 3152 2004). All landfill projects financed with
                           resources from the World Bank must comply with these standards.

                           Once the site of the new landfills is selected the detailed designs should incorporate environmental
                           site conditions, hydrological conditions, and slope stability considerations , site hydrology, among
                           others. Finally the EIA establishes an Environmental Management Plan including documents
                           which are to be approved by ways of the Environmental License.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Environmental and Social Management Framework: An environmental and social management
                           framework (ESMF) was been developed at appraisal in compliance with Colombian law and
                           World Bank safeguards policies and adjusted as part of the restructuring to reflect project lessons.
                           It outlines the process of project screening, planning, environmental and social assessment
                           procedures and development of environmental and social plans, their implementation and
                           supervision. The project has implemented this framework with subprojects that have been
                           prepared screened and accordingly applied the environmental assessment policy for all subprojects
                           and the preparation of social inclusion strategies was undertaken for several subprojects due to the
                           presence of informal recyclers. The framework was revised as part of restructuring to include
                           lessons learned from implementation and restructuring, in particular: (i) Subproject viability
                           criteria to be met by solid waste management subprojects; (ii) specifying that upgrading,
                           improvement and expansion of landfills include diagnostics and solutions for the previously used
                           landfill areas as some projects that the MVDT included within the Program with the World Bank
                           have previously operated cells with environmental weaknesses in the operation, for example lack
                           of intermediate and final landfill cover; this in some situations has represented environmental
                           risks, triggers of spontaneous and/or induced fires (in a adjacent landfill cell to the works in the
                           Guaratara site, for example); and (iii) the social inclusion plan content was optimized based on the
                           actual conditions found in the project sites.



                                                                       Page 6 of 9
                           Institutional Strengthening for Local Authorities: The restructured project includes a component to
                           provide institutional strengthening for operation of the facilities including environmental and
                           social safeguards management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Strengthening of the Project Implementation Unit (UEP-MVCT). The Project Implementation Unit
                           is linked to the Department of Programs at the Vice Ministry of Water and Sanitation. The
                           Implementation Unit, is supported by the Planning Advisory Office and the General Secretary of
                           the Ministry. The Technical Team consists of a coordinator and engineers responsible for
                           environmental monitoring that are included in the program with the World Bank. The
                           restructuring includes funding from the loan to support this team including their safeguards
                           professionals.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders are the provincial and local governments and the communities around the
                           project works including any informal recycling communities. The ESMF includes procedures for
                           consultation of local stakeholders including project affected populations. MVCT has undertaken
                           socialization of the ESMF with the responsible provincial and local authorities. At appraisal an
                           advance draft of the ESMF was disclosed in country and on the Bank InfoShop on December 8,
                           2007. The task team has also submitted a summary of the ESMF in English to the regional
                           safeguards team for clearance on July 24, 2008, prior to circulation to the Board. The ESMF that
                           has been updated as part of the restructuring was also disclosed on August 15, 2014 The
                           implementation of ESMF including its adjustments as part of the restructuring will be consulted
                           with the relevant stakeholders (provincial and local governments, nearby communities and
                           informal recyclers) as part of the subproject implementation process and for new projects before
                           works begin.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                  12-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                               15-Aug-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  28-Jul-2008
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Colombia                                                     15-Aug-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                  12-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                               15-Aug-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Colombia                                                     15-Aug-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the



                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or  EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?



                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: John Morton
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                     Date: 18-Aug-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Practice Manager/   Name:                                              Date:
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
