                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSR1044
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Jan-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Jan-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                                        Project ID:           P118647
                            Project Name:       China: Anhui Shaying River Channel Improvement Project (P118647)
                            Task Team           Reda Hamedoun
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           24-Aug-2010                                  Estimated   12-Apr-2011
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GTIDR                                        Lending     Sector Investment and
                                                                                             Instrument: Maintenance Loan
                            Sector:             Ports, waterways and shipping (99%), Public administration- Water, sanitation
                                                and flood protection (1%)
                            Theme:              Other rural development (30%), Infrastructure services for private sector
                                                development (30%), Water resource management (30%), Climat e change (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       291.14           Total Bank Financing:                                       100.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                             191.14
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                100.00
                              Total                                                                                                291.14
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The development objectives of the proposed project would be: (a) to increase the carrying capacity;
                           (b) to improve the efficiency; and (c) to reduce the adverse


                                                                                 Page 1 of 13
                         environmental impact of the IWT infrastructure that serves the industries of th
                         e Shaying River Basin.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The immediate transport benefits of the Project will be to overcome capacity bottlenecks in the IWT
                         system and reduce the average costs of transport in the corr                                idor.
                         These benefits will, in the medium and long-term, also boost the regional
                         economic development of the affected hinterlands in Anhui and Henan, mainly thro
                         ugh facilitating the exploitation and economical transport of coal and other bul
                         k goods to industrial areas of demand in the Yangtze Delta.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The development objectives of the proposed project would be: (a) to increase the carrying capacity;
                         (b) to improve the efficiency; and (c) to reduce the adverse
                         environmental impact of the IWT infrastructure that serves the industries of th
                         e Shaying River Basin.

                          The immediate transport benefits of the Project will be to overcome capacity bottlenecks in the IWT
                         system and reduce the average costs of transport in the corr                                idor.
                         These benefits will, in the medium and long-term, also boost the regional
                         economic development of the affected hinterlands in Anhui and Henan, mainly thro
                         ugh facilitating the exploitation and economical transport of coal and other bul
                         k goods to industrial areas of demand in the Yangtze Delta.
                         3. Project Description
                         Project Description. The Project will re-open and upgrade the 205.6 km long Shaying River channel
                         between Changshenggou on the Henan-Anhui border and Mohekou at the confluence of the Shaying
                         River with the Huai River. The improvement works will raise the standard of the channel and
                         associated infrastructure to national standard Class IV, which will permit year-round navigation of
                         laden or unladen powered vessels of 500 dwt. The Project consists of the following four main
Public Disclosure Copy




                         components:

                         Component 1 – Navigation Infrastructure and Facilities. This component includes river
                         channelization and dredging works, river bank strengthening and protection works, and provision of
                         navigation aids and service facilities.

                         Component 2 – Reconstruction and Relocation of Existing Infrastructure and Facilities. This
                         component includes reconstruction and reinforcement of existing cross-river bridges that have
                         insufficient clearance and relocation of other existing cross-river facilities that impede navigation.

                         Component 3 – Erection of Waterway Transport Management Systems. This component includes
                         provision and installation of the plants and equipment which are needed for building the management
                         systems to be developed by the two technical studies under Component D.

                         Component 4 – Technical Assistance. This component includes technical studies and training
                         programs that are designed to build the institutional capacity of the IWT sector to enable sustainable
                         IWT development in Anhui Province. The two technical studies are: (a) Shaying River Waterway
                         Transport Management and Emergency Service System; and (b) Comprehensive Ship Lock
                         Management System.



                                                                       Page 2 of 13
                         Misprocurement. In a letter dated June 4, 2014, the Bank declared misprocurement in the cases of
                         two contracts (HD-01: waterway improvement works on 40km, and QL-01: bridge modification
                         works). In parallel, the Bank also concluded that the violation may have resulted from a genuine
Public Disclosure Copy




                         misunderstanding and misinterpretation of the conflict of interest clause in the bidding documents
                         and, therefore, the Bank consented to not cancel the Loan funds allocated to the contracts under the
                         Loan Agreement.

                         Addition of two ship locks under the proposed restructuring. The Ministry of Finance of China
                         (MOF) requested, in a letter dated April 21, 2014, to use unallocated funds (from the misprocured
                         contracts as well as savings from lower bidding price) to finance part of the cost of two new ship
                         locks in Yingshang and Yangqiao. Civil works of the two new ship locks will be added to
                         Component 2. The proposed locks will relieve capacity constraints on existing infrastructure and
                         therefore advance the project in achieving its PDO: “to contribute to the increased cargo throughput
                         of the Shaying River in Anhui Province through infrastructure improvements and capacity building”.

                         •       Second Yingshang lock: traffic through the existing Yingshang lock has reached 7 million
                         tons/year, which is challenging its nominal design capacity of 6 million tons/year. The sharp traffic
                         growth has created an emerging bottleneck at Yingshang lock, which is the key lock for IWT access
                         to Fuyang City. It is therefore proposed to build a second lock, adjacent to the existing one, with a
                         capacity of 12 million tons/year.

                         •        Yangqiao lock: the increase of IWT traffic has created the opportunity to extend the effective
                         Shaying waterway network to Linquan County. The existing Yangqiao lock’s capacity is too low to
                         accommodate this increase. On the banks of the Quan River, road trucks that carry various materials
                         load and discharge directly into barges moored up in ranks immediately downstream of Yangqiao
                         lock as they are unable to proceed further upriver. It is therefore proposed to upgrade and expand the
                         existing ship lock.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The Shaying River, a major tributary of the Huai River in central China, originates from Henan
                         Province and converges with the Huai River in Anhui Province. The total length of the Shaying
                         River is 620 km, of which 206 km flows through Anhui Province. The proposed Project aims to
                         improve 205.6 km long river channel within Fuyang City, Anhui Province. The project area is mainly
                         flat alluvial plain, with intensive farmland cultivation.

                         There is an existing Yingshang ship lock on Shaying River in Yingshang County of Fuyang City.
                         The proposed second Yingshang ship lock, as part of the project restructuring, will be located in
                         parallel to the existing Yingshang ship lock.

                         The Quan River (also called Fenquan River) is a tributary of Shaying River. It originates from Henan
                         Province and converges with the Shaying River in Sanliwan of Fuyang City. The total length of
                         Quan River is about 241km, of which 82km flows through Anhui Province. The Quan River has
                         undergone dredging and channeling for flood prevention purpose since 1950’s. As a result, it
                         currently has a width of 25-30m, with a regular depth of 3.5-4m that allows navigation of 500-1000
                         dwt ships. However, the existing Yangqiao ship lock, located in Linquan County of Fuyang City,
                         was built in 1980’s and allows navigation of 100 dwt ships only. Expanding the capacity of
                         Yangqiao ship lock will make the ship lock match the existing navigation capacity of Quan River.



                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                           Construction at Yangqiao lock will affect local people’s livelihoods, as 10 people from 4 households
                           will be resettled and 0.6 mu of land will be taken. A simplified Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has
                           been prepared and locally disclosed on August 28, 2014. Construction at the second Yingshang lock
Public Disclosure Copy




                           will require three pieces of land for temporary use as spoil disposal sites. The land will be restored to
                           arable land and handed over to the local communities after use. Compensation will be provided
                           during project use based on local land productivity. One state-owned enterprise, Yingshang Ship
                           Lock Management Company, will be resettled and move to another place where they own the land.
                           The cost of resettlement will be accounted within its mother company. A RAP has been prepared and
                           will be disclosed locally before the end of December 2014, and the English version of the RAP will
                           be disclosed at InfoShop.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Aimin Hao (GSURR)
                           Ning Yang (GENDR)

                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               Yes
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                            Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    Yes
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Environmental:

                             The project restructuring proposes to add two ship locks: (i) the second Yingshang ship lock on
                             Shaying River; and (ii) the Yangqiao ship lock on Quan River, a tributary of the Shaying River.
                             EIAs were conducted for the two ship locks. The project EA category and triggered safeguards
                             policies remain unchanged. Main environmental issues are summarized below.


                                                                         Page 4 of 13
                         The second Yingshang ship lock will be adjacent to the existing Yingshang ship lock on the
                         Shaying River. Building the second ship lock has become a necessity given the fast increase of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         freight transport along the river in the past three years. The Yangqiao ship lock is located on the
                         Quan River, a tributary of the Shaying River. The Quan River now allows for the navigation of
                         500-1000 dwt ships at regular water depth as the result of flooding prevention efforts made during
                         1998-2005. However the existing Yangqiao ship lock was built in the 1980s and can only
                         accommodate 100 dwt ships. Currently, bigger size vessels have to load and unload goods at the
                         Yangqiao Operations Area near the ship lock. Goods are then shipped by trucks.

                         Expanding the two ship locks will not result in any significant changes to depths or flow volume
                         of the rivers during construction and operation. Therefore potential impacts on river ecology are
                         considered to be very limited.

                         The remaining key environmental issues associated with the two new ship locks include:

                         •        Soil erosion, water pollution and vegetation loss as a result of building or widening of
                         channels under the ship locks;
                         •        Disposal of soils, spoils, and debris from channel cutting and dismantling of existing
                         structures;
                         •        Social disturbance such as noise, dust and traffic blocking;
                         •        Waste management, safety issues during construction and operation. These environmental
                         issues have been adequately addressed in the EIAs, and mitigation measures included in the EMPs
                         to avoid or minimize the potential environmental impacts. By applying readily available
                         construction technology and proper construction scheduling, potential impacts on water quality,
                         loss of soils and vegetation, disturbance to local road traffic can be minimized. Post-construction
                         re-vegetation and protection works will be carried out. Disposal sites for spoils have been
                         identified and included in the EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project EMP implementation performance has been satisfactory. Regular field investigation
                         and environmental monitoring show construction impacts have been well managed. Specifically,
                         monitoring results of water quality, sediment quality, and soil quality show that dredging, river
                         bank cutting, and disposal of silts activities have not resulted in significant impacts to water
                         quality of the river and soil quality in the vicinity of the disposal sites.

                         Field investigation shows that construction practices have followed EMP requirements to
                         minimize impacts on the natural environment and local communities. The monitoring, supervision,
                         and awareness raising programs have been implemented following EMP requirements by the
                         project owner, supervision engineers and contractors.
                         The Project originally included channelization, dredging, river bank works along Shaying River
                         and removal and reconstruction of several bridges on the river. The project was categorized as
                         Category A. OP4.01 and OP4.04 were triggered because the Project will have the potential to
                         cause direct, indirect or cumulative impacts to the social and natural environment. The project was
                         prepared during 2009-2010 and has been under implementation for 42 months.

                         Potential adverse impacts are primarily related to:

                         •       River ecology, water quality, and soil quality issues associated with Shaying River
                         channelization, dredging, and river bank works (Component 1);

                                                                   Page 5 of 13
                         •        Soil erosion, construction waste management, social disturbance associated with
                         dismantling and construction/reconstruction of several bridges on Shaying River, the two ship
                         locks, etc. (Component 2);
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Other impacts during construction and operation.

                         The project area has been subject to intensive human activities for a long time. Ecological surveys
                         along the Shaying River, Quan River and other relevant rivers were conducted through desk
                         review, field investigation and consultation with local authorities, institutes and communities.
                         They show that artificial ecosystems such as farmland, artificial woodland and urban area is
                         prevalent throughout the project area. No nature reserves, forest parks nor scenic areas at any level
                         of protection are located in the project area. The Anhui Taihe Shaying River National Wetland
                         Park is located along the Shaying River in Taihe County. River, farmland and artificial woodland
                         are currently prevalent in the Park. The purpose of establishing the Park is to promote the
                         rehabilitation of the already degraded ecological environment. The establishment of the wetland
                         park was announced during the Project preparation in late 2009. In response to the change, the
                         Project design was refined to meet relevant national wetland park management regulation. As a
                         result, one river bank cutting within the wetland park was cancelled. Special consultation with the
                         Park management was carried out regarding the project activities. Approval was later obtained
                         from the wetland park management authority (Taihe County Forestry Bureau). Overall, the
                         Project, including newly added activities, is not anticipated to cause significant conversion or
                         degradation of natural habitats in the project area.

                         Social:
                         Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The construction of the Yangqiao ship lock will cause
                         minor land acquisition and resettlement in the Laojie village of Yangqiao. A total of 0.6 mu of
                         land originally allocated for house building will be taken. Also, houses of 4 households (10
                         people) with a total area of 190 square meters will have to be demolished. These households will
                         be compensated according to local standards and their livelihoods will be restored to the original
                         level or better. During construction, a temporary road will be provided to reduce negative impacts
Public Disclosure Copy




                         on local communities. A total of 150 mu of national land will be used temporarily.


                         Construction at the second Yingshang lock will use three pieces of land for temporary spoil
                         disposal, and one state-owned-enterprise will be resettled. Compensation will be provided for the
                         period land is occupied by the project, and after use the land will be restored to arable land and
                         returned to the local community. Resettlement of the state-owned-enterprise does not affect local
                         people’s livelihoods, and the company will relocate to another place where it owns the land. The
                         cost of this resettlement will be accounted within it mother company. A RAP has been prepared
                         and will be disclosed locally by the end of December 2014, and will also be disclosed at InfoShop.
                         The Project will benefit the rural and urban residents along the river basin by improving transport
                         and the local economy. On the other hand, land occupation, house and structure demolition, bridge
                         reconstruction, sludge disposal, etc. will cause potential adverse impacts on the project area. The
                         PMO, together with consultants from Hehai University established a social team to investigate,
                         record, evaluate and address social impacts during the project planning and design since
                         November 2009. The Project triggers the Bank policy OP 4.12, and Resettlement Action Plans
                         (RAPs) (with a RPF as an annex) was prepared for the Project with involvement of local
                         government, APPSCIG and APMO. The RAP for Yangqiao ship lock was disclosed locally on
                         August 28, 2014 and the RAP for the second Yingshang ship lock was disclosed locally on
                         December 24, 2014.

                                                                   Page 6 of 13
                          The main resettlement impacts involve 1,658 mu (111 ha) permanent land acquisition, 9,874mu
                          (658 ha) temporary land acquisition, 364 households relocation with 1,489 people. In addition, 34
Public Disclosure Copy




                          sites of dredged sediment disposal will have temporary land use which affects 2,891 households
                          with 10,316 persons. There are in total 3,679 households with 13,456 people to be affected to
                          various extent by the resettlement.

                          Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP4.10). This policy is not triggered based on the social development
                          specialist's screening. The social team has conducted an investigation on IP minority villages
                          along the Project, and identified that there are three Hui minority villages in Saijian Township.
                          They are part of the mainstream society and are anticipated to benefit as much from the Project as
                          other groups such as the Han communities. In fact, the Hui groups in the project areas do not have
                          their own language but speak Mandarin. They do not have customary economic, social, or political
                          institutions separated from the dominant society while they conduct Islamic religious practice. It is
                          thus concluded that the three Hui villages in the project areas do not fall under the definition of
                          Indigenous Peoples as per OP 4.10, and the policy does not apply to this project.

                           Linkage issue. The Fuyang ship lock reconstruction project is implemented together with the
                           Project. The ship lock within the river section of the project is a key facility on the inland
                           waterway to be improved by the project. The activity is an upgrading action on the original site
                           without land acquisition or resettlement, and so there is no further resettlement action needed.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            Environmental:

                          The Project will promote waterway transport at regional level, and facilitate the development and
                          utilization of waterway transport infrastructure. Potential cumulative impacts resulting from the
                          development activities were assessed with reasonably defined time and geographical boundaries as
Public Disclosure Copy




                          part of the project environmental assessment. It is anticipated that potential negative cumulative
                          impacts include loss of habitats, riparian for example; obstruction of fish migration; and waste
                          discharge. These impacts are considered limited and manageable. Overlapping analysis shows
                          that the Project will impact only a small amount of riparian vegetation. Various development plans
                          stipulate that river shore wetlands should be protected to the extent possible. There is no fish
                          spawning area in the Shaying River and Quan River probably due to bad water quality. Local
                          fishery authority confirms that in the watershed spawning areas are found in several tributaries.
                          Hence development activities on the Shaying River will have no significant impact on fish
                          spawning. There are three ship locks along the Shaying river section, and one ship lock on Quan
                          River, whose impacts associated with expansion and operation on river hydrology and aquatic
                          ecology are very limited. In addition, the Project will support navigation management that includes
                          significant environmental considerations. It is believed that the awareness and environmental
                          management capacity of the Shaying River will be considerably improved through the
                          implementation of the Project.

                          Social:

                          The dredging works will cause sludge disposal and involve temporary land acquisition of about
                          9,831 mu (655 ha) in 34 sites along the River. In addition to identifying and applying existing
                          borrow sites through consulting with local land authorities and villages, the RAP includes a special


                                                                    Page 7 of 13
                           land restoration plan and timely and sufficent compensation for land use. This plan will change
                           1,607 mu (107.1 ha) of wasteland to farmland, and improve 3,080 mu (205.3 ha) of farmland,
                           which will benefit more than 12,500 farmers in 34 villages along the Project. This will increase the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           land resource and benefit the local inhabitants in the project area.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             During project preparation, design optimization was conducted and a number of alternatives were
                           analyzed, including the following which are relevant to the mitigation of environmental and social
                           impacts:

                           •       Service areas. Two services areas will be built under the Project. Locations of the service
                           areas were compared in terms of environmental impacts, resettlement, traffic disturbance,
                           construction convenience, and compatibility with existing development plans.

                           •       Disposal sites for dredged silts. The disposal sites for the dredged sediment from the
                           Shaying River were diligently reviewed with the following considerations: (a) choosing the nearby
                           low-lying land, shoaly land and existing borrow pits for building the dikes to minimize occupation
                           of farmland; (b) filling the ponds and strengthening the foundation of the dikes to benefit the water
                           conservation and flood control; (c) keeping away from built-up areas to avoid pollution by mud
                           disposal; and (d) meeting relevant technical specifications and adding greening and beautification
                           design for the urban sections along the River. During implementation, the principles of selecting
                           disposal sites have been adhered to. Several disposal sites were combined in order to reduce
                           occupation of farmland.

                           •       Dredging methods. Dredging equipment and operational approaches were also compared
                           during project design. It was concluded that cutter-suction dredger is a mature and proven
                           technology for this type of dredging and was therefore adopted.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           •       Riverbank protection. Extensive design of bank protection works is integrated with the
                           existing infrastructure for water conservation and flood control to optimize the location and scope
                           of the bank protection. Upon ensuring the basic function, priority is given to flexible and/or
                           ecological revetment covered with plants.

                           •       Bridge reconstruction. The issue of bridges impeding navigation due to insufficient
                           clearance is analyzed in detail. The estimation is done on average number of days when navigation
                           impedance occurs and the ratio of guaranteed navigable days according to the hydrological
                           observation records of the past 22 years. Four bridges will be reconstructed, and anti-collision
                           design is also applied to the exiting bridges.

                           During project restructuring, alternatives were also considered for the two ship locks. For the
                           second Yingshang ship lock, two locations were considered, i.e. either on the left or on the right of
                           the existing Yingshang ship lock. The selected alternative will take less land and result in less
                           potential impacts on the flood protection function. For the Yangqiao ship lock, expanding the
                           existing ship lock, rather than building a new one, was selected as the final option.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            Environmental:



                                                                     Page 8 of 13
                         The project owner hired an accredited EIA consultant to prepare EAs for the project, EIAs and
                         EMPs for the original designed activities and newly added ship locks were prepared following
                         domestic regulations and Bank safeguards requirements.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The EMPs implementation is managed by the Anhui Provincial Port and Shipping Construction
                         Investment Group (APPSCIG) under the supervision of the Anhui Provincial Transport
                         Department (APTD). Dedicated staff has been appointed to the environmental management office.
                         Qualified environmental staff has been assigned to the Contractors' teams and Supervision
                         Engineers' teams to ensure effective implementation of the EMP. An External Environmental
                         Consultant (EEC) has been hired by APPSCIG to monitor the EMP performance of the
                         Contractors and Supervision Engineers.

                         The Bank team has carried out supervision to the project through field visit and review of
                         monitoring reports. The project EMP implementation performance is considered satisfactory.
                         Since the start of the implementation of the project, the project owner has set up proper
                         environmental management institution, carried out environmental supervision and monitoring
                         plans following EMP prepared during project preparation. In particular, the project owner hired
                         external environmental monitoring consultant to strengthen its environmental management
                         capacity. The consultant has carried out field visits, provided training to the project owner,
                         contractor, and supervision engineer, coordinated environmental quality monitoring, and assisted
                         the project owner in preparing semi-annual environmental monitoring reports. The consultant
                         provided valuable support to maintain EMP implementation performance.

                         The EMPs of the two ship locks detailed the environmental management and supervision
                         organizations and responsibilities, mitigation measures, capacity training plan, monitoring plan,
                         and budget estimates of the EMP implementation. The project owner is committed to ensure that
                         the contractors implement the relevant obligations specified in the EMP that are part of their
                         contracts. The Bank's supervision will continue to monitor environmental activities carried out
                         under the Project in order to ensure compliance.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Social:

                         House restoration: The 346 urban households in Taihe and Jieshou will be compensated in cash in
                         line with commercial evaluation, with agreement from the affected households who then could
                         purchase their own apartments. 18 rural households in three villages will be compensated at
                         replacement cost and collectively provided with residential land for restoration based on local
                         residential planning, and public facilities for the new housing by the local government. All the
                         relocated households will also receive transition fee and movement allowance, as well as
                         additional assistance during the house restoration from the local government.

                         Construction of the Yangqiao ship lock will cause minor land acquisition and resettlement in the
                         Laojie village of Yangqiao. A total of 0.6mu of land originally allocated for house building will be
                         taken. Also, houses of 4 households (10 people) with a total area of 190 square meters will have to
                         be demolished. These households will be compensated according to local standards and their
                         livelihoods will be restored to the original level or better.

                         Construction of the second Yingshang ship lock will require the permanent acquisition of 136.4mu
                         of national land, with no impact on local communities, and the temporary use of 507.4mu of land
                         as disposal sites, which will affect the Jiangxinzhou, Sanba, and Shabei communities of the

                                                                   Page 9 of 13
                          Shencheng Township. Compensation will be provided during project use based on productivity,
                          and the disposal sites will be restored to arable land after use and returned to the local
                          communities. One company will need to be resettled: the Yingshang Ship Lock Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Company, which is a state-owned enterprise with 35 employees and also the executing company
                          for the project activities. The company will fund its own resettlement voluntarily to another site
                          which is owned by the enterprise; therefore, the relocation does not require land acquisition. A
                          RAP has been prepared to guide resettlement at the second Yingshang ship lock, and was
                          disclosed locally on December 24, 2014. The English RAP will be disclosed at InfoShop.

                          Bridge reconstruction: there are four bridges to be reconstructed under Component 2 of the
                          Project. The resettlement related to the bridge reconstruction was already included in the RAP.
                          The APMO/APPSCIG and the local governments cooperating closely to ensure that the design of
                          bridges fits into the local transport development plan. Designing and financing of the bridges will
                          take time and need more involvement from the involved parties, so the RP includes detailed
                          recommendations on how to get agreement on bridge reconstruction with the local governments
                          and how to ensure the fund to be available.

                          Women’s participation: women have participated in resettlement activities such as resettlement
                          impact investigation, village meetings, and focus group discussions. Women will have the same
                          rights as men in receiving compensation, employment and training. In addition, the following
                          measures will be taken to ensure women's rights and interests:

                          •       During project construction, a certain number of women (at least 20% of unskilled labor)
                          will obtain unskilled job opportunities;
                          •       Technical training will be firstly provided to affected female laborers to ensure that their
                          economic status will not be lowered;
                          •       Affected women will receive relevant information during resettlement and participate in
                          public consultation and resettlement. The compensation agreement with the affected households
                          must be signed by the couples.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Vulnerable people: the RAP identifies some vulnerable people and determines additional financial
                          assistance to these people. In the affected population of the Project, 21 households with 80 people
                          were identified vulnerable (0.6% of the affected population) in 8 villages, in which 16 households
                          with 74 people receive minimum living security; 5 households with 6 people are Wubaohu
                          (Households who are provided with food, clothes, house, health care, burying as died or education
                          for orphan). Besides the normal measures, the APMO/APPSCIG will grant a subsidy of
                          RMB5,000 to every affected household in order to protect the interests of the affected vulnerable
                          people.

                           Resettlement budget and financing: the resettlement cost is about RMB169 million and is already
                           integrated into the project budget, which will be fully financed using counterpart fund.
                           Resettlement cost for the four bridges will be jointly financed by the APTD and Fuyang City.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Environmental:
                           During project preparation, two rounds of public consultation and information disclosure were
                           conducted in April-May 2008, and December 2009 - April 2010, respectively. Combined opinion
                           surveys and public consultation meetings in the townships, village committee and affected


                                                                    Page 10 of 13
                         villagers' home have been implemented during preparation of the EA and RAP. Mitigation
                         measures are determined taking into account the suggestion s from both experts and the public.
                         Most of the concerns have been incorporated either in project design or in the EMP or resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                         plan.

                         During the first round of public consultation, a brief edition of the EA for the Project was made
                         accessible on the website of Fuyang Maritime Bureau in May 2008 with announcement on
                         Yingzhou Evening Newspaper, to collect opinions, suggestions and concerns from communities
                         and departments affected by the Project. Opinions and suggestions received were documented and
                         incorporated into the EA as appropriate. During the second round of public consultation, a full
                         version of the EA report was disclosed on April 13, 2010 at local maritime bureaus (hardcopy) and
                         on the websites of APTD, Fuyang Local Maritime Bureau and APPSCIG, with an announcement
                         on Fuyang Daily Newspaper. The EA reports were submitted to the Bank's Inforshop on August
                         11, 2010. As such, the EA report is easily accessible to the general public.

                         During the project restructuring, the EAs for newly added activities have undergone public
                         consultation and disclosure following OP4.01 as well. Two rounds of consultation were carried
                         out. Public opinions have been incorporated into the project design and EAs. A revised full EA for
                         2nd Yinshang Ship Lock was disclosed locally on May 16, 2014 at the website of Fuyang Local
                         Marine Bureau and a revised full EA for Yangqiao Ship Lock was disclosed on September 19,
                         2014 at Fuyang Port and Navigation Bureau and at the Yangqiao Ship Lock. The final full EAs
                         after incorporating the World Bank comments were re-disclosed locally in potentially affected
                         communities in Yinshang and Linquan on January 12, 2015. They were disclosed at Infoshop on
                         January 8, 2015.

                         Social:
                         All the key stakeholders such as the losers of land, houses, access roads, and other assets, as well
                         as village committees, local authorities were identified and are fully consulted in the resettlement
                         planning and will be consulted in the RAP implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Information disclosure: The main contents of the RAP were already disclosed in relevant villages
                         and the final RAP was re-disclosed. The feedback of the disclosure has been integrated into the
                         RAP. In addition, a resettlement information booklet was drafted in the RAP and will be
                         distributed among the affected prior to the commencement of the construction.

                         Consultation and grievance addressing: The RAP includes a special chapter of participation,
                         consultation and grievance addressing to record the relevant actions already done in the
                         resettlement planning, and further determine new actions, procedures in this regard. The
                         stakeholders were identified at the early stage of the resettlement planning, and were fully
                         consulted on such aspects as project objectives, project locations and impacts, resettlement
                         policies and measures, and so on. Information disclosure was implemented in the RAP preparation
                         and was arranged for the next stage. A detailed procedure on grievance addressing is also
                         developed in the RAP.

                         As part of the project restructuring, public consultations were conducted to assess impact to local
                         people’s livelihoods caused by construction at Yangqiao ship lock and the second Yingshang ship
                         lock. Based on due diligence review, the construction of the two ship locks will have a negative
                         impact on local communities. Therefore a RAP was prepared to guide resettlement work for the
                         two restructured activities respectively. The RAP for the Yangqiao ship lock was disclosed locally

                                                                   Page 11 of 13
                           on August 28, 2014 and at Infoshop on October 31, 2014. The RAP for the second Yingshang ship
                           lock was disclosed locally on December 24, 2014 and at Infoshop on January 6, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      26-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Jan-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      //
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            12-Jan-2015
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04-Dec-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-Jan-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            24-Dec-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?


                                                                   Page 12 of 13
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Reda Hamedoun
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                               Date: 13-Jan-2015
                            Advisor:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Practice Manager/    Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)                               Date: 13-Jan-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 13 of 13
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
