                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSR1047
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Ukraine                                      Project ID:           P095337
                            Project Name:       Urban Infrastructure Project (P095337)
                            Task Team           Tamar Sulukhia
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           28-Feb-2007                                  Estimated   28-Aug-2007
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GWADR                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:             Water supply (40%), Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (20%), Wastewater
                                                Collection and Transportation (15%), Wastewater Treatment and Disposal
                                                (15%), Solid waste management (10%)
                            Theme:              City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (75%), Climate change (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       140.00           Total Bank Financing:                                       140.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                               0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                140.00
                              Total                                                                                                140.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The Project objective is to assist the Utilities in implementing Business Plans that lay out the
                           financial, operational changes and investments needed to move toward sustainable operations.


                                                                                  Page 1 of 7
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The Project objective is to assist the Utilities in implementing Business Plans that lay out the
                         financial, operational changes and investments needed to move t
Public Disclosure Copy




                         oward sustainable operations.
                          3. Project Description
                         There are 14 participating cities included in the project: Cherkassy, Drogobych, Kamyanets-
                         Podilskyi, Kolomya, Nova Kakhovka, Kharkiv, Boryspil, Slovyansk , Chernihiv, Ivano-Frankivsk,
                         Kalush, Kremenchuk, Novograd-Volynskii, and Odessa.

                         Project includes 4 Parts:

                         Part A: Institutional Strengthening. The component finances preparation and implementation of the
                         business plans for water and wastewater utilities, including setting performance targets.

                         Part B: Rehabilitation Investments. The component finances carrying out selected rehabilitation of
                         infrastructure works and replacement and upgrading of equipment needed for selected water and
                         wastewater utilities.

                         Part C: Energy Efficiency Investments. The component finances upgrading of equipment and related
                         infrastructure with more energy efficient facilities in selected municipal utilities.

                         Part D: Project Management. The component supports the MInistry of REgional Development,
                         Construction, Housing and Communal Services in overall implementation and coordination of the
                         Project at the central level, including financial management, procurement, monitoring and
                         evaluation, public information and training and related operating costs. It also supports the utilities
                         in implementation and coordination of the Project at the local level, including financial management,
                         procurement, monitoring and evaluation, public information and training and operating costs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Investment is being considered for the following cities: Cherkassy, Drogobych, Kamyanets-
                         Podilskyi, Kolomya, Nova Kakhovka, Kharkiv, Boryspil, Slovyansk, Chernihiv, Ivano-Frankivsk,
                         Kalush, Kremenchuk, Novograd-Volynskii, Odessa. All project works will take place at the footprint
                         of existing utilities/infrastructure/networks.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexei Slenzak (GENDR)
                         Klavdiya Maksymenko (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No




                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        Yes
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Environment

                             The investment component addresses emergency investments to mitigate health and environmental
                             risks posed by water and wastewater management systems, and investments involving efficiency
                             and sustainability issues, as well as health and environmental risks. This component is categorized
                             into the following types of investments/works:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              i. rehabilitation of water distribution systems, including piping, elevated reservoir, equipment for
                             rehabilitation work and leak detection, and installation of water meters;

                              ii. rehabilitation of water intakes and water preparation facilities including wells and water intake
                             facilities, sedimentation, filtration, and disinfection system;

                              iii. rehabilitation of sewerage systems, including sewer pipes, pumping station, equipment for
                             rehabilitation work and vacuum truck; and

                              iv. rehabilitation of sewage treatment plants, including grit removal chambers, sedimentation
                             tanks, biological reactors, and sludge dewatering equipment.

                             Since all investments are rehabilitation, the environmental issues associated with their
                             implementation are minor, short-term, and primarily limited to the facility site (except for
                             movement of equipment and materials to/from the site). These issues are primarily: dust, noise,
                             disposal of waste material and/or older equipment, possibly traffic disruption (depending upon
                             specific location), worker safety (e.g. welding operations, work on height) etc. All these issues are
                             being addressed by good engineering and construction practices.

                             Social


                                                                         Page 3 of 7
                           A comprehensive social assessment was conducted. The majority of respondents were highly
                           concerned about the quality of the environment. Water supply was a priority but sanitation issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                           were key to not only safe water for the wider community but also to regional and international
                           environmental issues. The use of recreational facilities on beaches, riverbanks and even in some
                           cases lakes was curtailed as a result of sewage polluting these areas.

                           At project appraisal stage, twenty percent of the respondents reported serious health problems
                           related to water supply and sanitation, including gastric-intestine and kidney disorders (kidney
                           stones).

                           On the issue of confidence in local institutions and social capital, residents of cities were satisfied.
                           NGOs responded more often as neutral. In Odessa, respondents were more positive recognizing
                           constraints that hampered the intentions of public officials. In all three cities, the merits of user
                           groups and NGOs as advocates had appeal. The role of the media was seen as more important in
                           Odessa and not very important in the other two communities.

                           In general most users in Ukraine were dissatisfied with the water services they received and noted
                           problems with wastewater drainage. Health concerns were widespread.

                           Major pollution factors cited for the Black Sea were (i) inadequate wastewater treatment and
                           disinfection, (ii) uncontrolled construction works without any urban development master plan, and
                           (iii) the overall poor technical quality of the city water supply and sanitation network. Improved
                           regional collaboration was cited as a need.

                           9 utilities participating in the project have developed "Customer Service Programs." In part this
                           was a local contribution of the utilities to the project, but specialized consultation, training, and
                           workshops were be supported under the project as part of their overall business and strategic
                           planning. These programs include periodic monitoring of user satisfaction by means of customer
Public Disclosure Copy




                           satisfaction surveys whereby users periodically rank services by standardized criteria. This builds
                           on the initial examples of the focus groups used in the social assessment but offers an
                           institutionalized and sustainable mechanism for user input. Unfolding social issues and concerns
                           could also be addressed on a recurrent basis by such programs. Flexible solutions were advocated
                           on a community specific basis.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            Long term impacts are positive in nature including improved water supply and sanitation
                           services, which in turn leads to improved health conditions for the population in the service areas.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            Not applicable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            Environmental

                           The environmental analysis includes an Environmental Assessment (EA) that examines the current
                           baseline situation, describes what rehabilitation activities are proposed, and identifies any


                                                                       Page 4 of 7
                           significant impact arising from the proposed rehabilitation investments. Qualified local firms are
                           conducted this analysis.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           As indicated above there is no significant impact, but in order to minimize impact and contain
                           impact from the rehabilitation process, the EA includes an Environmental Management
                           Framework (EMF) that consists of: (a) a mitigation plan, and (b) a monitoring plan identifying
                           monitoring roles/responsibilities of various parties to check the compliance of project
                           implementation with the mitigation plan.

                            The EMF is consistent with environmental assessment policies and procedures of both the
                           Government of the Ukraine and the World Bank. The EMF describes procedures and
                           responsibilities for key elements of the environmental assessment process, namely: screening, EA
                           document content, review and approval, consultation, disclosure, and implementation
                           arrangements for safeguard supervision.

                           Both the EA and Environmental Framework Documents, Completed September 23, 2005, and
                           approved has followed World Bank procedures for disclosure and stakeholder consultations.

                           The Final EA Consultations/Disclosures began on September 8, 2005 and ran through November
                           29, 2005.

                           Social

                           A social assessment was carried out by MAMA-86, a local NGO with experience in water and
                           urban infrastructure issues. Methodological review has been provided by the Institute of
                           Sociology in Kiev. Assessment instruments included:
                            -      Household Surveys
                            -      Focus Groups
                            -      Informant interviews
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The assessment addressed user priorities and social capital issues related to building the
                           sustainable monitoring system for social impact that will be used by utilities. The development of
                            Offices of Consumer Relation▲ within the utilities facilitated the monitoring process and
                           creation of a user-oriented culture within the utilities. Additionally an information/education
                           program was be developed for administration by the utilities throughout project implementation.
                           The project did not cause any permanent or temporary physical or economic displacement.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders include: (i) at the central level the Ministry of Finance, and the Ministry of
                           Regional Development, Construction, Housing and Communal Services, and (ii) at the local level
                           the 14 participating municipalities, the respective utilities, and the offices of civic groups and such
                           NGOs.

                           The Project Team carried out extensive consultation throughout the preparation process with the
                           stakeholders at the central level as well as key local officials. The consultation process used with
                           both the Environmental Assessment and the Social Assessment included disclosure and
                           consultation with representatives of all local stakeholders. Agency responsibilities for
                           environmental mitigation and monitoring were identified in the EMPs. Consultation at the local


                                                                       Page 5 of 7
                           level followed the model used for the Social Assessment and be carried out by the respective
                           utilities through their customer service offices which will one of the targets of capacity building
                           under the project. User responses is being monitored by the utilities using a customer feedback
Public Disclosure Copy




                           system.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         23-Sep-2005
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      26-Oct-2005
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [       ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [       ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [       ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [       ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [       ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [       ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [        ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [        ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [        ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?


                                                                      Page 6 of 7
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Tamar Sulukhia
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                          Date: 15-Sep-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Practice Manager/   Name:                                              Date:
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 7 of 7
