                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA7704
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Myanmar                            Project ID:    P146332
                            Project Name:     Myanmar Decentralizing Funding to Schools (P146332)
                            Task Team         James A. Stevens
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         28-Mar-2014                        Estimated   20-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    EASHE                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General education sector (60%), Other social services (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (60%), Social safety nets (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        100.00                Total Bank Financing:        80.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               80.00
                              AUSTRALIA, Government of                                                                  20.00
                              Total                                                                                    100.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of this project is to help improve and expand Myanmar’s existing school grants and
                           student stipends program.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 10
                         The project will contribute to the MoE’s existing budget allocation in support of three specific
                         programs: (1) expansion of MoE’s existing national schools grants program that benefits all
                         government-supported schools, (2) expansion of its student stipends program, focusing on 40
Public Disclosure Copy




                         townships over the three year project duration, (3) strengthening of its capacity to monitor and
                         implement these programs and lay the foundation for more focus on learning outcomes in future
                         programs by conducting an early grade reading assessment baseline. The implementation period for
                         the project is 4 years. The Bank will manage a parallel technical assistance program to support
                         program design, monitoring and evaluation..

                         Expansion and Improvement of the School Grants Program (US$77 million): All schools with
                         primary students currently supported by government budget funding are eligible for participation in
                         the school grants program. Expansion of the program, therefore, will mean increasing the size of
                         annual operating grants to schools from approximately US$250, US$400 and US$500 per school for
                         small, medium and large schools, respectively, to targets of [US$900, US$1,200 and US$1,800] per
                         school, respectively, over a four year period. Improving the program means introducing innovations
                         from global experience, as well as improving the fiduciary management of the program, in particular
                         its financial management. Innovations will be introduced to the program by revising its guidelines
                         and by providing training. Specific innovations include: (i) introduction of well-defined program
                         objectives and performance indicators; (ii) tying of the grant funding to school improvement
                         planning; (iii) introducing increased autonomy on school-level spending; (iv) promoting community
                         participation and oversight through parent teacher organizations; (v) standardizing financial
                         reporting; (iv) provisions for audits; and (vii) linking program progress reporting to MoE’s own
                         information systems.

                         Expansion and Improvement of the Student Stipends Program (US$19 million): While all
                         government-supported schools in Myanmar are nominally eligible to participate in the existing
                         student stipends program, the small size of the program (11,000 stipends to be awarded nationwide)
                         effectively means that, while most schools apply for stipends funding, few schools are actually
Public Disclosure Copy




                         selected to participate in the program and those that do participate would have, in most cases, no
                         more than 2 stipend students. Because the new student stipends guidelines will include an increase
                         in coverage for each school and more rigorous targeting and administration, the program will only be
                         expanded to more schools and students in a limited number of townships over time. In school year
                         2014-15, the stipends program will be expanded to 8 townships and is expected to cover
                         approximately [30 percent] of grade 5-11 students in each township. An additional 12 townships will
                         be added in school year 2015-16 and an additional 20 townships will be added in school year
                         2016-17, for a total of 40 townships (out of 330 total) to be supported over 3 years. The number of
                         total stipends provided by MoE is expected to increase from about 11,000 currently to about
                         [160,000] over 4 years (Myanmar’s education system includes about 8.2 million students).
                         Townships will be selected based on drop-out rates and poverty indicators to be agreed with the Bank
                         and Australia as part of the DLI process.

                         Improving the stipends program means introducing innovations from global experience, as well as
                         improving the financial management of program funding. Assessments of the program have
                         suggested a number of ways in which the program design and implementation can be improved. The
                         national program allocates stipends to all primary and secondary grades. Evidence from a number of
                         data sources suggests that the fraction of students dropping out before grade 4 is small, and that
                         dropout rates are particularly high at key transition moments from primary to middle school, and
                         from middle school to high school. The revised program will therefore focus on children in grades 5


                                                                    Page 2 of 10
                         to 11, at the moments when dropouts appear to be the most prevalent. In addition, the stipend value
                         will be progressively raised in lower-secondary and upper-secondary school to reflect the increase in
                         opportunity and direct costs incurred as a child advances throughout the education system. As with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the school grants above, innovations will be introduced to the program by revising its guidelines and
                         by the provision of training. Specific innovations include: (i) introduction of well-defined program
                         objectives and performance indicators; (ii) evidence-based selection of initial townships; (iii)
                         evidence-based targeting of schools and students within townships; (iv) better definition and
                         communication of conditionality and of the program in general; (v) community participation and
                         oversight; (vi) introduction of provisions for audits; and (vii) linking program progress reporting to
                         MoE’s own information systems.

                         Capacity improvement support to strengthen monitoring and implementation of programs (US$4
                         million): This project will focus on training, and on conducting a baseline assessment of early grade
                         reading. On training, MoE will design and begin implementing a national training program during
                         school year 2014-15 aimed at introducing the new school grants and stipends program to township
                         officials and school headmasters. Program content will be prepared as part of the process for the
                         preparation of program guidelines. In the case of the school grants, it will also benefit from the
                         example of similar training programs already introduced by UNICEF in Myanmar. The training
                         program is expected to follow a cascade model used by UNICEF in which training providers are
                         trained at the central level and are then responsible for delivering training sessions at the regional or
                         township levels. Over 3 years, MoE is expected to deliver training to approximately 1,000 township
                         education officers, assistant education officers and accounting clerks and approximately 43,000
                         school head masters.

                         Assessment data, capturing student learning achievement and progress, is a critical building block for
                         school planning and effective resource targeting. During project preparation, the Bank has assisted
                         MoE with technical assistance and Australian funded an initial baseline for early grade reading
                         assessment (EGRA) in the Department of Basic Education 3 (Yangon area). The survey will be
                         completed in January and a full report and public presentation will be completed by June 2014. Save
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the Children Myanmar also contributed technical assistance to this initiative and helped to manage
                         the survey. During the 4 year project period, MoE will carry out baseline surveys in DBEs 1 and 2
                         (lower and upper Myanmar) as part of the project, providing a complete map of the distribution of
                         children’s early grade reading skills across the country. The project’s funds will help pay for travel
                         costs and allowances for enumerators (who will likely be graduates from teacher training colleges).
                         The Bank will continue to provide technical support through a parallel technical assistance program.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is expected to support decentralization to townships and schools in all of Myanmar's 330
                         townships. It is expected that the stipend program will be provided in 40 townships during the four
                         Academic Years (AY) 2014-2018. The program is expected to cover about 50% of schools in each
                         township. The criteria for the selection of townships and schools will be provided in the national
                         guidelines for the stipend program, but they will include levels of poverty, remoteness and drop-out
                         rates. Some of the selected townships are expected to be in high density of ethnic populations. The
                         school grants program is a nationwide program for which all schools in the country are eligible
                         indiscriminately. The program supports schools purchase of recurrent spending (consumables and
                         materials) that is generally non procurable in nature. Minor maintenance and repairs are not
                         currently allowed but may be permitted as eligible expenditures during implementation. A simple
                         ECOP has been prepared and agreed for this eventuality.


                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Pamornrat Tansanguanwong (EASTS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (EASER)
                         Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes           TThe program is classified as category "B". The
                         BP 4.01                                      school grants program is a nationwide program
                                                                      for which all schools in the country are eligible
                                                                      indiscriminately. The project will “top up”
                                                                      additional capital to the national program through
                                                                      which grants will be provided to all schools in the
                                                                      country. The program supports schools in
                                                                      purchasing consumables and covering operational
                                                                      expenses. No significant works or equipment
                                                                      procurement are permitted under the grants.
                                                                      Minor repair and maintenance of facilities and
                                                                      furniture is currently not permitted, but the
                                                                      eligibility for spending under the grants may be
                                                                      expanded to include such spending in later project
                                                                      years. To cover this eventuality, government will
                                                                      agree to include a simple ECOP in its school
                                                                      grants guidelines. No environmental impact is
                                                                      expected to arise from the program.

                                                                      The stipend program is also a nationwide program
                                                                      and provides stipends to students. Primary, lower
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      secondary and higher secondary students are
                                                                      eligible. Preliminary social assessment conducted
                                                                      during preparation found that principles and
                                                                      procedures including eligibility criteria are not
                                                                      clearly established, and that there is a risk that
                                                                      some vulnerable groups such as female headed
                                                                      households and religious minorities are excluded
                                                                      and cannot receive benefits from the program. It
                                                                      also found that access to education is restricted
                                                                      particularly for female students in remote areas
                                                                      because of traditional gender norms and safety
                                                                      concerns due to long distance to schools. Children
                                                                      of migrant workers and poor families often drop
                                                                      out due to financial difficulties. Since such
                                                                      vulnerable people will be affected by the project,
                                                                      the policy is triggered and measures to ensure that
                                                                      they receive project benefits are developed in
                                                                      Community Participation Planning Framework
                                                                      (CPPF).



                                                              Page 4 of 10
                                                                         A total of 63 focus group discussions and 86 key
                                                                         informant interviews were conducted during the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         preparation to assess potential risks and negative
                                                                         impacts of the project. Community Participation
                                                                         Planning Framework (CPPF) was developed to
                                                                         guide the implementation of the two programs to
                                                                         ensure that: i) the poor and vulnerable groups will
                                                                         benefit from the programs; and ii) negative
                                                                         impacts, if any, will be avoided or fully mitigated.
                                                                         Detailed operational guidelines are being
                                                                         prepared with full integration of the principles
                                                                         and process of the CPPF.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            The project will not cause any degradation of
                                                                         natural habitats as defined under the safeguard
                                                                         policy.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            The project will not degrade critical forest areas
                                                                         as defined under the safeguard policy.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project will not involve any procurement of
                                                                         pesticides nor cause any increased use of
                                                                         pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The project will not adversely affect sites with
                         BP 4.11                                         archaeological, historical, religious or unique
                                                                         national values.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           The programs are expected to be implemented in
                                                                         townships where ethnic minorities are present. A
                                                                         preliminary social assessment was carried out
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         during preparation which assessed access
                                                                         educational services and school grants and
                                                                         stipend programs among vulnerable groups
                                                                         including ethnic minorities. Free, prior and
                                                                         informed consultations were carried out with key
                                                                         stakeholders including affected ethnic
                                                                         communities which ascertained their broad
                                                                         community support to the project.

                                                                         The government has developed the Community
                                                                         Participation Planning Framework (CPPF) to
                                                                         ensure that ethnic minority groups have equal
                                                                         opportunities to participate in and benefit from
                                                                         the project, and that community members will be
                                                                         empowered to monitor implementation of the
                                                                         programs. Information with regard to the
                                                                         programs will be developed in Myanmar and
                                                                         major ethnic languages and distributed widely in
                                                                         the project implemented areas. The principles and



                                                                 Page 5 of 10
                                                                       procedures of CPPF are being integrated in the
                                                                       government’s operational guidelines of the
                                                                       stipend and school grants programs. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       Department of Planning and Training under MoE
                                                                       will be responsible for the implementation of
                                                                       CPPF including the development and
                                                                       implementation of the annual Community
                                                                       Participation Plan (CPP) in line with this CPPF.
                                                                       CPP will be developed and updated annually as
                                                                       the project rolls out to new townships, and
                                                                       incorporate all elements of Indigenous Peoples
                                                                       Plan (IPP) as defined under OP 4.10.

                                                                       As part of the preparation of CPP in year one,
                                                                       Social Assessment (SA) will be conducted in all
                                                                       selected townships. SA will include vulnerability
                                                                       assessment and free, prior and informed
                                                                       consultations with vulnerable and ethnic groups.
                                                                       Measures will be developed and included in CPP
                                                                       to strengthen ethnic parents’ participation in
                                                                       project implementation and ensure they receive
                                                                       project benefits in a culturally appropriate
                                                                       manner. When it is judged that MoE has
                                                                       developed sufficient safeguard capacity, SA will
                                                                       be conducted in selected townships. The selection
                                                                       will ensure that all ethnic and vulnerable groups
                                                                       affected under the program are represented, and
                                                                       will be conducted in consultation with the World
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       Bank.

                                                                       Feedback/Grievance mechanisms will also be
                                                                       developed, which helps establish and strengthen
                                                                       the participation of community members in
                                                                       School Project Committee (SPCs) to monitor
                                                                       project implementation through regularly meeting
                                                                       stipend beneficiaries, receiving their feedbacks
                                                                       and checking that school grants are used as
                                                                       agreed between school management and SPCs.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No           The program will not support any civil works. No
                         4.12                                          acquisition of private land, or loss of private
                                                                       assets including trees and structures, is
                                                                       anticipated.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No           The project does not involve any dams.

                         Projects on International        No           The project does not involve international
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                          waterways.



                                                               Page 6 of 10
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 The project will not be located in any known
                            7.60                                                disputed areas as defined in the policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              No major, significant and/or irreversible impacts are envisaged under the project. The project will
                              not support major civil works, and environmental impact or land acquisition will not occur. The
                              Ministry of Education does not currently allow spending for minor maintenance and repairs at
                              schools under its school grants program. However, the Bank has recommended that MoE consider
                              allowing expenditure for such activities which are frequently allowable under school grants
                              schemes globally. MoE is considering making this change to its programs, but it not ready to do
                              so in the project’s first year. In order to accommodate such a change to the government’s
                              programs during implementation, the MoE will include a simple environmental code of practice
                              (ECOP) in its school grants guidelines to guide any ‘small scale’ renovation work such as
                              repairing/cleaning windows, repairing a roof, repairing furniture, etc. No physical additions,
                              expansion or demolition would be permitted under the school grants or any similar changes to the
                              physical footprint of the school.

                              There are risks that some vulnerable social groups including ethnic minorities and female headed
                              households may be excluded from the stipend program. Existing grievance and feedback
                              mechanisms are not adequate and those who are eligible but are excluded from the stipend
                              program may not be able to have their grievance addressed.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              No negative indirect or long term impacts are anticipated.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Not applicable.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              A preliminary social assessment was carried out during project preparation to assess potential
                              negative impacts of stipend and school grant programs and risks associated with implementing the
                              programs. Free, prior and informed consultations were also conducted with key stakeholders
                              including representatives of vulnerable and ethnic groups which ascertained their broad
                              community support to the project. No significant negative impact was found to entail from project
                              implementation, however, risks that some vulnerable and ethnic groups may be excluded from
                              project benefits were found to be present. The Community Participation Planning Framework
                              (CPPF) was developed which sets out principles and procedures to address potential risks of
                              exclusions identified in line with OP 4.01 and OP 4.10. The CPPF provides principles and
                              procedures through which Social Assessment (SA) will be conducted annually in selected
                              townships where the stipend program will be newly rolled out. SA will include vulnerability
                              assessment and free, prior and informed consultations with vulnerable and ethnic groups. The
                              requirements under CPPF are being incorporated in the national guidelines on stipend and school
                              grants programs which are currently under development. The guidelines will be consulted with

                                                                        Page 7 of 10
                          key stakeholders including representatives of ethnic minorities. Measures will be developed and
                          included to ensure that vulnerable and ethnic groups will benefit from the stipend program and that
                          adverse impacts, if any, will be adequately addressed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The School Project Committee (SPC) will be established at the school level based on the existing
                           but significantly strengthened community participation mechanism in school management through
                           PTA. SPC will participate in and monitor the implementation of the stipend and school grant
                           programs. SPC will comprise the school headmaster, teachers and parents including those of
                           vulnerable groups including ethnic minorities. SPC will be empowered in the monitoring and
                           grievance mechanisms to ensure that the stipend and school grants programs are implemented
                           under the support of this program as per provisions of this CPPF.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The Department of Planning and Training (DEPT) and the Department of Basic Education (DBE)
                           under the Ministry of Education is in charge of implementing the project and the CPPF. Township
                           Education Officers (TEO) and Township Program Working Groups (TPWG) will take the lead in
                           implementing this CPPF at the township level and the below. Each school will establish the
                           School Project Committees (SPC) that will coordinate with school management in the
                           implementation and monitoring of stipend and school grants programs at the school level.

                          Stakeholder consultation meetings with local and international NGOs were conducted on March
                          19, 2014. Both national and international NGOs as well as other agencies involved in education
                          and ethnic minority issues were invited. Myanmar language and English copies of the draft CPPF
                          and the executive summary of the preliminary social assessment were provided to invited agencies
                          two weeks prior to the event. Overall, participants expressed strong support to the project and to
                          the CPPF measures that aim to ensure that the project will benefit vulnerable and ethnic groups.
                          The key comments provided from participants include:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          School grants program should consider: i) extending the program support to monastery schools
                          and community-based schools which often are located in the poor and remote areas; 2) providing
                          longer training and coaching to teachers to better develop and implement school improvement
                          plans; 3) putting in place a rigorous monitoring mechanisms for the program; 4) avoiding using
                          school grants as a substitute for parent/community contributions to the schools; and 5) making a
                          full use of existing entities such as PTA and BOT instead of creating a new committee for the
                          program.

                          Stipends program should consider: 1) students below grade five should also be considered for the
                          program; 2) NGOs and INGOs could collaborate with the Ministry to reach out to more
                          disadvantaged students especially disabled children; and 3) a longer timeframe should be allowed
                          for complaints – seven days may not be sufficient for people from remote areas to provide
                          complaints.

                          Free, prior and informed consultations were also conducted as part of the preliminary social
                          assessment with Parents Teachers Associations (PTAs), the poor and vulnerable families and
                          students from different ethnic background. A total of 63 focus group discussions and 86 key
                          informant interviews were conducted to ascertain broad community support to the two programs.
                          In total, 361 people were consulted, of which 166 were ethnic minority people (“ethnic groups”),
                          including 35 extremely poor ethnic minority people. Capacity and knowledge of all stakeholders


                                                                   Page 8 of 10
                           in the Bank safeguard policies are limited. The World Bank will provide training for DEPT and
                           relevant DBEs to implement the CPPF, particularly with regard to vulnerability assessment,
                           Community Participation Plans (CPP), and roles of the School Project Committees (SPC). The
Public Disclosure Copy




                           responsible DBE officers will further provide appropriate training to the Township Education
                           Offices (TEO), Township Project Working Group (TPWG) and school headmasters on core CPPF
                           principles. The Bank will help ensure the inclusion of CPPF in training programs, and may
                           participate in training sessions from time to time. The World Bank will also provide funding
                           support for training, monitoring and evaluation activities.

                           A full social assessment was not done during preparation because townships where the project will
                           support the stipend program have not been determined before appraisal. The townships where the
                           stipend program would be implemented during the first year may be identified before the Board
                           approval of this project scheduled on May 20, 2014. A Social Assessment (SA) including free,
                           prior and informed consultations with ethnic and vulnerable groups will be conducted in first year
                           townships immediately after the school restarts on June 1 after a holiday season – even if project
                           supported townships are selected before the Board approval, it is impractical to carry out SA
                           during the school recess as many eligible students and teachers are away from schools.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        03-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     19-Feb-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Myanmar                                                            21-Feb-2014
                           Comments: This project will have no significant or adverse environmental impact. An
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         environmental assessment is not required for this project.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        03-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     19-Feb-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Myanmar                                                            21-Feb-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples


                                                                    Page 9 of 10
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: James A. Stevens
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (RSA)                        Date: 27-Mar-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Luis Benveniste (SM)                              Date: 27-Mar-2014




                                                                       Page 10 of 10
