                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA7965
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ethiopia                          Project ID:    P143302
                            Project Name:      ET Competitiveness and Job Creation Proj (P143302)
                            Task Team          Asya Akhlaque
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          18-Mar-2014                       Estimated   13-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTFE                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General industry and trade sector (50%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade
                                              (25%), Vocational training (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (50%), Other Private Sector
                                              Development (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     260.00           Total Bank Financing:                250.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        10.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              250.00
                              Total                                                                                    260.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to contribute to job creation by attracting investments
                           and improving enterprise competitiveness in the targeted industrial zones (IZ).
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 13
                         The project will comprise of four mutually-reinforcing components. These are summarized below:

                         Component 1: Institutional and Regulatory Framework and Capacity Building (US$6.1 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1. Provision of consulting services and goods to strengthen the regulatory framework to underpin an
                         effective industrial zones program. Based on global lessons learned, an effective institutional and
                         legal framework is critical for successful IZ development as well as attracting reputable IZ
                         developers, operators, investors, and service providers. In this context, this component focuses on the
                         development of a sound legal framework with clear rules of the game and the institutional capacity to
                         catalyze private sector investment in the IZs. This component includes:
                         i.       Support for the development of an effective legal, regulatory, and operational framework for
                         IZ development and operation;
                         ii.      Support for the operationalization of the newly established Ethiopian Industrial Development
                         Zone Corporation (EIDZC) to focus on development and management of IZs, including after care;
                         this work will be undertaken in close collaboration with IFC Advisory which is supporting the
                         Government to revise the investment incentives framework and Investment Proclamation to ensure
                         an effective regime;
                         iii.     Support for setting up and building the capacity of the Regulator that will oversee IZ
                         development and operations with a focus on performance and selection criteria for IZ developers,
                         managers, service providers, and investors, in line with international good practice;
                         iv. Assistance to the Ethiopian Investment Agency (EIA) for the establishment of a “One-Stop”
                         Shop (OSS) to streamline different business regulation services – this will be undertaken in
                         collaboration with IFC Advisory which is working with EIA in improving its overall administration
                         and development of an OSS; and
                         v.       Assistance for the establishment of an OSS focusing on the most relevant processes for IZ
                         investors within each IZ. The OSS(s) will be carried out by the EIDZC in collaboration with EIA and
                         the IZ Regulator.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Investment generation support through targeted promotion. The proposed Project will support
                         development of a strategy with a detailed action plan for investment promotion for the industrial
                         sites, aimed at targeting potential IZ developers/operators, service providers, and IZ investors. The
                         program will be conducted in collaboration with the EIA. The sub-component will include: (i)
                         preparation of high quality materials to set out the investment process, the comparative advantages of
                         investing in Ethiopia, and in the IZs in particular, (ii) development of a website as a tool in marketing
                         and lead generation efforts, (iii) organization of a few international investor events targeting
                         identified industries, sectors, and companies; (iv) an investor tracking system whose objectives
                         would include due diligence on incoming investors, and (v) technical support for developing a
                         framework, evaluating, and entering into legal agreements to accommodate various models for
                         private sector participation in IZ development, operations, service provision, and investment.

                         Component 2: Support for Industrial Infrastructure (US$218.3 million)

                         3. Provision of consulting services, goods and works for the development of physical on-site and off-
                         site infrastructure. This includes support for (i) detailed feasibility studies for both Bole Lemi Phase
                         II and Kilinto sites including master planning of the zones, detailed engineering designs with detailed
                         phasing and costing, and World Bank-compliant environmental and social impact assessments; (ii) a
                         programmatic IZ financing window, which would finance on-site and off-site infrastructure based on
                         detailed criteria including a solid business case supported by demand analysis. Public funding would


                                                                       Page 2 of 13
                         catalyze private funding through an approach that provides opportunities for the private sector to
                         participate in IZs, including: development and/or operation of IZs; subcontracting services/activities;
                         provision of services to the EIZDC, the Regulator, private sector managers/operators, as well as IZ
Public Disclosure Copy




                         investors; leasing or buying pr e-built factory, office, or warehouse sheds/buildings/space, or leasing
                         land and constructing their own buildings - which will be designed and supported under Component
                         1.

                         4. The programmatic IZ financing window is expected to finance infrastructure investment in the two
                         targeted IZs (Bole Lemi Phase 2 and Kilinto) subject to meeting the “eligibility” criteria: The
                         application of these criteria is intended to ensure that the appropriate studies and analysis that
                         demonstrate the positive economic and financial returns and the social and environmental impact are
                         used, and the IZs are developed within the context of an appropriate legal, regulatory, and
                         institutional framework. Those criteria include, among other things, adopting an effective legal and
                         institutional framework to facilitate IZ development, completing detailed demand analysis, master
                         plans, and building the institutional capacity for IZ development and regulation, etc. Annex II
                         provides the detailed “eligibility criteria” that will be further elaborated in the Operations Manual. It
                         is expected that the Project will first support the Bole Lemi IZ, Phase II, followed by the Kilinto IZ,
                         which is envisaged to be developed in phases.

                         5. Private sector demand identified upstream: There is a strong pipeline of investors in need of
                         serviced industrial infrastructure in Ethiopia. This has resulted in leasing of all available factory
                         buildings in Bole Lemi 1. Twelve firms have leased factory buildings in Bole Lemi 1, taking up all
                         the twenty factory buildings that are near completion or still under construction. Based on the initial
                         demand projections using Bole Lemi and the pre-feasibility study as a basis, 40 to 60 companies are
                         expected to set up operations in Bole I and II combined, and a similar number in each of Phases I and
                         II of the Kilinto Zone, reaching 100 to 150 companies in total. Bole I and II are principally attracting
                         textile, clothing, and leather goods manufacturing. The Kilinto IZ, in addition to accommodating
                         these industries, is expected to attract companies in the pharmaceutical and agro-processing
                         industries.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6. The IZs being developed under the Project will include modern social and environmental
                         processes. The Competitiveness and Job Creation (CJC) Project will support the development and
                         implementation of a modern environmental and social approach focusing on three themes: (i) women
                         in IZs; (ii) an environmental management system to support an effective approach for environmental
                         sustainability; and (iii) the framework for the application of a green and low-carbon IZ approach. In
                         Bole Lemi II and Kilinto, for example, waste steam from textile dyeing or washing processes could
                         be used in other industrial processes such as steam softening of leather or wet-thermal heat setting
                         and shaping of shoes. Treated waste-water could be recycled into industrial processes and/or
                         provided to neighboring agricultural areas for irrigation. This approach will provide an opportunity to
                         replicate these good practices across the future IZs and the focus industries.

                         Component 3: Enhancing IZ linkages to the local economy (US$17.2 million)

                         7. The objective of this component is to support linkages between domestic SMEs and medium and
                         large firms in producing and processing (upstream) activities, and marketing (downstream) activities,
                         especially those in the industrial zones (IZs). SMEs face difficulties accessing appropriate skills,
                         technologies, and finance that keep them from growing out of low-productivity, low-quality traps
                         and linking up with larger manufacturing firms.



                                                                       Page 3 of 13
                         Sub-component 3.1: Skills Development Center (US$ 1.8 m)

                         8. A skills development center will be set up in Bole Lemi II and will be used by investors and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         workers from the two zones supported by the CJC project. A private firm or a consultant, hired by
                         the PCU, will manage the center and develop curriculums in collaboration with an advisory board -
                         comprised of firms in the zones – and the sectoral institutes, notably the Leather Industrial
                         Development Institute (LIDI) and the Textile Industrial Development Institute (TIDI). Once the
                         zones take off, and with the increasing demand, some private ownership could be explored.

                         9. Initially, this center will help serve the skills needs of investors who will be operating within the
                         industrial zones through the provision of basic skills and working ethics training. It will speed up the
                         operations of firms in the zones - by reducing the duration of on-the-job training and help smooth the
                         hiring process for the firms which often face the challenge of finding the right workers at initial
                         stage. In a second phase, this center will help alleviate the workers retention challenges that firms
                         are facing through the provision of various part-time courses for workers. Eventually, this center will
                         be financially sustainable and may provide various courses and modules for workers and will also
                         tailor training for SMEs that want to link up with firms in the zones. The center can also be rented
                         out to firms to conduct their own trainings or have conferences, exhibitions and other events.

                         10. Training courses in the skills development center will be delivered by trainers from the sectoral
                         institutes, private sector trainers or external consultants. Support will be provided to the institutes to
                         implement their training of trainers (ToT) programs for up to seven years, and will include hiring of
                         short-term trainers, twinning arrangements with other good practice institutes, and consulting
                         services.

                         Sub-component 3.2: Business-to-Business (B2B) Linkage Platform (US$ 0.4m)

                         11. The main objective of this B2B Linkage Platform is to develop a cost-effective way to bridge the
                         information gap between investors and their potential local suppliers, by creating an online
Public Disclosure Copy




                         marketplace that connects buyers – typically large firms and foreign investors – to suppliers – which
                         are usually medium and small local firms. This system will generate, aggregate and disseminate
                         valuable information on suppliers and their profile, so as to reduce buyers’ search and screening costs
                         as they try to identify viable and trustworthy business partners. This website will be developed based
                         on the information portal called “Subcontracting and Partnership Exchange” (SPX) system that has
                         been developed by UNIDO. It will be implemented under the auspices of the Ethiopian Investment
                         Agency (EIA), where investors will have a single-window access to registered local firms in different
                         sectors through EIA’s website. In the first phase, focus will be on leather and textile/garments
                         sectors, given the pipeline of investors attracted to Ethiopia. Subsequently we expect to add other
                         light manufacturing sectors such as food processing, depending on the demand in the zones. Sectoral
                         institutes, such as the Leather Industry Development Institute and the Textile Industry Development
                         Institute, will be in charge of collecting, validating, populating and updating the relevant information,
                         and promoting the information portal to suppliers and buyers, with the support of external
                         consultants for the first 1-2 years.

                         12. To make the full use of the linkage platform, the system will also be linked up with some of the
                         services provided in the skills development center: 1) advertise and promote the training programs
                         carried out by the skills center; 2) allow potential trainees to register for the training programs online;
                         and 3) through the registration system, the skills center could build up a pool of trained labor, which
                         will serve as part of the head-hunting functions of the skills center.

                                                                        Page 4 of 13
                         Sub-component 3.3: Business-to-Business Linkage Fund (US$ 15m)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         13. The objective of this instrument is to enhance the quality, productivity and market access of small
                         and medium enterprises. It will therefore help strengthen the business linkages between large firms
                         within the zones and local SMEs outside the zones through removing the binding constraints for
                         SMEs to be qualified suppliers or subcontractors for bigger firms. Each application (called Supply
                         Development Plan) will specify the nature of the problems, objective and scope of the interventions,
                         total cost and breakdowns, targeted results and concrete plans to execute the interventions. The
                         approval of each proposal is subject to the identification of a potential buyer(s) located in Bole Lemi
                         or Kilinto. The funds will be disbursed to local SMEs (potential suppliers) and can be used in various
                         ways (for example, skills training, equipment upgrading, compliance training, product certification,
                         etc.) depending on the nature of the binding constraints identified in the Supply Development Plan.
                         Access criteria will be defined in an operations manual.

                         14. This grant will not cover more than 60 percent of the costing presented in the proposal (no more
                         than 50 percent of goods). No single firm may receive total grant funding in excess of $400,000 from
                         this fund. The Fund will be headed by a full-time manager, and its management is expected to follow
                         the successful model used under the Ethiopia Competitiveness Facility (ECF) which was
                         administered by an independent administration unit with oversight of the Steering Committee headed
                         by the Government.

                         Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$8.5 million)

                         15. The Project will finance Project Implementati on Unit (PIU) core staff (Project coordinator,
                         fiduciary and safeguard specialist), equipment and operating costs. It will also strengthen the
                         capacity of the PIU strategically by providing technical assistance through consultancies on specific
                         issues (technical, safeguards, legal, engineering expertise etc).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         16. The Project will fund Monitoring & Evaluation related activities that will be performed by the
                         implementing agencies and specific tasks that cut across the project components. These include:
                         surveying regularly firms within the zones, monitoring subprojects financed under the B2B Linkage
                         Fund, supervision of implementation of the safeguards instruments; and updating project key
                         performance indicators.

                         17. In order to account for the change brought about by the CJC Project as well as to foster our
                         understanding of the Project’s profound consequences on beneficiaries, the Project will conduct a
                         rigorous impact evaluation based on scientific methods of certain interventions. Critically, the
                         evaluators will compare treatment and control groups in order to causally link any observable
                         changes to project activities. The impact analysis will therefore be able to capture intended and
                         unintended benefits of project interventions.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

                         The sites for the industrial zone (IZ) construction are found in Addis Ababa in localities called Bole
                         Lemi and Kilinto.



                                                                      Page 5 of 13
                         (a) Bole Lemi

                         The Bole Lemi IZ site is located in the southeastern suburbs of Addis Ababa at a distance of 15 -20
Public Disclosure Copy




                         kms from the city center. The Bole Lemi IZ site is situated by a vast farm lands and quarries in its
                         south and southeast, by residential areas in the north and northwest, and by the Akaki River and its
                         tributaries in the east. The site is virtually devoid of native trees and shrubs due to heavy
                         encroachment from farming, grazing and establishment of numerous quarry and stone crusher plants.
                         However, there are eucalyptus trees in areas very close to resident areas. There is no any designated
                         sensitive area

                         Bole-Lemi Industrial Zone development project is being developed in two phases. The first phase
                         which is being developed by the Government has a total size of 156 ha and the second phase is
                         about 186 ha. The first phase of the zone is being constructed with five initial pre-built factory
                         facilities in areas of 10,000 square meters, five factory buildings of 5,000 square meters with
                         administration / management building. The Zone also included on-site infrastructures such as power,
                         water, drainage, sewage, connections to waste treatment plant and telecommunications.

                         The Bole-Lemi phase II industry zone development project, planned to be supported by the CJC
                         project, will also have pre-built factory facilities which are expected to mainly be used for Garment,
                         textiles and leather factories . The industrial zone development will involve, in addition to pre-built
                         factory facilities, the development of infrastructure such as road and utility networks, greenery and
                         parking, business and administration, storage and other various related infrastructures in the area
                         allocated for industry zone development. The structures that will be built in the industry zone are (a)
                         factory sheds, b) sheds to be used mainly for working area and storage or other related activities in
                         the industry zone, c) separate buildings for the various administrative and social services, and d) road
                         and other utilities. These also include buildings and the installation of utility networks to set up the
                         above mentioned functions.

                         According to the Industry zone Development Program Implementation Plan (prepared by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Ministry of Industry and Ministry of Urban Development and Construction), the number of workers
                         to be engaged in the different activities is estimated to be up to 50,000.

                         (b) Kilinto

                         The Kilinto area is located at about 35km southeast of Addis Ababa, in the Addis Ababa City
                         Administration (recently moved from Oromia Regional State) in Akaki-Kality Sub-city. The Kilinto
                         area is close to Yarer Mountain and about 5km from the Akaki Bridge on the Akaki-Bishoftu road.

                         The KIZ area is found at an elevation over 2,200m.a.s.l, covered with light black soil and few
                         pockets of vertisols (deep black soil).The land terrain is near to flat and the site hardly requires
                         drainage and crossing structures. Vegetation and trees have already been cleared. The site is used to
                         grow crops like Tef, wheat, chickpea, linseed, and the grazing lands are used for keeping cattle,
                         sheep and donkeys. The plots with farm trees are mainly planted with fast growing eucalyptus that
                         served as source of domestic firewood, construction and income. The KIZ area is rich in quarry and
                         may need early removal of this valuable resource before the commencement of construction. It is
                         worth noting that the specific site for Bank intervention within the Kilinto area will not be known
                         before the completion of the feasibility study.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                                                                      Page 6 of 13
                         Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS)
                         Asferachew Abate Abebe (AFTN3)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes           The subproject location is known but all the types
                         BP 4.01                                         of activities to be supported by the project are still
                                                                         evolving at this stage of project preparation, and
                                                                         may trigger Category A safeguards issues. The
                                                                         ESMF has been consulted upon and disclosed in-
                                                                         country and at the InfoShop before appraisal. The
                                                                         ESMF will guide the preparation of project
                                                                         specific environmental assessments that will be
                                                                         prepared before any decision is made on possible
                                                                         financing under component 2. An ESIA for one of
                                                                         the sites, Bole Lemi Phase 2, has also been
                                                                         prepared, consulted upon and disclosed in-
                                                                         country and at the InfoShop.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            The project is not being implemented in or near
                                                                         natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            The project does not involve forest activities.

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project does not involve pest management
                                                                         activities.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The project is being implemented in areas that do
                         BP 4.11                                         not have physical cultural resources in or near
                                                                         them.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            The initial screening indicates that there are no
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         groups in the project area that meet the criteria of
                                                                         the policy.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The exact locations of project activities will be
                         4.12                                            carried out within existing locations, but the exact
                                                                         subproject activities are undetermined activities,
                                                                         and might include civil works, and possible
                                                                         legacy issues, with potential for adverse localized
                                                                         environmental and social impacts, which cannot
                                                                         be determined prior to appraisal. Therefore, as a
                                                                         precautionary measure, the project has prepared,
                                                                         consulted upon and disclosed in-country and at
                                                                         the InfoShop a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                         (RPF) A RAP for the Bole Lemi Phase 2 site has
                                                                         also been consulted upon and disclosed in-
                                                                         country and at the InfoShop.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No            N/A

                                                           No            N/A



                                                                 Page 7 of 13
                            Projects on International
                            Waterways
                            Projects    OP/BP 7.50
                                     in Disputed  Areas OP/BP No                  N/A
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is classified as Category A because it is likely that some of the industries to be
                              established in the IZs will have adverse environmental impacts that are sensitive, and diverse.
                              Quantifiable data on the magnitude of adverse environmental impacts associated with construction
                              and operational phases of the Industrial Zones are not available. However, during the construction
                              of the Industrial Zones, it is likely that adverse impacts related with noise, dust, vibrations, closure
                              of access routes, heavy traffic, quarry sites, spoil materials and occupational health and safety
                              would occur.

                              During the operation, the industrial activities can emit gases, discharge liquid and solid wastes that
                              can be hazardous to the ecosystems and human health. More specific impacts, among others, may
                              include:
                              •        Public and ecosystem health by air pollution,
                              •        Contribute to climate change by emission of Green House Gases,
                              •        Visibility by creating smoke haze,
                              •        Affect the quality of surface and ground waters as well soil
                              •        Workers health upon direct contact and/or contamination with hazardous solid and liquid
                              wastes
                              •        livestock upon direct consumption of solid and liquid wastes
                              •        fire hazard by storage, processing and release of flammable materials
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Mitigation measures are being adopted upfront with the application of green and low carbon IZ as
                              part of the design development of the IZs that will include modern and sustainable environment
                              processes and management.

                              The adverse social impacts will be site-specific, and are limited in terms their significance.
                              Specifically, social adverse impacts are related to: i) community impacts such as land taking and
                              resettlement--- that is displacement of farmers from their agricultural farmland and residential
                              houses. The establishment of the proposed industrial zone will involve the demolishing of houses
                              and loss of annual and perennial crops and trees with in the project site. The major impact is
                              therefore related with economic activities of households as well as disruption of their social and
                              cultural setting in the existing neighborhoods; and ii) construction impacts such as noise, dust, soil
                              erosion. The Bank environmental safeguards policy OP/BP4.01 for Environmental Assessment is
                              triggered given the nature and scale of project activities and anticipated environmental and social
                              impacts.

                              For Bole Lemi, about 259 households are expected to be affected by the project and all will lose
                              their farmland and perennial crops. The residential houses will also be demolished by the project
                              and consequently there will be physical displacement. The PAPs obtain income and livelihood
                              from agricultural activities like crop production and rearing animals; and the farmlands are used


                                                                          Page 8 of 13
                           for cultivation of different kinds of crops; such as, Teff, Maize, Wheat, Barley, Sorghum, Sweet
                           potato etc, among which Teff is dominantly cultivated. Most of the PAPs are using their product
                           for household consumption. They sell only some amount of crops for purchasing cloths and other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           consumer goods such as kerosene, food oil, salt etc. Agricultural product contributes 99 % of their
                           annual household income. A total of 38,500 perennial trees (not forest but backyard trees owned
                           by individuals) will be affected due to the project. Different types of trees will be affected; though
                           most are Eucalyptus and Juniper (Tid).

                           Proposed Mitigation Measures: Based on the GOE's Resettlement/Rehabilitation policy framework
                           and WB policy on involuntary resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), description of the packages of
                           compensation is established at a replacement cost. The resettlement measures will assist each
                           category of eligible displaced persons to achieve the objectives of the policy of GOE and WB. In
                           line with the government legal provisions and WB’s operational steps, the following mitigation
                           measures were developed in response to the issues stressed by the PAPs for affecting their lives:
                           (a) Compensation for physical assets owned, like house structures and fences, (b) Compensation
                           for their farmland and Grazing land, (c) Compensation for their planted trees, (d) Provision of
                           relocation allowance (movement and installation), Provision of compensation for livelihood
                           interruptions and income restoration strategies. Special Assistance will be provided to Vulnerable
                           Groups as well as specific funds will be allocated to support women career development and
                           continued engagement in economic activities, particularly female headed households, widows,
                           widowers and the elderly people. These special groups will be given direct support by acquisition
                           of land and developments of new structures to enable them have a smooth transition compared to
                           the others who will be compensated directly by cash payment and more importantly, concerns
                           which they raised during consultations are incorporated in the RAP as actionable points.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The Bank has also conducted retrospective due diligence for the ongoing Bole Lemi phase 1,
                           which is been financed with government fund and where land acquisition and resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                           activities have been done prior to Bank’s involvement. In preparing this project, the Bank
                           reviewed the lessons learned from the resettlement undertaken in Lemi Bole Phase I, which was
                           financed by the GoE. The review has underscored the importance of ensuring supporting
                           infrastructure, such as rural roads, water supply, health care and school facilities, is in place in the
                           resettlement sites, as well as identifying and targeting development activities to the vulnerable
                           groups. The project will therefore develop community development initiatives for Lemi Bole
                           Phase II, including providing basic infrastructure and facilities, particularly in places where project
                           affected persons are relocated. The project will also emphasize a strong “community focus” and a
                           bottom up planning with full participation of all stakeholders at community level, at woreda and
                           regional government levels.

                           The project is aware of potential indirect social impacts of this type of development, which might
                           result from induced growth or significant secondary changes in the project area. Therefore, the
                           project will work with the local, regional and federal authorities to plan for the influx of a
                           secondary population of voluntary migrants who might take advantage of the new economic
                           opportunities that will be created, particularly those seeking employment and or other services,
                           which will place a burden on the industrial zone surrounding communities and environment given
                           the needs for food, fuelwood and living space. Specifically, the project will work with responsible
                           government to examine the predictable social impacts of influx of outsiders on the local
                           population, which will put pressure on existing resources and infrastructure; existing village


                                                                       Page 9 of 13
                           institutions—possible breakdown of traditional methods of social control and discipline and
                           potential widening of the poverty gap, since the more vulnerable groups such as the aged and
                           women, must compete both with the local population and with outsiders for limited resources.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The industrial zone sites are delineated as industrial development area in the city master plan and
                           local development plan has been handed over by the Addis Ababa City Administration to the
                           Ministry of Industry for industrial development. The selection of the sites as industrial
                           development area was done taking into account the following industrial site selection factors:
                           -        Strategic located in the periphery of Addis
                           -        Availability of ample land for industrial zone development
                           -        In close proximity to the national highway network and Bole International Airport/ New
                           Cargo Terminal
                           -        A greenfield development site
                           -        Opportunity to design a best practice industrial zone away from residential areas
                           -        Opportunity to have a direct/ independent road entrance access for vehicles and trucks
                           -        Opportunity to provide proper infrastructure and utilities to the site as per industrial
                           sectors/ demands
                           -        Opportunity to phase development according to demand
                           -        Immediate access to a variety of types of labor and creation of employment opportunities
                           -        International amenities in close proximity (hotels, schools, hospitals, parks etc)
                           The Government has disclosed the master plan for the city and the local development plan.

                           As part of its due diligence, the World Bank has conducted social screening of the project sites to
                           assess safeguards risks and potential impact of the proposed project on humans and environment,
                           particularly, to determine whether the physical and sociocultural characteristics of Bole Lemi II
                           and the proposed site of Kilinto meet the requirements of OP4.10. The screening observed no
                           visible or unique socio-cultural characteristics similar to the OP4.10 requirements and notes the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           location of the project in an urban area; therefore, the task team has concluded that OP 4.10 is not
                           triggered.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           For Bole Lemi site, where the location is known, the client has prepared Resettlement Action Plan
                           (RAP) in order to minimize the negative impacts that will be created on the local population due to
                           the implementation of Industrial Zone Development project. The preparation of the RAP is on the
                           basis of the Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, and the World Bank's
                           Operational Policies and Procedures (OP/BP 4.12). Further, the RAP is complemented by
                           Environmental and Social Assessment (ESIA) that assesses key environmental and socio-
                           economic factors that require consideration; identifies and forecast the possible positive and
                           negative impacts on the environment resulting from the proposed project; identifies the impact of
                           the project on the surrounding community; identifies vulnerable groups that may be excluded from
                           the program and be adversely affected as a result, and the necessary impact mitigating measures;
                           assesses any potential adverse environmental and social impacts of the project and determine
                           whether the program is likely to trigger the World Bank social safeguards policies; and,
                           recommends in the early stage of project preparation, the appropriate measures towards addressing
                           World Bank requirements on safeguards triggered by the project (OP4.01, and OP/BP 4.12).

                          For the Kilinto site, where the full extent of the social impacts of the project is not known in

                                                                     Page 10 of 13
                           advance, the client has prepared a RPF, given the possibility that some of the transactions may
                           involve land acquisition and involuntary resettlement, where applicable, the RPF will guide
                           preparation of Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for subprojects. RPF was prepared by the client
Public Disclosure Copy




                           according to national and World Bank policies and was consulted upon and disclosed in country
                           and through the World Bank’s InfoShop. The RPF contains details of the principles and objectives
                           governing the preparation and implementation of RAPs, including review, approval and disclosure
                           of RAPs, screening for Involuntary Resettlement, establishment of baseline and socioeconomic
                           data, and the likely categories of project affected persons. Compensation arrangements for those
                           being involuntarily resettled, including possibilities for land exchange, are outlined in the RPF. In
                           particular, the RPF also contains a grievance handling mechanism to address any grievance and/or
                           complaints of Project Affected Persons (PAPs) on any aspects of land acquisition, compensation
                           and livelihood rehabilitation in a timely, adequate and transparent manner, to ensure that all PAPs
                           as well as CSOs are aware of the procedures of grievance redress. Social impacts and risks besides
                           resettlement will be addressed through the ESMF/ESIA.
                           Capacity Building: The PIU Unit is new and will require capacity building to address safeguards
                           related issues. The project will identify the capacity building needs and will provide training with
                           emphasis on understanding the WB’s safeguards policies, guidelines, reporting, and strengthen
                           project internal monitoring mechanism. The PIU will hire a dedicated safeguards staff: one
                           environmental and one social specialist to work with the project on day-to-day basis. ToRs for
                           these specialists have been finalized and cleared by the WB.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project has multiple stakeholders in various levels of government: Kebele, Woreda, regional
                           and Federal, including federal and state agencies (such as EPA, REPA and woreda land
                           commission), project implementation agencies, non-governmental organizations, private sector
                           and local communities. During project preparation, meetings were held with key officials and
                           opinion leaders to inform them about the project, and receive feedback about project
                           implementation. Concerns expressed during these public meetings or focus group discussions have
Public Disclosure Copy




                           been addressed either in the project design, or in the RAP/RPF. More importantly, in preparation
                           the safeguards instruments (ESIA, RAP, ESMF and RPF), various public meetings were held with
                           relevant government agencies, local government authorities, non-governmental organizations, and
                           civil society groups. These stakeholders were supportive of the project and interested in knowing
                           what types of industries to be attracted in the industrial zones and how these industries will
                           manage issues of waste management, pollution, noise level, etc. Stakeholders affected by physical
                           relocation from project site were also interested on how they will be compensated in accordance
                           with Bank’s OP/BP policy on involuntary resettlement. It was also agreed that public consultation
                           with project affected persons will be a continuous process during project implementation.

                           The approved safeguards instruments are disclosed locally and in World Bank InfoShop. The
                           government is ensuring that the documents were made accessible to affected people, NGOs, Civil
                           Society Organizations (CSOs) in a form, manner, and language that are understandable to them.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          09-Jan-2014
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       09-Jan-2014
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

                                                                     Page 11 of 13
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                         09-Jan-2014
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Feb-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                         05-Feb-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?



                                                                    Page 12 of 13
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Asya Akhlaque
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 20-Mar-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Yira J. Mascaro (SM)          Date: 21-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                Page 13 of 13
