                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC876

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Feb-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Cape Verde                        Project ID:       P126516
                            Project Name:       Cape Verde - Transport Sector Reform Project (P126516)
                            Task Team           Pierre Graftieaux
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           05-Feb-2013                       Estimated         24-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTTR                             Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (59%), Public administration-
                                                Transportation (18%), Ports, waterways and shipping (12%), Av iation (11%)
                            Theme(s):           Infrastructure services for private sector development (23%), Rural services and
                                                infrastructure (65%), Other public sector governanc e (6%), Injuries and non-
                                                communicable diseases (6%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     31.00                        Total Bank Financing:          19.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                Amount
                              Borrower                                                                         12.00
                              IDA reallocated as a credit                                                      19.00
                              Total                                                                            31.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           25.     The proposed objectives of the project are to: (i) support the Recipient’s efforts to sustain its
                           road asset base, and (ii) provide the building blocks towards transport sector SOE reform and
                           increased private sector participation.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed project consists of the following four components described below:

                         Component 1 – Road Asset Preservation including PBMC on selected road network in targeted
Public Disclosure Copy




                         islands – US$16 million, out of which IDA finances US$11 million.

                         This component will scale up the use of Performance-based Maintenance Contracts (PBMC) in
                         CapeVerde, building on the still incipient experience of the IE with this type of contract, and finance
                         five-year Performance Based Contracts (PBCs) 197 km of roads in the island of Santo Antão, 3 km
                         in the island of São Nicolau, 48 km on the island of Maio, and 171 km in the island of Fogo. These
                         contracts would cover about 40 percent of the national network, and more than half of the roads
                         located in hilly areas and will include emergency works, rehabilitation, and routine maintenance. The
                         contracts will be co-financed with the Road Fund as follows: the IDA credit will finance the
                         rehabilitation works (mainly spot improvements on roads mostly in overall good condition ), while
                         the maintenance costs will be funded by the Road Fund. According to IE, the overall aggregated
                         costs of these PBMC is estimated at US$13.5 million, out of which about 63 percent (US$8.5
                         million) will go towards spot improvements, and 37 percent (US$5.0 million ) towards the
                         maintenance costs.

                         The IE has benefited from a South-South Exchange with Brazil on PBCs, which gave them the
                         opportunity to travel to Brazil at the end of October 2012 in order to visit PBMC in the State of
                         Bahia and to meet the Ministry of Public Works in Brasilia about the Brazilian
                         "CREMAs" (Rehabilitation and Maintenance Contracts). Brazilian experts also travelled to Cape-
                         Verde in December 2012 for a training seminar on PBMC targeting the IE, and the local contractors
                         and consulting firms and also to help the IE prepare the bidding documents and draft contracts of the
                         upcoming PBCs.

                         This component will provide for: (a) consultancy services by firms that will perform as Monitoring
                         Consultants (MC) for the above PBMC. The MC’s role is to monitor the Contracting Entity’s (CE)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         performance and provide timely advice to them to ensure the quality of the final deliverables. The
                         MC will be responsible for verifying the achievement of all of the contractual requirements within
                         stipulated time and budget; and (b) the allocation of US$2 million for urgent works required after
                         heavy rainfalls, so that funds needed for emergencies be readily available to initiate remedial works
                         immediately, preventing further costly deterioration.

                         Component 2 - Institutional Strengthening and Project Management in the Road Sector – US$3
                         million.

                         The main objective of the technical assistance will be, consistently with Component 1, to ensure the
                         preservation of road assets through different means such as (a) the setting up of a Road and Bridge
                         Management System to collect and analyze yearly data relating to the condition of bridges and roads
                         in order to highlight the vulnerabilities of the road network and re-orient maintenance efforts
                         accordingly, (b) institutional strengthening for the IE and the FAMR, and contribution to the
                         operating costs of the Project Coordinating Office (PCO), (c) definition and establishment of
                         complementary funding mechanisms to widen the resource base of the FAMR. This component also
                         includes the purchase of truck weighbridges, including portable ones, to enforce the existing
                         legislation on axle load control.

                         Component 3 – Road Safety – US$1 million.
                         This component will finance: (a) the revision of the NRSP, including the establishment of a road
                         safety action plan; (b) the implementation of an accident database and monitoring and evaluation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (M&E) system; (c) a study for the establishment of a National Road Safety Observatory; (d) the
                         revision of the outdated highway code; (e) the purchase of radars for speed limit enforcements,
                         alcohol breath analyzers, and (f) institutional capacity-building of DGTR and IE in the area of road
                         safety, including road engineering standards to improve road safety.

                         The proposed activities will complement ongoing activities financed by the Portuguese Cooperation
                         to the tune of US$1.0 million to train police forces in the areas of speed limit enforcement, fight
                         against drunk-driving, etc.

                         Component 4 – Technical Assistance (TA) in support of the Government’s reform agenda for the
                         Corporate Governance of SOEs, with a focus on the air and sea transport sectors – US$3 million out
                         of which IDA finances US$2.0 million.

                         This component will finance: (a) the strengthening of the SOE ownership and oversight functions
                         including capacity building targeting the SOE Unit within the Ministry of Finance (MOF), and (b)
                         critical studies and technical assistance activities in support of the SOEs: TACV, ASA, ENAPOR,
                         and IMP.

                         Technical assistance activities will include but are not limited to: (a) financial analysis of transport
                         sector SOE’s books and design of optimal tariff strategies for transport sector SOEs, (b) review of
                         labor law and SOE’s labor agreements to ascertain total cost of labor right sizing, (c) assessment of
                         regulatory agency model options in the sea transport sector, (d) Public Private Partnership (PPP)
                         feasibility for ASA’s airports and ENAPOR’s ports, (e) route network analysis for air transport,
                         revenues optimization action plan, debt reduction strategy for TACV, (f) mapping of maritime
                         industry and sea transport skills, (g) communication strategy geared towards SOEs employees etc.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in Cape Verde, especially in the islands of Santo Antão, São Nicolau, Maio,
                         and Fogo.

                         The criteria used to select the beneficiary islands were as follows: (a) focus on hilly islands where
                         maintenance is more costly and more complex, except for one “flat island” [Maio] as a pilot to be
                         able to draw lessons about our second generation PBCs for both hilly and flat islands, (b) target
                         pockets of poverty: according to the 2012 Poverty Mapping, Santo Antão and Fogo are the two
                         poorest islands in Cape Verde with a poverty incidence of 41 and 40 percent respectively. Maio is the
                         poorest of the flat islands, and the works in São Nicolau are indispensable to prevent the isolation of
                         40 percent of the population of the island living in the eastern part in the municipalities of Carriçal
                         and Juncalinho (c) include sections whose condition jeopardizes access to some remote communities,
                         and (d) internal rate of return of the proposed works.

                         The road network in Cape Verde is vulnerable and expensive to maintain because of the geography
                         (steep slopes), geology (unstable and crumbly terrain conducive to landslides, subsidence and rock
                         falls), and climate (heavy rains, potentially explained by climate change and likely to become more
                         and more common). In addition, most of these roads were designed decades ago for much lower
                         traffic volumes than those of today, and the drainage systems have been sized for rainfalls dwarfed
                           by the downpours being experienced over the last few years. Many would need to be re-engineered if
                           not reconstructed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The proposed project of road rehabilitation is designed to have beneficial impacts on the population
                           in terms of improving people and goods movements as island roads are often damaged and cut off
                           due to torrential rains. However, these works also might have adverse environmental and social
                           impacts such as losses of acacias vegetation which are reducing erosion along the right-of-way, and
                           the risk of accident for the construction workers due to the sometimes dangerous location of some
                           road sections (at the edge of cliffs for example).
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) of the Ministry of Infrastructure and Maritime Economy,
                           which has been satisfactorily implementing the ongoing Road Sector Support Project since 2005, is
                           experienced in safeguards policies, in line with existing country legislation and World Bank
                           procedures. The PCU has already prepared and implemented successfully an Environmental and
                           Social Management Framework as well as Environmental Safeguards Impacts assessments for
                           transport investments.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Demba Balde (AFTCS)
                           Isabelle Celine Kane (AFTN2)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              This policy will be triggered due to the potential
                           BP 4.01                                              adverse environmental and social impacts such
                                                                                as losses of accacias vegetation, risk of accident
                                                                                for the workers during engineering works. An
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                Framework (ESMF) and four Environmental
                                                                                and Social Management Plans (ESMP) are
                                                                                being prepared, respectively for Santo Antão,
                                                                                São Nicolau, Maio, and Fogo islands where
                                                                                performance-based contracts for rehabilitation
                                                                                and maintenance will be financed under the
                                                                                project.
                                                                                These safeguards documents will allow the
                                                                                identification, assessment and mitigation of
                                                                                potential negative environmental and social
                                                                                impacts related to these activities. It will also
                                                                                address the potential environmental and social
                                                                                risks that would arise in repairing roads and
                                                                                bridges after floods. These documents will be
                                                                                consulted upon, and disclosed before appraisal.

                                                                                The draft version of the ESMF and those of the
                                                                                four ESMPs have been reviewed by the Bank’s
                                                                 project team and comments provided to improve
                                                                 the quality of the documents. The final version
                                                                 of the document is expected by February 21,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 2013 after the pre appraisal mission.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    4.04 on Natural Habitats will not be triggered
                                                                 because the investments in this project only
                                                                 concern rehabilitation works of an existing road
                                                                 network. It is not expected for the works to be
                                                                 undertaken to develop quarries. Generally, the
                                                                 works envisaged do not have impacts on natural
                                                                 habitats or ecological functions of the areas.
                                                                 There is no land clearing or degradation of
                                                                 ecosystems.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project does not involve forests or forest
                                                                 management.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project does not involve pest management
                                                                 schemes.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   This policy will be triggered in relation to
                         BP 4.11                                 emergency works location not yet identified.
                                                                 However it is clear that no rehabilitation works
                                                                 already identified under the maintenance
                                                                 contract are located near cultural heritage spots.
                                                                 The ESMF prepared for the project will address
                                                                 this policy in the case of chance finds in
                                                                 emergency and other works, but the four
                                                                 ESMPs do not include such measures because
                                                                 physical cultural resources are not affected by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 the works in these road segments.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                 area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   No resettlement has been identified in relation
                         4.12                                    to the rehabilitation and emergency works so
                                                                 far. However, some portions of crop plots might
                                                                 be affected because of emergency repairs after
                                                                 extreme climate events. Therefore a
                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is being
                                                                 prepared. The first draft of the RPF is being
                                                                 reviewed by the Bank project team and
                                                                 comments will be provided to improve the
                                                                 quality of the document. The final version of the
                                                                 RPF is expected by February 21, 2013 after the
                                                                 pre appraisal mission. The RPF will be
                                                                 consulted upon and disclosed before appraisal.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No    N/A
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 28-Feb-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The safeguards instruments prepared under the Road Sector Support project will be updated since
                                      Environmental assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and
                                      Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) policies are triggered.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Pierre Graftieaux

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 26-Feb-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (SM)                                                                                            Date: 18-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
