INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCI 128
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Dec-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         India                      Project ID:   P152698
Project Name:    IN Hydrology III Project (P 152698)
Task Team        Anju Gaur
Leader(s):
Estimated        31-Jul-2015                Estimated     30-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWADR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       General information and communications sector (40%), Irrigation and drainage
(20%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and flo od protection (15%),
Flood protection (15%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%)
Theme(s):        Water resource management (80%), e-Government (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     500.00             Total Bank Financing:   370.00
-       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              130.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     370.00
Total                                                           500.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed PDO is to "to strengthen water resources planning and management in selected
institutions across India through improved monitoring and enhanced accessibility and use of water
resources data and information"
C. Project Description


﻿Based on the successes of previous phases of project, the Government of India wishes to expand
these efforts to cover the entire country including the states of the Indus, Ganga and Brahmaputra
basins . HP-III will further improve and expand monitoring systems for water availability and water
use. It will emphasize real-time monitoring for operations, flow forecasting, integrated water
resource planning on a river basin basis and strengthening of community-based groundwater
management. HP-III will contribute to the Gol Digital India initiative by integrating across state and
O
central agencies.
Building on the earlier phases, HP-III will include the following:
i.     Database standardization: a national information center and center of excellence will be
established to standardize databases and associated procedures and to integrate hydro-
meteorological and water use data of the country.
ii.    Transparent and reliable water data: real-time and automated monitoring with online delivery
for reliable and transparent data access in support of operational management.
iii.   Balanced centralized and decentralized support: the project will provide both generic
national solutions (through central agencies) and specific state-based solutions.
iv.Operational systems: state-level operational systems will be put in place for flood management
and irrigation distribution.
v.     River basin approach: IWRM on a river basin basis will be promoted to devise appropriate
solutions for planning investments and developments.
vi.Flexible design: the project will support performance based funding allocations and flexibility in
program to address the needs of states.
vii.Cross learning: cross-learning among states will be continued including transferring knowledge
from HP-II state agencies to new HP-III agencies.
The project will consist of the following four components:
Component A: Improving In Situ Monitoring System (IMS): USD 300 million.
o
This component will expand and upgrade water resources monitoring systems, bolster database
population and maintenance, develop community-based data collection and water management, and
conduct site specific surveys to the states in the Indus, Ganges and Brahmaputra Basins and in North-
East India. This will include:
i)     In situ real time/automated monitoring systems (weather, river, reservoir, canal, groundwater
and water quality);
ii)    Community-based hydrological monitoring and management system;
iii)   Implementation of protocols developed by central agencies (CWC, CGWB and CPCB) for
inter-agency data sharing, data validation and analytical quality control procedures for water quality
laboratories;
iv)Establishment of National Water Information Center though upgrading and expansion of database
software on web-based centralized systems for data entry, data storage, data management and data
dissemination, developed under HP-II (including India-WRIS); and
v)Targeted surveys such as i) priority reservoir sedimentation surveys, ii) bathymetric surveys in
river stretches with critical flooding issues, iii) groundwater exploration and aquifer mapping for
selected areas, and iv) water quality and waste load surveys, to assess the load, fate and transport of
critical constituents within water quality hotspots.


﻿The output of this component would be a national Water Resources Monitoring System.
Component B: Improving Spatial Information System (SIS): USD 80 million
0
The component will strengthen and make available remote sensing and spatial information data to
water managers and stakeholders through providing and processing of spatial data sets, creating tools
for tailor-made processing of spatial data, and developing web-based portals for public access to
information. Development of centralized spatial data sets will largely be produced by National
Remotes Sensing Center (NRSC), Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) and Survey of India
(SOI) with the dissemination of the information via a publicly accessible, web-based portal for non-
classified data. Products to be developed include:
i)     Digital Elevation Model (DEM) for the entire country for improved flood hazard mapping
and other planning purposes,
ii)    Local high resolution surveys (such as LIDAR) for flood prone areas to support flood risk
mapping and management action plans,
iii)   Satellite based estimates of water balance parameters including climate, land use, irrigation
water requirement, and flood assessment
iv)Publicly accessible, web-based portal for non-classified data.
The output of this component will be centralized Water Resources Information System (WRIS)
customized with respect to various users including public, state agencies and other departments.
Component C: Promoting Water Resources Operation and Management Applications (WROMA):
USD 50 million
This component will ensure the usefulness of the WRMS and WRIS data sets through decision
support systems (DSS) for river basin planning, water balance assessments, climate risk assessments,
water quality management, scenario analysis for investment planning, and tools for community based
groundwater management. It will develop short-term and seasonal flow forecasts, establish multiple
flood/flow forecasting systems important for operation of reservoirs and flood management, and
introduce on pilot basis operation and water distribution systems for irrigation systems.
o      Flagship knowledge products will include IWRM plans for selected river basins, a report on the
status of India's water resources, including water balance assessments, water quality assessments and
support purpose driven studies (PDS) on specific issues for each IA, including climate risk
assessments for present and planned water resources infrastructure.
Component D: Strengthening Water Resources Institutions and Capacity Building (WRICB): USD
70 million
Component D will strengthen and build capacity in the participating Implementing Agencies (Water
Resources Institutions) through establishing Water Resources Knowledge Centers and providing
infrastructure and ITC equipment, capacity building and extensive training programs, supporting
project management through Technical Assistance and Management Consultancies, and funding of
incremental staff. In particular, the project will support the establishment of a National Water
Information Center (upgraded version of India-WRIS) and centers of excellence at national and state
levels. The National Water Information Center will provide a central platform for integration and
exchange of water data across the country and will ensure the sustainability of data management.


﻿MoWR, RD&GR established India-WRIS with its own resources and they are now committed to the
National Water Information Center following the achievements of HP-II. In addition, the project will
support strengthening of irrigation training Institutes for improved water management practices.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project would cover all states of India and will draw lessons from the past and current projects -
Hydrology Phase I and II projects implemented in selected states. For the physical locations of the
monitoring stations (component 1) the sites will be chosen to fill the gaps in the current monitoring
network. While the intention is to use only state owned land for the upgradation of existing
monitoring stations, a final determination on locations where land is required, the process used to
obtain it, and a consequential determination of whether OP 4.12 is triggered will be made before
project appraisal. Under component 3, water resources management plans, and drought management
plans will be prepared at the sub-basin levels. The choice of sub-basins will emerge out of the
success of implementation of components 1 and 2 (as without adequate monitoring data and other
planning information, plans cannot be made), and as such any sub-basin in India could be selected.
Components 2 and 4will be implemented state-wide for all states. An identification of whether any
Scheduled Tribe households are impacted by the project will follow the determination of where
component 1 monitoring stations and community crowd sourced information are located, as well as
the choice of sub-basin for component 3. It may be noted that the project is intended to cover the
entirety of the country including Schedule 5 and Schedule 6 areas. As this automatically triggers OP
4.10, the project team will pay particular attention to the specific cultural needs of tribal groups in
ensuring meaningful participation.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
All states have well established water resources departments with some engineering skills to handle
the project interventions. The interventions in component 1 is not expected to lead to any significant
negative environmental consequence, as the construction/installation impacts will be very small and
very localized. It is not anticipated that land will need to be acquired for the monitoring stations but a
final determination will be made before appraisal. Should OP 4.12 be triggered, the project will
make an assessment of the Borrower's institutional capacity to implement appropriate social
safeguard management plans.
o
Components 2 and 4 are not expected to have any environmental and social impacts. Component 3
(preparation of sub-basin level plans for water resources management or for drought management)
may have environmental and social consequences, which need to be managed, particularly in the case
where Scheduled Tribe households are present in the selected sub-basin area. These will not be direct
impacts (and therefore, specialized capacity to management direct impacts will not be required), and
will only be indirect consequences from implementation of the sub-basin plans. It is therefore,
important to have a robust process of sub-basin plan preparation which takes care of the potential
social and environmental risks. Almost all states lack adequate and appropriate capacity to manage
the process of preparation of basin or sub-basin plans, and the project will support building that
capacity. As part of the capacity building component for the implementing agencies, the component
4 will also build/augment capacity to review and supervise the process of preparation sub-basin
plans, and the process to ensure that the potential environmental and social are identified adequately,
avoided or addressed adequately.
In fact, the project interventions and outcomes will contribute to better overall sustainable
environmental management in India, and as such be considered as part of the overall national


﻿capacity building for environmental management. By (i) setting in operation a reliable and
accessible hydrological knowledge base of meteorology, surface and ground water resources and
water quality; and by (ii) promotion of use of hydrological models and analytical tools,
environmental concerns will be mainstreamed in in the water resources sector plans, basin/sub-basin
)       plans, and in water resources management across the country. Special-purpose studies will include
studies relevant to critical environmental resources (such as lakes, rivers), and priority environmental
issues (such as the pollution of surface and groundwater resources, and source sustainability) which
will help conservation of critical environmental and water resources. The databases and analytical
tools developed by the project will help in the enhancement of dam safety in many basins.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Pyush Dogra (GENDR)
Smrithi Talwar (GSURR)
Tapas Paul (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project components 2 and 4 do not have any
OP/BP 4.01                               environmental impacts. Component 1 which will set
up monitoring stations, and associated facilities and
infrastructure that may have small footprints, and
very low levels of environmental impacts.
Component 3 (preparation of flood and drought
management support system, or water resources
management) may have impacts when
recommendations are implemented, and therefore, it
is important to prepare these system in a manner and
through a process that identify all relevant
Q)                                               environmental issues, avoids generation of those
issues, and mitigates and manages these issues as
part of the planning process. This will be taken care
by mainstreaming environmental management issues
in the terms of reference of the basin or sub-basin
level plans for water resources management or flood
management or drought management (and referred to
in the operational manual of the project).
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No         No direct or indirect impact on natural habitats. Any
potential indirect impact will be avoided or mitigated
as part of the process of preparation of the sub-basin
plans (i.e., during implementation of component).
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          No direct or indirect impact on forests or livelihood
based on forests. Any potential indirect impact will
be avoided or mitigated as part of the process of
preparation of the sub-basin plans (i.e., during
implementation of component).
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          The project does not finance any chemical or


﻿synthetic pesticide. In fact rational and balanced use
of pesticide, avoidance of WHO Classes 1 and 2
pesticides, and adoption of IPM and NPM will
expected to be promoted by the sub-basin level water
resources arrangement plans.
Physical Cultural Resources  No           No direct or indirect impact on forests or livelihood
OP/BP 4.11                                based on forests. Any potential indirect impact will
be avoided or mitigated as part of the process of
preparation of the sub-basin plans (i.e., during
implementation of component.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes          The project will be implemented all over the country,
4.10                                      including the scheduled tribal areas. The sub-basin
plans, as required, if located fully or partly in the
scheduled areas, will have consultation to ensure that
the concerns of the IP are considered in preparation
of relevant documents.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  TBD         It is anticipated that state owned land will be used for
BP 4.12                                   the construction of monitoring stations. However, as
the specific site locations are yet to be determined, a
clearer assessment on whether this policy is triggered
or not will be made before project appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           The project will finance data and analytical tools.
The reservoir operation system may suggest
improvement of operating rules for some reservoirs
(that will be selected depending on the success of
components 1 and 2 during implementation). The
project will examine the need for specific
examination of all such dams, and as required will (i)
accept selection of the dams where the borrower's
dam safety review and management processes are
deemed to be adequate and appropriate, for
consequent preparation of reservoir operation plans;
or in the event when the borrower's dam safety
review and management were not found to be
adequate and effective, (a) hire services of an
independent panel of experts on dam safety; and/or
(b) implement the requisite inspection, remedy or
any other dam safety measure. These mechanisms
will be covered by the operation manual of the
project.
Projects on International    TBD          The project does not finance any intervention, or any
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      detailed design and engineering study that triggers
the policy. The relevance and application of the
Policy will be assessed during preparation, and will
be updated, as necessary at appraisal.


﻿Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         No known locations of the project's footprint is in
BP 7.60                                   the disputed areas.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jul-2015
O
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
A.     Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage
ISDS would be prepared:
B.     For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-
stage ISDS:
C.Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The project is not expected to have any adverse environmental or social impacts. The project seeks
to improve the environmental knowledge base, environmental awareness, synergize data and
analysis on water quality, improve access to water related information, develop analytical tools
such as decision support systems and design aids that, in addition to the improved knowledge base
and special-purpose studies are expected to better inform environmental activities and improve
future environmental assessments at least in the project areas.
The project team will make a clearer identification of community beneficiaries (for components 1
and 3) so as to facilitate social benefits accruing from their participation in the project. Where
Scheduled Tribe families are directly impacted a social assessment will be undertaken to identify
particular areas of impact, so as to take this into account in sub-basin management plans. These
plans will be made with the active consultation of affected tribal households. A stakeholder and
institutional mapping will determine those beneficiaries (for component 4) who are the focus of
institutional strengthening initiatives.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Anju Gaur
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards    Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                  Date: 22-Dec-2014
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/      Name: Josses Mugabi (PMGR)                      Date: 22-Dec-2014
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


