                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC6092

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                          Project ID:      P132775
                            Project Name:      China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Infrastructure Project (P132775)
                            Task Team          Binyam Reja
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          27-Aug-2014                    Estimated        20-Jan-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                          Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Regional integration (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        297.65                Total Bank Financing:        150.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                   147.65
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      150.00
                              Total                                                                      297.65
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           18.    The PDO is to provide targeted residents of Wuwei Municipality and Linxia County with
                           improved and safe transport access to economic opportunities and social services.

                           Beneficiaries
                           19.     The project is designed to ensure development benefits reach isolated residents in Wuwei
                           Municipality and Linxia County, thereby ensuring China’s and Gansu’s development is shared with
                           vulnerable communities and extreme poverty in these communities is eliminated. The project would
                         ensure that these targeted groups are active participants in the economy by linking them to economic
                         opportunities and social services. More specifically, rural residents will benefit from having shorter
                         travel time to reach essential social services and job opportunities. They will also be able to transport
Public Disclosure Copy




                         their produce to urban markets efficiently. At the same time, urban residents will also benefit from
                         better integration with the rural economy and enjoy better access to agricultural products and rural
                         labor. Business in urban areas would benefit from a larger market.
                         C. Project Description
                         A. Concept

                         1.       The proposed project is to improve rural accessibility by improving and expanding the
                         current road network. To this end, the project will contain specific investments to construct and
                         upgrade priority roads that would ensure effective road connection between rural communities and
                         nearby towns. The proposed roads in Wuwei are located in the Urban-Rural Integration Core Area
                         supported by the Urban-Rural Integration and Development of Core Area Master Plan. Linxia 12th
                         Five Year includes the development an urban-rural integration program and the proposed roads in the
                         sub-plan for transport sector. The projects will also improve the roads available in the new urban
                         areas that foster urbanization and inclusive rural-urban integration. The project will support capacity
                         building program for road safety and maintenance planning, budgeting, and execution.

                         1. Description

                         2.     Component 1. Road Access Improvement (Total cost: US$288.43 million; IBRD Loan: US
                         $144.63 million).This component finance the (a) construction of about 88 km new roads in Wuwei
                         and about 34 km new roads in Linxia; and (b) rehabilitation of about 57 km existing roads in Linxia.
                         (See Annex 3 for detail project description by project city).

                         3.       Component 2. Institutional Development and Capacity Building (Total cost: US$9.22
                         million; IBRD Loan US$5.37 million). This component is designed to enhance the capacity of local
Public Disclosure Copy




                         governments to provide sustainable and safe road network in their respective jurisdiction, and for
                         sustaining the benefits under the project.. The component includes: (i) comprehensive planning
                         framework for road construction, operation and maintenance. This sub-component will finance a
                         study to introduce lifecycle planning whereby the financing requirements for road construction,
                         operation and maintenance are considered jointly during the planning stage. The study will also help
                         both governments to develop a long-term rural road maintenance funding arrangements, with a view
                         to identifying resources for rural and lower-level roads that are often neglected during the resource
                         allocation process; (ii) road safety program in project areas. This sub-component includes road safety
                         education and training to the public, developing the capacity of traffic policy to collect and analyze
                         traffic accident data with a view to develop safety mitigation measures; (iii) research on innovative
                         road design, construction techniques, and socio-economic impact of rural-urban integration. This
                         subcomponent will finance studies for (a) introducing new road design and construction techniques
                         in desert areas, (b) effective road development and operational procedures for rural-urban integration
                         in minority areas, and undertaking socio-economic impact of the project; and (iv) project
                         management and monitoring support. This sub-component will finance training and study tours for
                         local officials, and financing consultants to support implementation, monitoring and evaluation of
                         project activities.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                           The project is in Wuwei City and Linxia County, Gansu Province. All the physical activities are in
                           the urban and peri-urban area of Wuwei City and Linxia County. Wuwei Municipality, located at the
                           east of Gansu Hexi Corridor, is a prefecture-level city in northwest central Gansu province. It borders
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Yingchuan and Inner Mongolia in the north; Lanzhou Municipality, provincial capital of Gansu
                           Province in the east; and Qinghai Province in the south. Its position makes it an important business
                           and transportation hub for the area. Wuwei has one district, and three counties with a land area of
                           33,000km2 and a population of 1.82 million.
                           Linxia county is located in the middle of Gansu Province, the transition zone of Qinghai-Tibet
                           Plateau and Loess Plateau. Linxia is a county of the Linxia Hui Autonomous Prefecture. It borders
                           Yongjing County in the north; Dongxiang County and Hezheng County in the east; Gannan
                           Prefecture in the south; and Qinghai Provinces in the west. Linxia consists of 19 townships with a
                           population of 381,200 and a land area of 1212km2
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Gansu Province has worked with the Bank since 1980s. At present, it has four ongoing projects
                           financed by the Bank. The province is familiar with the Bank’s procedures and requirements. Under
                           the provincial level, project implementation and coordination will be carried out by Wuwei City and
                           Linxia County respectively. Wuwei and Linxia have established their Project Leading Group (PLG)
                           with a vice mayor or a country governor as the head of the PMOs, assisted by a number of
                           government agencies. PMOs have been established under the guidance of the PLGs. The PMOs
                           consist of departments responsible for financial, engineering, procurement, social and environmental
                           management.

                           The PMOs will designate staff for environmental safeguards management and for the coordination
                           among consultants and the PMOs. PMO will receive trainings of the Bank safeguard policies during
                           project preparation. The training will be provided by the Bank and the environmental consultants
                           engaged by the PMOs. The capacity of the PMOs will be strengthened to meet the Bank’s
                           requirement for project safeguards management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Feng Ji (EASCS)
                           Jun Zeng (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) is
                           BP 4.01                                              triggered. The project mainly finances
                                                                                construction and improvement of urban and
                                                                                rural-urban roads, and the associated facilities
                                                                                such as bridges, culverts, sewage and storm
                                                                                water pipelines and traffic safety facilities (e.g.
                                                                                lighting, traffic signals). There will be 12 urban-
                                                                                rural roads in two districts and one town in
                                                                                Wuwei Municipality, and 9 urban-rural roads in
                                                                                Linxia County. Most of the urban-rural are less
                                                                                than 10km with a road width less than 20
                                                                                meters. Of the roads proposed under the project,
                         57.41 kilometers are for the rehabilitator of
                         existing roads.
                         It is expected that the project will bring about
Public Disclosure Copy




                         positive environmental and social benefits to
                         local communities. It will improve rural
                         accessibility, promoting inclusive urbanization
                         and rural-urban integration.Road construction
                         will cause construction impacts, e.g. nuisance of
                         dust and noise, wastewater and spoil,
                         disturbance to traffic and local communities.
                         Environmental concerns during operation
                         mainly include noise, road safety, vehicle
                         emission etc.. These potential impacts are small
                         scale, site-specific, and can be readily mitigated
                         with good engineering design and construction
                         management practice.
                         Two separate EA and EMP will be prepared for
                         Wuwei City and Linxia County respectively.
                         Given that project investments including the
                         road alignments have been determined,
                         Environmental Framework is not needed.
                         Environmental impacts will be assessed in the
                         EA and measures proposed in the EMP.
                         Cumulative and induced impacts from road
                         construction will be part of the EAs for Wuwei
                         and Linxia. The EA will cover the project
                         activities in the project influence area, and
                         analyze environmental and social issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                         associated with the project, which include,
                         among others,
                         •        Design Phase. Environmental
                         considerations will include (i) balance of cut
                         and fill for construction; (ii) avoiding
                         disturbance to local communities, irrigation
                         systems and farmland; (iii) good design for road
                         drainage system and road safety.
                         •        Construction Phase. EA will address
                         construction-related impacts such as (i) disposal
                         of spoil, burrow pits, nuisance of dust, noise,
                         waste, and wastewater; (ii) disturbance to local
                         communities and agricultural activities etc.; (iii)
                         local traffic disturbance; and (iv) potential
                         pollution to the streams caused by construction
                         activities.
                         •        Operation Phase: (i) road maintenance
                         (e.g. road safety, drainage system).
                                                            A stand-alone Environmental Management Plan
                                                            will be prepared based on the above
                                                            environmental assessment. The EMP includes,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            among others,
                                                            •         Generic Environmental Code of
                                                            Practices (ECOPs) for contractors for inclusion
                                                            in the bidding documents and civil work
                                                            contracts;
                                                            •         Specific mitigations measures for
                                                            potential adverse impacts of the project;
                                                            •The measures for construction (e.g. ECOP) will
                                                            include provision for qualified environmental
                                                            supervisors in the supervision team; The
                                                            proposed new road and infrastructure are in line
                                                            with the urban plans for the two cities; Site
                                                            specific stream protection plans will be
                                                            developed as suggested; and the requirements
                                                            for the chance finding procedures will be
                                                            included in the contracts
                                                            •         A monitoring plan for the EMP;
                                                            •         An institutional framework for project
                                                            preparation and implementation for project
                                                            activities;
                                                            •         An institutional strengthening plan
                                                            covering training and technical assistance; and
                                                            •         Adequate budget for the EMP
                                                            implementation.
                                                            TA under component 2 is for capacity building
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            only in developing design standards and other
                                                            related institutional development. There will not
                                                            be specific investments identified.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No   The project is mainly in the urban and peri-
                                                            urban areas which have been disturbed by
                                                            intensive human activities.. The draft EA shows
                                                            that the project will not affect rivers/stream
                                                            which is considered as natural habitats. The
                                                            proposed bridges will traverse some low lying
                                                            areas, gullies, and dry/shallow stream beds.
                                                            There are no endangered species or of special
                                                            importance in the project area that could be
                                                            affected by project interventions. The project
                                                            will not convert, degrade or restore any natural
                                                            habitats or critical natural habitats. This policy
                                                            is not triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No   The project will not have impacts on the health
                                                            and quality of forests, nor affect the rights and
                                                            welfare of people and their level of dependence
                                                                 upon or interaction with forests, nor aim to
                                                                 bring about changes in the management,
                                                                 protection, or utilization of natural forest or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 plantations. This policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not include any procurement of
                                                                 pesticides or pesticide application equipment;
                                                                 nor introduce any new pest management
                                                                 practices, or expand/alter existing pest
                                                                 management practices; nor lead to substantially
                                                                 increased pesticide use and subsequent
                                                                 environmental and health risks. Road
                                                                 maintenance in the project area will not involve
                                                                 the use of pesticides due to the elevation and
                                                                 climate conditions in Wuwei and Linxia. It will
                                                                 be further clarified in the EA. This policy is not
                                                                 triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Based on the available information and
                         BP 4.11                                 preliminary screening, No physical cultural
                                                                 resources have been identified to be affected by
                                                                 the project. It will be further assessed by the
                                                                 EA. The policy is marked as “TBD” at this
                                                                 stage.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   Linxia is a Hui autonomous county with 40% of
                                                                 its population is Hui ethnic minorities. Based on
                                                                 project proposal, there are Hui groups/villages
                                                                 present in the project area and the Bank’s
                                                                 OP4.10 on Indigenous People is triggered. A
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Social Assessment as required by the policy will
                                                                 be conducted, and an Ethnic Minority
                                                                 Development Plan will be developed by the
                                                                 client. As the proposed components include
                                                                 construction of local roads which will serve
                                                                 local communities directly, clients were
                                                                 reminded that the project designs should be
                                                                 consulted with and agreed by the local people/
                                                                 communities. And any social impact on local
                                                                 people/communities needs to be identified and
                                                                 addressed. Therefore, Social Assessment
                                                                 exercises are needed, and Social Assessment
                                                                 reports should be prepared. The clients are
                                                                 reminded to pay special attention to collecting
                                                                 women’s views on the project.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Land taking caused by project construction is
                         4.12                                    unavoidable. The main involuntary resettlement
                                                                 impact will include structure demolition, land
                                                                 acquisition and temporary land taking. Two
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) will be
                                                                                                                                 prepared by Wuwei Municipality and Linxia
                                                                                                                                 County in both English and Chinese. In the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 project preparation phase, locations of some
                                                                                                                                 subcomponents might not be determined or
                                                                                                                                 might change during project implementation;
                                                                                                                                 therefore both Wuwei and Linxia are required to
                                                                                                                                 prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                                                                                 (RPF).
                                                                                                                                 Linkage projects: The Golden Avenue (Jinse
                                                                                                                                 Dadao Road) in Wuwei is identified as the
                                                                                                                                 linkage project as defined by the OP4.12. Given
                                                                                                                                 the resettlement of the road has been completed;
                                                                                                                                 a Due Diligence study on its resettlement
                                                                                                                                 practice should be conducted. The due diligence
                                                                                                                                 report should be included in the Wuwei RAP.
                                                                                                                                 The screening of other potential linkage project
                                                                                                                                 will be continuous during the project
                                                                                                                                 preparation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                                                                 policy.
                                                                                                                                 Not applicable
                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 10-Jan-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      During preparation mission (November 2013) the draft EA reports prepared by the EA institute
                                      were reviewed by the Bank team. The updated EA documents and Social Safeguards documents
                                      (RAPs, RPFs, SAs and EMDP) will be submitted to the Bank’s team for review in February, 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Binyam Reja

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 26-Feb-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 26-Feb-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
