INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA1060
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jan-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Burkina Faso                Project ID:  P148062
Project Name: Education Access and Quality Improvement Project (EAQIP) (P148062)
Task Team       Adama Ouedraogo
Leader(s):
Estimated        12-Jan-2015                Estimated    13-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Secondary education (60%), Tertiary education (20%), Primary education
(15%), Pre-primary education (5%)
Theme(s):       Education for the knowledge economy (80%), Education for all (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      50.00             Total Bank Financing:    50.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
IDA Grant                                                                    50.00
Total                                                                        50.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to support the Government of Burkina Faso to increase access
to pre-school education in the two poorest regions, secondary education in the five poorest regions
and to improve teaching and learning.
The components in support of these objectives have been designed to complement other activities
Page 1 of 12


﻿financed by the Government and other development partners as stated earlier.
3. Project Description
The project will focus on increasing access to pre-school and secondary education in the five poorest
regions and contribute to the further improvement of quality and institutional strengthening in the
sector in complementarity with other government and partners' interventions. These five provinces
have been prioritized in the CPS to help reduce levels of poverty in the country.
o        The selection of the project components was based on the following rationale which largely builds on
the results of previous projects. ECD has been included because it is one of the key factors that
would promote increased access to primary education and quality education at all levels.
Expansion of secondary-level places, including specialized science classrooms, would create
additional capacity to accommodate the growing number of students coming from the primary level
especially those from poor families. "Lyc6es Scientifiques" (Scientific Upper Secondary Schools)
would create a model that could be expanded to help meet critical skill gaps in the economy. The
lowering of the costs of education to the poorest households in the five regions would help promote
equity.
The focus on quality is essential in promoting increased incomes and economic growth. This part of
the project would address critical gaps that constrain quality improvement that are not currently
being addressed. Curriculum would introduce a more streamlined and integrated basic education
curriculum. The discontinuity between the primary and lower secondary curriculum poses challenges
for primary school graduates leading to low learning achievement.
Improving the training of secondary teachers would help increase access to quality secondary
education for students. In-service training would help support new teachers and support improved
classroom performance.
Increased attention is being paid to the availability of textbooks to complement the other quality
inputs. Textbooks publication and distribution has been a difficult problem for the country over the
years. The textbooks component would help provide materials to support teaching and learning. The
aim would be to build the capacity for local production to reduce reliance on external publishers.
This would help speed up production and reduce costs.
Involvement of COGES will help stimulate demand, improve quality and increase retention in
secondary education.
Further improvement and more effective use of the assessment system are needed to support the
quality improvement efforts in the sector.
Strengthening the EMIS at the local levels would enhance the capacity of the ministry in charge of
Secondary education to better identify the specific needs of the diverse communities as a basis for
targeted planning.
Analytical studies will also be financed to support further development of policies and strategies to
find solutions to current and emerging needs.
Component 1: Expanding equitable access to pre-school education in the two poorest regions and
Page 2 of 12


﻿secondary education in the five poorest regions (US$30 million)
Sub-Component 1.1: Increasing access and quality of early childhood education through piloting of
an interactive audio instruction program and short-track certification
0
S1. 1.1: Development and Delivery of Interactive Audio Instruction program
The objective of this sub-component is to provide ECD to children aged 3-4 years living in the East,
and Central East regions as well as those in the main urban center of Ouagadougou. This would be
the first phase of a national audio instruction program and would be targeted at about 15,000
children. The program would be implemented through audio episodes in one local language (Moore,
Dyula or Fula) and based on the national pre-school curriculum. Around 600 trained community
facilitators would help with implementation. The distance education approach has been adopted to
meet the challenges posed by a large country with diverse geographic conditions and a widely
dispersed population. Interactive Audio Instruction has been used in countries like Tanzania with
similar challenges. The approach will be introduced in Burkina on a phased schedule. There is good
broadcast infrastructure in the private sector which can be used for the program.
Lead responsibility for oversight and management of the program would be with the Ministry of
Education (MENA), Department for Pre-school Education. However, implementation will be carried
out by an interdisciplinary team, made up of MENA and MASSN staff supported by locally based
technical assistance. Communities would be sensitized in the new methodology and encouraged to
create physical spaces and village level youth to serve as audio program facilitators. They would be
drawn from primary school graduates in the villages.
This component would be implemented in conjunction with the parenting education for ECD which
will be financed in another project managed by the Social protection Unit. A systematic link of this
component with the parenting program would ensure that children and parents adopt improved child
development practices and are better prepared to receive ECD programs.
Financing of the program will be shared by the communities and government. Villages and
communes are expected to contribute space and food as well as pay the audio instruction facilitators.
The project would finance the equipment for schools and the production of the audio instruction
programs as well as the payment of facilitators for the first three years of project implementation.
o        This is to allow time for the payment system by communities/ communes to be fully worked out
before it is implemented. MASSN and MENA staff will be trained with project funds. The project
would also finance a grant of $200,000 USD for a small number of villages to make low-cost
upgrades to physical structures.
1.1.2: Piloting of a formal short-track teacher training mechanism
The objective of this sub-component is to pilot a short-track distance education teacher training
program to support the audio instruction program. Trainees would be recruited from the village level
(CEP holders) and face-to-face training would be provided at the provincial level by MASSN and
MENA staff trained in ECD education. The initial training would be for 3 weeks followed by four 1-
week training sessions for further upgrading. The Director of INFTS supported by technical
assistance would lead the piloting of the program. It is expected that 300 village facilitators would
enroll in the program by year four. This subcomponent would also pilot incentives to motivate
teachers to participate in the training. Based on results, the program would be institutionalized.
The project would finance the equipment and production and distribution costs of the audio
Page 3 of 12


﻿programs, technical assistance, incentives for trainees and operational costs for the pilot.
Sub-Component 1.2 - Expanding Access to secondary education
O
Q)        he objective of this sub-component is to contribute to increased and equitable access to secondary
education by: (i) increasing public secondary education places in the five poorest regions; (ii)
introducing incentives to promote enrollment, especially of girls and low income students, in lower
and upper secondary education; and (iii) expanding private secondary schools in urban areas that
would also help the poor.
1.2.1. Increasing public secondary school places, especially in the five targeted regions
The objective of this sub-component is to construct and equip 20 new lower secondary schools
(CEG), 20 upper secondary schools (Lyc6e) and upgrade 5 lower secondary schools to upper
secondary schools with the provision of libraries and latrines in underserved areas. The construction
program would include 2 "pilot" lyc6es scientifiques located in suburban areas to serve as models.
Based on the scheme used for previous projects (PPEP 2), the MESS will hire full time teachers
while communities/communes and parents students association (APE) or COGES will continue to
hire needed part time teachers.
The project would finance the construction and equipment of all the schools.
1.2.2. Targeted support to girls and students from the poorest households. The objective of this
subcomponent is to reduce the costs of secondary education to households, especially poor families,
to stimulate demand. This would be done through the policy of fee reduction started in the PPEP2
and subsidies to students to help finance additional costs of schooling. With regard to the incentives,
recurrent costs of schools would be subsidized with project funds for the first two years of
implementation. About 1000 selected students, mainly girls, from poor households would receive
help to cover additional schooling costs. Specific criteria based on past experience would be
established to identify students who would receive the grants. This approach would initially be
launched on a pilot basis in 5 selected communes in the five targeted regions. One or two civil
society organizations (CSOs), active in the education sector with similar experience will be selected
to coordinate activities related to this sub-component. This mechanism would allow the Sah el
o        Women Empowerment and Demographic Dividend (SWEDD) Project (P150080) to expand girls'
education to other regions which are not covered by EAQIP.
1.2.3. Increasing private secondary school places in urban areas. The objective of this sub-component
is to expand the private sector participation in the provision of secondary education and increase
access of poor students in urban areas to these schools. The project would construct and equip 5 new
private lower (CEG) and 5 upper secondary schools (lyc6es) and the expansion of existing private
secondary schools. The MESS would build and lease ownership and management of schools to
private education providers who would be contracted to provide an agreed number of places for poor
students.
The project would finance, for both public and private schools, construction and equipment of 52
schools, including two lyc6es scientifiques, upgrade 5 lower secondary schools to upper secondary
schools, build 55 additional classrooms in existing schools and 30 boreholes.
Component 2: Improving the quality of the teaching and learning process (US$13 million)
Page 4 of 12


﻿The objective of this component is to contribute to improved quality of teaching and learning
focusing on: (i) curriculum reform; (ii) secondary teacher training; (iii) textbooks development and
distribution; (iv) school based quality initiatives; and (v) expanding the use and management of
O
assessment and examination systems.
Sub-Component 2.1:    Curriculum improvement
The objective of this component is to develop a basic education curriculum by integrating and
streamlining the pre-school, primary education and lower secondary education curricula to facilitate
students' progress through the sub-sectors, as well as transition and success from pre-primary to
primary and ultimately to lower secondary education. Based on recommendations and official
guidance, the rewriting of the basic education curricula would follow an eclectic approach which
relies on a variety of tested teaching methods.
The basic education curriculum preparation which started in March 2014 is expected to be completed
by the 2020-2021 academic year. The whole reform process consists of three phases: (i) the design of
the curricula, (ii) a pilot and update phase and (iii) the implementation of the new curriculum in all
schools throughout the country.
The project would contribute to the financing of the of the pilot for the curriculum reform, by
covering development of learning instruments, ECD, teacher training for the first two sub-cycles of
primary education, and the first three grades of lower secondary education.
Sub-Component 2.2. Improve teacher Pre- and In-service Training in secondary Education.
This subcomponent aims at improving both the initial and in-service training of secondary school
teachers.
Pre-service training: The objective of the pre-service training program is to expand output of teachers
and improve the quality of the teacher training program. The ongoing e xpansion of physical
facilities in the training institutions would be complemented by a distance training programs.
Currently, the two institutes responsible for teacher training, the ENS-UK and the IDS produce only
o        around 1,400 of the 2,000 teachers needed annually (with the highest deficits being in math and
science).
The project would finance a video lessons system which would include the required equipment and
needed training for teachers and technical staff.
To improve the quality of teacher training, the project would support the use of more appropriate
teaching methodologies especially for math and science. The project will provide support to improve
the training program based on findings from a needs assessment of the pre-service training programs
to be carried out at the start of project implementation. A virtual library to be shared by all teacher
training institutions within the universities would also be established.
The proposed project would finance the needs assessment, TA for improving teaching methods, and
the costs for establishing the virtual library.
In-service training: The objective of this component is to further develop continuous pedagogic
Page 5 of 12


﻿support and advice which are necessary to improve the quality of instruction and to upgrade teacher
performance. This would be done through a three-pronged approach. Specifically, the project would
use the manual developed in PPEP 2, which clearly explains the respective roles of staff. The second
level of support involves more effective deployment of Pedagogic Advisers (Conseillers
Q)       P6dagogiques -CP) and Inspectors. The inspectorate would prepare subject-based in-service training
programs. The third level of support would be through the network of teachers' study groups in
which teachers discuss shared pedagogical issues and solutions.
The project would finance the equipment and operational costs of Pedagogic Advisers and
Inspectors.
Sub-Component 2.3. Increased availability of science equipment, textbooks and pedagogical
materials
The objective of this component is to improve the learning environment by providing equipment for
the two pilot upper secondary schools - "Lycees Scientifiques" and by expanding local development
of textbooks and increased availability of textbooks and other pedagogical materials in schools.
Provision of science equipment to upper secondary schools aims at establishing a model for science
teaching.
Specifically, the aim is to reduce reliance on external companies for textbooks publications through
promotion of local editions. Production of local textbooks would be expanded. The low-cost rental
system for textbooks would also continue.
In line with the national strategy the project would finance: (i) the finalization of the nine sets of
textbooks for publication through training of authors and workshops on editing and illustration; and
(ii) the development of five sets of textbooks for the first cycle of secondary education. Printing of
the textbooks would be financed with funds from CENAMAFS . The project would also finance
science equipment for upper secondary schools and TA for CENAMAFS to strengthen its technical
and management system and to ensure it is operating with the right business model.
Sub-Component 2.4. Development of school-based quality initiatives
a        The objective of this component is to help improve learning outcomes through increased
participation of communities in school operations and provision of incentives for schools to improve
their quality. This will be achieved through establishment of COGES in each secondary school. The
two following key tools will be used by COGES to achieve success in quality improvement: (a)
expanded use of School Improvement Plans (SIPs) (pedagogic support and materials) and (b)
piloting incentives for performance improvement in secondary schools.
Development of School Improvement Plans (SIPs). Each lower secondary school will have a SIP
prepared by the COGES focusing on quality improvements. Existing guides for the preparation of
SIPs at the primary level will be adapted for use at the lower secondary level. Training and guides
would be provided to support efficient operations of the COGES. Attention will be paid to local
problems including attendance and retention of girls and vulnerable children, the issue of HIV, health
and nutrition.
The project would finance production of the tools to be used by the COGES, training of COGES
members and campaigns to prevent unwanted pregnancies.
Page 6 of 12


﻿Incentives for performance improvement. The objective of this component is to encourage schools to
improve their quality through a competitive process. This would build on the existing annual school
performance competition already being run by MESS. Under the MESS initiative, the best
O
performing schools are included in a "Circle of Excellence". Schools that do not maintain their
performance levels annually will be re-evaluated and, if performance does not improve, these schools
will be removed from the "Circle of Excellence". Two types of incentives will be introduced for
schools. The first will vary by size of school and the second will be linked to existing annual school
performance competition already being run by MESS.
The project would finance the grant (on the basis of school size) for two years to allow time for these
resources to be included in the government's recurrent budget.
Sub-component 2.5. Assessment of student learning achievement: The objective of this sub-
component is to develop the capacity of OCECOS to carry-out two types of assessments. The first
would be to monitor the education system performance overtime while the second would be to
provide the needed information for corrective actions to be undertaken at the school and other levels
to increase student achievement. This capacity would be used to select and support schools in the
circle of excellence, to identify systematic issues that constrain learning and to improve the design of
the end of cycle examinations in secondary education. In addition to systematically analyzing
students learning achievements, identifying the reasons for potential failure and success, the
objective would be to provide practical recommendations for revising School Improvement Plans and
improving performance. The results of this evaluation would determine the type of support to be
provided by the Ministry and financed by the project.
OCECOS will administer standardized tests in French, mathematics, and sciences in grade nine
(4eme) and grade twelve of lower and upper secondary education in a representative sample of
schools countrywide. The wide variations in the results of end of cycle examinations from one year
to the next expose the limits of the current evaluation system. To correct these weaknesses the
project will support the establishment of a new system of design of the BEPC and Baccalaureate
examinations.
To ensure implementation of these tasks on a sustained basis, the project would help strengthen the
a        management capacity of OCECOS and the Baccalaureate Office and foster collaboration between the
two institutions.
For both the learning outcomes and examinations subcomponents, the project would finance: (i)
learning outcomes assessment annually in a selected sample of schools in the circle of excellence; (ii)
administration of two standardized tests to a national representative sample of secondary schools;
(iii) training of technical and supervisory staff and counselors in testing and evaluation; (iv) two
evaluations of school instructional time; (v) establishment of a new system and training for the BEPC
and Baccalaureate examinations; (vi) software acquisition, (vii) the database development, (viii)
staff training and (ix) the technical assistance to be provided by the University of Laval to OCECOS.
This TA was established during PPEP2, to reinforce its capacity and ensure implementation of
improved national examinations and students' learning assessments systems.
Component 3: Contributing to strengthening education institutional capacity at central and
decentralized entities (US$7 million)
Page 7 of 12


﻿The objectives of component 3 are to contribute to strengthening the ministry's capacity for data
management and planning, reinforce school level management and support the PCU operations. The
specific areas covered include:
O
Subcomponent 3.1. Education planning and administrative management. The objective of this sub-
component is to strengthen data processing and analysis, as well planning capacity at the local levels.
The project will reinforce the sector EMIS built under the PPEP2 by integrating different entities,
including regional directorates, with connectivity to the Ministry responsible for secondary
education. DGESS will reinforce decentralized units capacity in analyzing and using basic statistics
and sector policy analysis as well as develop simple M&E tools, such as school report cards, to
support school level planning and resources management.
The Project will finance equipment acquisition, s taff training and development of tools needed to
meet the agreed objectives. To improve the management of numbers of students and their evolution
in the system, the project will finance the transfer of computerized management system implemented
satisfactorily in Senegal with the World Bank support. Towards this end, an agreement specifying the
modalities of the transfer will be signed between the Ministry of Tertiary Education of Senegal, the
MESS and a technical assistance operator. Project funded activities would also cover the students'
identification, technical assistance, the training of technicians and the acquisition of equipment.
Subcomponent 3.2 Promoting School Based Management Committees
The objective of this subcomponent is to establish COGES in each lower public secondary school to
help promote increased involvement of communities in school operations. It would build on the
Presidential Decree of 2010 authorizing nation-wide establishment COGES (SBMCs) in all primary
schools by 2015. The design and implementation will build on the successful experiences of using
SBMCs in Niger and the JICA financed pilot programs on SBMCs at the primary level in Burkina.
The project would finance the adaptation of the existing operational and training guides for use in
Burkina Faso.
Subcomponent 3.3 Project management and implementation activities and core studies
a        The objective of the sub-component is to provide resources for undertaking the incremental tasks
required for project implementation. The project will finance operating costs, including salaries/
indemnities of agreed staff and activities of the PCU. Core studies will be financed also to provide
relevant information needed for policy dialogue and decision-making for education policy reforms.
Implementation arrangements: The SG/MESS will be responsible for overall supervision of this
component. This office has the comparative advantage as coordinator of MESS activities and
privileged access to the MENA management team, to coordinate the various central and
decentralized units that would be responsible for implementing this component. The DGESS will be
responsible for implementing the educational planning activities, including the EMIS reinforcement
at decentralized levels and coordinating core studies implementation. The OCECOS will be in charge
of managing activities related to the assessment of students learning achievement and the
examinations system improvement. In addition to the management of the project (accounting,
contract administration, procurement processing, and documentation), the PCU will implement the
activities related to financial management.
Page 8 of 12


﻿4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented mostly in five poorest regions of the country which are East,
Central East, South West, Central Plateau and North regions.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Abdoulaye Gadiere (GENDR)
Lucienne M. M'Baipor (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment Yes          The project will finance construction of new lower and
OP/BP 4.01                            upper secondary schools in the five poorest regions of
the country. In addition, it is envisaged that the project
will finance the expansion of existing private secondary
schools using private-public partnerships. Likewise, IT
infrastructure is planned to be constructed under
component 3. These investments, which are mostly
small- to medium-scale civil works, are expected to
induce potential environmental adverse impacts.
However, they do not involve irreversible impacts. So,
impacts expected will be dust, noise and particularly
waste management. The exact location of the
construction and expansion activities are not yet known,
an Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) has been prepared. This document has later
been consulted upon and disclosed both in-country on
October 1st, 2014 and at the World Bank Infoshop on
October 3, 2014.
O
U         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No           The project does not involve or affect natural habitats.
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No           The project does not involve or affect forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09  No           The project does not involve pest management.
Physical Cultural Resources Yes       The construction will involve excavations. Taking into
OP/BP 4.11                            account that factor, the policy on physical cultural
resources has been triggered because it could lead to
chance finds. However, the triggering of this policy does
not entail the preparation of a specific safeguard
instrument. Only a specific chapter has been included in
the ESMF to provide guidance in case physical cultural
resources will be discovered.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP  No          There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement  Yes         Usually, in urban areas, public schools are built in
OP/BP 4.12                            administrative areas reserved for this kind of
Page 9 of 12


﻿infrastructure. However, this is not the case in rural
areas, where these new constructions could involve land
acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement and/or
restrictions of access to resources and livelihoods.
Therefore, to anticipate these potential social adverse
impacts, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has
been prepared by the client. That safeguard document
preparation has followed the same process as the ESMF.
So, after its preparation, it has been reviewed, consulted
upon and disclosed publicly within Burkina Faso on
October 1st, 2014 and at the Infoshop on October 3,
2014.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No          N/A
Projects on International  No         N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas  No        N/A
OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
No significant, long term or irreversible adverse impacts are to be expected from the
implementation of activities that envisaged to be financed under this project. Most of the adverse
environmental and social impacts associated with these investments will be small-scale and site-
specific. Consequently, they will be manageable in acceptable manner. Based on these aspects,
O
)           the project is classified as being EA category B and triggers three safeguards policies. There are
OP/PB 4.01; OP 4.11 and OP/PB 4.12. To be in compliance with these policies the following
safeguard instruments (ESMF and RPF) have been prepared reviewed, consulted upon and
disclosed in Burkina Faso on October 1st, 2014 and at the infoshop on October 3, 2014. Based on
the triggering of OP/PB4. 11, a specific chapter has been developed in the ESMF, in order to
provide guidance for any physical cultural resources discovery.
During the whole phase of the project, the ESMF and the RPF will be implemented as guidance/
guidelines for any activity that will have to be financed under the project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
No long-term impact due to project activities is foreseen.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The ESMF prepared by the borrower contains : (a) a systematic environmental and social impact
assessment for all activities before selection and implementation; (b) procedures for conducting
Page 10 of 12


﻿activity-specific ESIAs or Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP); (c) capacity
strengthening and awareness raising campaigns targeted at relevant stakeholder groups for better
implementation and monitoring of project safeguard measures; and (d) establishment and
implementation of a consultation framework for the environmental control and monitoring.
Q)         As the ESMF, the RPF also outlines the principles, organizational arrangements, and design
criteria to be applied to investments to be prepared during project implementation. Investment
specific Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared in line with the RPF and submitted to
the bank, as required, for approval after specific design information becomes available.
Lastly, the specific chapter on physical cultural resources contained in the ESMF seeks to provide
guidance in how to protect discoveries charged of history or which represents important cultural
aspects for communities.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The preparation phases of the ESMF and the RPF have been occasions to consult the relevant
stakeholders as School-Based Management Committees (SBMCs), APE's members, COGES's
members, pedagogic advisers, inspectors, teachers and pupils. Furthermore, the three ministries
involved in the project are also consulted. Their viewpoints, comments and recommendations have
been reflected in the final versions. In addition, the Client was advised in implementation phase to
consult regularly stakeholders during the preparation of ESIAs, ESMPs and RAPs for each
construction.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              20-Aug-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           03-Oct-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Burkina Faso                                             01-Oct-2014
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              20-Aug-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           03-Oct-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Burkina Faso                                             01-Oct-2014
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Page 11 of 12


﻿Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ]  No[   ]  NA [ X]
report?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes[X]  No[       NA
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes[X]  No[     NA
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]   No[    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
O
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[       NA
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Adama Ouedraogo
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name:                                      Date:
Manager:
Page 12 of 12


