                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC1025

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Burundi                         Project ID:      P151869
                            Project Name:     Burundi Coffee Sector Competitiveness Support Project (P151869)
                            Task Team         Stephen D. Mink
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         27-Feb-2015                     Estimated        29-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GFADR                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Crops (30%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (25%), Agricultural extension
                                              and research (20%), General finance sector (15%), Pub lic administration-
                                              Agriculture, fishing and forestry (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Rural policies and institutions (25%),
                                              Other environment and natural resources management ( 15%), Export
                                              development and competitiveness (30%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     50.00                   Total Bank Financing:         45.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                               45.00
                              LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                        5.00
                              Total                                                                     50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           17.    The project development objective (PDO) is to increase the production of coffee in Burundi
                         and enhance its quality. This will contribute to: (a) improving the sector competitiveness and market
                         access, and (b) the country’s strategic goals of poverty reduction and enhanced exports revenues.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         20.      Burundi is a small player in international coffee markets and is operating in an environment
                         of aggressive competitors. The area where the best results may be realized in terms of the sector
                         productivity and competitiveness is not only limited to production increase, but most importantly,
                         quality improvement along the value chain and a focus on the lucrative specialty coffee markets.
                         Such efforts would certainly allow differentiating the country’s products and also provide a better
                         buffer for the inevitable periods of low prices. However, the business principle driving improvements
                         needs to be that quality starts at the farm level and can be maintained only through proper processing
                         and storage.

                         21.     In this respect, the proposed project will operate through multiple interventions, along
                         different segments of the coffee value chain, to address productivity and quality bottlenecks and to
                         open new market opportunities to Burundi– the specialty coffee markets. The proposed project
                         would reinforce the private sector role in leading and structuring the sector, namely the coffee
                         producers and the industry. More specifically, the following key areas of the value chain will be
                         addressed: (a) Governing structure of the value chain and institutional strengthening; (b) increasing
                         production and productivity; (c) improving quality and market access. A particular focus would be
                         put on greater organization and integration of smallholders into the chain and on more equitable
                         sharing of the benefits from improved quality and market access.

                         22.      Component 1 – Institutional strengthening and value chain governance: An essential
                         property of the chain is its governance structure, which determines to a considerable extent how
                         resources and gains are allocated and flow within the chain. In the case of Burundi, this structure is
                         developing but constrained by lack of capacity to implement concerted specific sector policies; weak
                         coordination; limited information exchange and non-transparent price mechanisms. The project will
                         support streamlining the governance structure of the sector by: (a) reviewing and adapting the current
Public Disclosure Copy




                         instuitional framework to improve its level of effectiveness and efficiency with a particular focus on
                         transparency in the decision-making process and on quality and pricing mechanism; (b) upgrading
                         the capacities of existing institutions/organizations overseeing the sector; and (c) improving the
                         dialogue among the key public and private actors of the chain to arrive at a consensus on solving
                         value chain bottlenecks.

                         23.      More specifically, the institutional architecture for coffee sector management that the project
                         would support strengthening comprises: (a) INTERCAFE -- a stakeholder-driven coordinating body
                         that has the mandate for most sector management decisions; (b) ARFIC-- a public regulatory
                         authority that ensures that the basic “rules of the game” for managing the sector are adequately
                         defined, transparently implemented, and where necessary, enforced by Government authority. This
                         intervention will aim also at upgrading the capacities of ARFIC to provide quality, inspection and
                         certification services to the coffee industry. The project will support both the modernization of
                         existing labs in line with international standards (and possibly their expansion within the producing
                         regions) and developing ARFIC human resources capacities for managing regulatory areas and for
                         coffee testing; (c) CNAC-- a coffee grower organization largely represented in all coffee growing
                         region; and (d) other stakeholder organizations for each of the main sector constituencies, to provide
                         representation into the INTERCAFE’s collective decision making on sector management. This
                         architecture is broadly similar to successful agriculture value chain management elsewhere in Sub-
                         Saharan Africa and many other producing countries as well, with strong public-private sector
                         participation.

                         24.      The project will also support increased consultations among the chain stakeholders; for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         instance, through regular forums to: (a) discuss the various problems and constraints of the sector
                         within a “value chain approach”; (b) elaborate (or update) a comprehensive strategy for the coffee
                         sector aiming at the general interest of the sector; (c) find harmonized and shared solutions to the
                         various challenges facing the sector; (d) eliminate or minimize potential conflicts among the various
                         actors in view of the general and common interest; and eventually (e) coordinating donors,
                         government and private sector investments to avoid overlap, scale-up impacts, etc.

                         25.      Furthermore, under this component the project will support the development of a Data Base
                         on the sector which would provide reliable data on the number of producers, number of trees,
                         production, quality, washing stations performance and other ecological and socio-economic factors.
                         This Data Base to be initially placed within ARFIC and linked to INTERCAFE, can be further
                         expanded to include a formal GI S module that can capture more of the agro-ecological variables
                         such as soil types, water sources and other variables that affect coffee quality. This investment will
                         constitute an important tool for the value chain actors in terms of planning, monitoring and
                         evaluation of their activities and return on investments. It can also be used as an export promotion
                         tool (see component 3 below).

                         26.      Component 2 – Support to increased production and productivity: Under this component, the
                         project will support investments aimed at increasing production and productivity with a focus on: (a)
                         the adoption of good agricultural practices - sustainable land management, planting trees, nutrition
                         and fertilizer management, pests and diseases control, pruning, rejuvenation (25 percent of existing
                         trees), harvesting, quality assessment and improvement, etc.; (b) improving production technology
                         and soil fertility; (c) the dissemination of improved varieties to renew old plantations (20 percent of
                         existing trees); (d) supporting specific research topics (coffee under shade, variety improvement and
                         germplasm enhancement, etc.); and (e) a support fund to facilitate access to inputs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         27.     In addition special emphasis will be on: (a) linking coffee growers to national agricultural
                         research bodies and extension services (public and private) and promoting a two-way flow of
                         information between these entities; (b) expanding the tested models for productivity enhancement
                         implemented as part of the PRODEMA project (community based mechanisms); (c) disseminating
                         sustainable water and land management (SWLM) best practices and more diversified plantations,
                         with fruit trees, inter-cropping with food crops, etc.; and (d) encouraging south-south exchange for
                         coffee production, for instance, with coffee growing countries including Rwanda, Ethiopia and
                         Colombia. This exchange will aim at various learning programs: production techniques, extension
                         methodologies, coffee under shade, etc., and will build on cooperation already established between
                         the PAZDOC project (Sustainable Landscape Coffee Project – GEF) and Columbia coffee growers.

                         28.      For the implementation of the productivity investments, the proposed project will make use
                         of INTERCAFE’s current contractual system provision for extension services and supply of inputs,
                         and extend these to a larger share of coffee farmers as well as to coffee-specific agronomic and
                         processing research. INTERCAFE has a cess revenue mechanism already in place to finance such
                         activities but, at current levels of national coffee production, the cess revenues only permit activities
                         at a modest scale.

                         29.      Component 3 – Support to improved quality and market access: The management of quality
                         in the coffee value chain is the most immediate instrument growers can use to improve their
                         upgrading opportunities and it is a critical element of the current trend toward coffee differentiation.
                         Furthermore, it is specifically vital in Burundi where the existence of “potato taste”, a strong off-
                         flavor resulting from the interaction between agro-climatic conditions and antestia bug infiltration, is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         endemic . Currently, cherry washing stations have only limited capacity to evaluate their coffee and
                         do not have the experience or the cupping infrastructure to evaluate their production. In this respect,
                         the project will promote quality enhancement activities along the value chain which would require
                         changes in the field, at the washing station and at the dry mill. Applying good agricultural practices,
                         flotation of cherries at the washing stations reception, meticulous hand sorting during pre-drying and
                         several other technical improvements are needed before Burundi can be recognized as a reliable
                         supplier of coffee specialty markets. Under this component, the project will build on successes of
                         recently closed USAID project in the country and will in particular support the following
                         investments:

                         Sub-component 3.1- Improving quality:

                         30.      Developing cupping capacity: A main focus of this activity will be on educating all value
                         chains actors on quality and cupping and establishing cupping labs in main producing areas. This
                         will be achieved by: (a) selecting a number of “leader” coffee washing stations to serve as an initial
                         focus for specialty coffee value chain development and as models for other stations to learn from;
                         and (b) the selection of a set of second tier washing stations to serve as “training hubs” aimed at
                         maximizing the dissemination of production, processing and marketing best practices that will help
                         in improving the quality and market access throughout all coffee producing regions in Burundi.

                         31.     Improving washing stations technical, operational and managerial capacities: Under this sub-
                         component, assistance will be provided to the managerial staff of the washing stations to develop and
                         implement customized Quality Improvement Plans (QIPs), including infrastructure improvement,
                         best practices and Quality Control (QC) systems. The production and processing of high quality
                         coffees requires sound technical and business management skills and systems. Currently the
                         management (and governance) capacity of most private and cooperatively owned washing stations
Public Disclosure Copy




                         needs improvement. This element is critical to obtaining the highest returns, continued access to
                         financing and sustainability. Furthermore, selected strategic supplier certification programs offer
                         substantial price premiums to growers but require the implementation of detailed and transparent
                         financial reporting systems. In the particular cases of cooperatives where the governance can be
                         problematic, it is also important to maintain a fully transparent financial management system to
                         ensure cooperative cohesion.

                         32.      For highly performing washing stations, traceability systems from the plantations to the
                         destination market may be introduced. Such systems will enable buyers and sellers to track each lot
                         from the time it enters the washing station (or even the field) until it is delivered to its final
                         destination. This feature is also an essential element that distinguishes specialty coffee production
                         from the production of standard grade coffee. The ITC component described below (parag. 34) will
                         be integral to the development of the coffee traceability system and to using this system to its full
                         potential.
                         33.      Improving existing processing infrastructure to meet environmental concerns: As pulping
                         coffee can be the source of significant environmental problems (pollution of water table and the soil
                         surrounding the washing stations, etc.), the project proposes integrating environmental mitigation
                         measures in existing (and new) washing stations. These investments (water treatment and recycling)
                         can lead to substantial cost reduction of production (reduction of water quantities used for de-
                         pulping) and, most importantly, responsible environmental stewardship is not only a best practice,
                         but is an obligation for certification to several preferred supplier programs such as the Neumann
                         Kaffee Gruppe (NKG) and the Starbucks’ C.A.F.E. Practices Program.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         34.      Developing an information technology and communication system specific to the sector:
                         Wireless internet access is now available in much of Burundi, presenting an exciting opportunity for
                         washing stations to broaden their horizon in terms of technology access, learning opportunities and
                         direct communications with buyers. The Data Base described in parag. 26 above can also be
                         expanded to track and report on key performance characteristics of all washing stations for purposes
                         of monitoring and planning and assessing the impacts of investments in quality improvement.
                         Similarly, the Data Base can serve as an important tool for export promotion, accessible to buyers
                         interested in visiting and buying Burundi’s coffee. Hot-links to individual washing stations sites will
                         allow buyers to download fact sheets, learn about the coffee characteristics, and communicate
                         directly with the stations that interest them most. From a basic training point of view, access to the
                         internet by washing stations staff will be a powerful tool for the dissemination of training materials
                         across the country. Other countries, particularly in Latin America and more recently in Rwanda have
                         benefited greatly from the development of information and communications technologies. Burundi
                         will be no different in this regard.

                         Sub-component 3.2- Marketing and promoting the Burundi Coffee brand:

                         35.     Burundi must learn to market its coffee to the new consumers and also minimize the risk and
                         uncertainties associated with coffee production, processing and marketing. In addition to the
                         investments made on increasing production and productivity, profiling of coffee quality for more
                         focused marketing, upgrading the processing infrastructure, etc., this component of the project will
                         support investments in: (a) building a recognizable image for Burundi’s coffee, including, a country
                         logo, brochures, standardized washing station fact sheets, coffee maps and other information that
                         may be useful to coffee markets; (b) developing a reliable coffee industry intelligence and
                         forecasting system; (c) establishing direct sales relationships with roasters and buyers; and (d)
                         introducing other innovative promotional activities such as buyer tours, certifications strategies,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         competitions such as the “cup of excellence”, and many other features that will place Burundi’s
                         coffees in some of the very best markets in the world. These activities will focus on cultivating
                         appropriate contacts and potential coffee relationships in North America, Europe, Japan and other
                         emerging markets such as China and Russia.

                         36.      This component of the program will require the full coordination of investments and
                         activities at multiple levels, including growers, washing stations, mills and other supporting
                         institutions. A key player in this process will be INTERCAFE which would be reinforced to take a
                         lead role in coordinating these activities and promoting the Burundi coffee brand.

                         37.      International Finance Corporation (IFC): The IFC Advisory Services Department has been
                         supporting the 3rd phase of the coffee sector privatization. A main focus of IFC assistance was to
                         advice on financing options for the coffee growers to buy shares of washing stations and to develop a
                         target list of experienced international investors in the coffee sector who may be interested in the
                         opportunity offered by the privatization. Further support will be sought from IFC, in particular for
                         developing industry partnership and linkages with potential international specialty coffee buyers.

                         38.    Component 4 – Program coordination, monitoring and knowledge management: This
                         component will facilitate: (a) administrative, technical, and financial management of the program; (b)
                         coordination among all institutional partners to ensure efficient flow of information and support to all
                         value chain actors, in particular the small coffee growers; (c) effective contractual arrangements with
                         key implementing partners (INTERCAFE, CNAC, ARFIC, etc.) and other private sector operators;
                         (d) monitoring and evaluation of the performance and the financial, environmental, and social impact
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of the program; and (e) development of communication activities to publicize and disseminate the
                         project results, best practices and success stories.

                         39.     Inclusion of youth and women: This population already active in the coffee value chain
                         (trees maintenance, harvesting, grading, etc.) will be systematically considered in all project’s
                         interventions. In line with the PRSP-2 and the National Gender Policy, a special focus will be given
                         to promoting increased youth employment (both women and men) in all segments of the value chain
                         by involving them in technical and entrepreneurial training programs and other planned
                         developments actions. The project will aim at a target of 50 percent of youth and women directly
                         benefiting from the project supported activities.

                         40.      Project costs: The indicative cost for the Coffee Competitiveness Support Project is US
                         $50.00 million. The proposed Bank-financed support would cost about US$45.00 million. It is
                         expected that the beneficiaries (INTERCAFE, ARFIC and CNAC) will contribute up to US$5.00
                         million. Furthermore, a GEF project is being considered for potential co-financing of selected
                         productivity enhancement activities (PAZDOC: Sustainable Landscape Coffee Project - US$ 4.2
                         million). Finally, USAID and the French Development Agency (AfD) are preparing parallel
                         financing for the sector with a focus on productivity and trade issues. The exact amount for this
                         financing is not yet defined, but is expected to be made available in the 2015 fiscal year.
                         Coordination with these projects is foreseen to ensure complementarities and cost effectiveness.

                         41.    Categories of expenditures: For all project’s components, there will be various categories of
                         expenditures including: (a) civil and rural works – case of upgrading the processing infrastructure
                         (CWSs); (b) materials and equipment; (c) technical assistance and studies; (d) training and
                         information; (e) support fund; (f) provision of services; and (i) operation and maintenance.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in the main coffee growing areas of Burundi with a focus on the
                         provinces of: Kayanza, Ngozi, Karuzi, Muyinga, Gitega, Kirundo, Bubanza and Bururi.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Borrower has established an environmental and social management capacity under PRASAB
                         and PRODEMA. These projects provided (i) extensive training to producer organizations,
                         community-based organizations and private sector service providers in the areas of pest management;
                         agro-forestry/soil conservation; environmental and social screening of sub-projects; marshland and
                         irrigation management as well as watershed and irrigation parameter management; and (ii) as
                         necessary, they hired qualified environmental consultants to carry out, among other things, EAs for
                         sub-projects dealing with marshland management and small-scale irrigation infrastructure.

                         The proposed project will continue strengthening the environmental and social management capacity
                         of borrower, especially the main coffee value chain stakeholders (INTERCAFE, AFRIC and CNAC).
                         These beneficiaries will be provided with environmental and social safeguards training, including
                         safe pest management, waste management in coffee washing stations, implementation of the
                         environmental and social screening process outlined in the ESMF, and implementation of ESIA
                         recommendations. Capacity building within the sector will also address strategic environmental
                           issues related to development of the coffee sector, building on the Rapid SEA prepared earlier, and
                           linked to the selection and implementation of appropriate certification schemes.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSURR)
                           Stephen Ling (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             This policy is triggered because physical
                           BP 4.01                                             activities under the project will involve minor
                                                                               civil works – i.e. upgrading a number of
                                                                               existing coffee washing stations (water
                                                                               recycling and waste disposal), labs and
                                                                               potentially other small office or storage
                                                                               infrastructure. Renewal of old coffee plantations
                                                                               and implementation of sustainable land
                                                                               management techniques may also involve some
                                                                               minor works with the potential for small-scale
                                                                               environmental impacts if not properly managed.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         TBD             The project will work in existing coffee
                                                                               plantations, and it is unlikely that civil works
                                                                               will require conversion of new land. However, a
                                                                               final decision on triggering the policy will be
                                                                               taken when the scope of work is clearer.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  TBD             The project will not be concerned with the
                                                                               management of forests except for activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               related to agro-forestry (specifically shade
                                                                               coffee). This policy is TBD, pending further
                                                                               analysis of impacts on existing forests or the
                                                                               need for forest plantations.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             Yes             This policy is triggered because the project aims
                                                                               to increase coffee production which will require
                                                                               increased use of inputs, including pesticides.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     TBD             Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) is
                           BP 4.11                                             unlikely to be triggered because the project’s
                                                                               civil works would be very small scale and
                                                                               would not involve any significant excavation or
                                                                               earth movement. However, a final decision on
                                                                               triggering the policy will be taken when the
                                                                               scope of work is clearer.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       TBD             As the project will cover a broad geographical
                                                                               area, and Batwa communities are represent in
                                                                               several locations in rural Burundi, it is likely
                                                                               that the policy will be triggered. However, a
                                                                                                                                 final determination will be made during
                                                                                                                                 preparation.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    TBD                           The minor nature of civil works and in-field
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 4.12                                                                                            SLM measures expected to be involved in the
                                                                                                                                 project mean land taking is unlikely. However,
                                                                                                                                 it may be necessary to trigger the policy as a
                                                                                                                                 precautionary measure in the event that this
                                                                                                                                 cannot be ruled out. Final determination will be
                                                                                                                                 made during preparation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) is not triggered
                                                                                                                                 because the project would not support any dam
                                                                                                                                 construction, nor does it depend upon existing
                                                                                                                                 dams for its physical functioning.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            7.50) is not triggered because the project would
                                                                                                                                 not adversely affect the quantity or quality of
                                                                                                                                 ater available to downstream countries.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) is not
                                 7.60                                                                                            triggered because all project activities take place
                                                                                                                                 within the undisputed territory of Burundi.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Dec-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Since some of the agricultural production activities implemented under PRASAB and PRODEMA
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      are the same than the proposed project, the existing ESMFs will be updated. The scope of
                                      proposed activities are very similar, the project would use the following existing safeguards
                                      instruments prepared for the ongoing Agro-Pastoral Productivity and Markets Development
                                      Project (PRODEMA) and updated for the Sustainable Coffee Landscape Project: (i)
                                      Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (Analyse d’Impact Environnemental et
                                      Social du Projet, February 2010), which includes an Environmental Management Plan (Plan de
                                      Gestion Environnementale) and Pest Management Plan (Plan de Gestion Integre de Pestes et des
                                      Pesticides) (the PMP will be disclosed separately from the ESMF); (ii) [if OP 4.12 is triggered]
                                      Resettlement Policy Framework (Cadre de Politique de Reinstallation Involontaire des
                                      Populations, December 2009); and (iii) [if OP 4.10 is triggered] Indigenous Peoples Plan (Plan
                                      d’Action pour le Developpement des Batwa, December 2009) for the overall project area.

                                      These existing safeguards instruments will be updated for the project with an explanatory Cover
                                      Note, endorsed by the GoB and disclosed for the project as new documents. These safeguards
                                      instruments would suitably cover this new project as well as the ongoing PRODEMA because (i)
                                      the new project’s proposed investments in sustainable land management, improved coffee
                                      cultivation and processing, and small civil works are a subset of the broader range of agricultural
                                      and natural resource management investments which have already been assessed for PRODEMA.
                         IV. APPROVALS



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Stephen D. Mink

                         Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 15-Oct-2014
                         Coordinator:
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Tijan M. Sallah (PMGR)        Date: 17-Oct-2014
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
