                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC6152

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Argentina                       Project ID:     P145686
                            Project Name:      AR Vega Flood Prevention and Drainage Project (P145686)
                            Task Team          Christophe Prevost
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          06-Mar-2014                     Estimated       30-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSWS                           Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Flood protection (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       260.00              Total Bank Financing:          138.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                   122.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      138.00
                              Total                                                                      260.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           Proposed Development Objective: The PDO is to increase the resilience of the City of Buenos Aires
                           to flooding, particularly in the Maldonado Vega and Cildáñez watersheds.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed Project has a total cost of US$260 million (US$138 million IBRD plus co-financing
                           for US$122 million from the City of Buenos Aires). The Project would support the City of Buenos
                           Aires’s plan to reduce flood hazard and will build upon the activities conducted under the Urban
                         Flood Prevention and Drainage Project APL1, lessons learned, best practices, and experiences
                         obtained from its implementation, as well as from activities in other countries. The proposed project
                         will have three components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Institutional Development for Flood Risk Management (approximately US$25
                         million): This component will support the creation of a modern and sustainable framework for flood
                         risk management within the City of Buenos Aires based on a permanent inter-institutional
                         organization that goes beyond the life of the Project. Component 1 will finance systems, equipment,
                         the development of risk models, policies and strategies, and capacity-building amongst other goods
                         and services. At this point it is envisaged that the following four sub-components or activities will be
                         financed:
                         •        Hydro-meteorological observation, surveillance and alert system (SIHVIGILA for its initials
                         in Spanish): This sub component will finance an integrated hydro-meteorological observation,
                         monitoring, alert, alarm, and response system which will increase the City’s severe-weather
                         forecasting capacity thus improving flood preparedness and emergency management and recovery.
                         City counterparts responsible for Component 1 are currently drafting an agreement with the National
                         Meteorological Service that explores synergies and creates joint forecasting capabilities to
                         incorporate a high resolution S-band Doppler-effect radar, the first of its kind in Argentina.
                         •        Flood Risk Financing and Protection Scheme: This sub-component will finance technical
                         assistance (TA) for the development a flood risk financial and protection program for homeowners
                         and SMEs that includes the design of a strategy (based on existing data) of innovative retention and
                         transfer instruments and products such as insurance (starting with a probabilistic flood risk model),
                         flood exposure databases, hazard maps, risk-based pricing and underwriting tools, web-based
                         production systems, claims management systems, etc. A regulatory capacity-building process as well
                         as outreach and consumer education on flood risk insurance will also be fostered. The proposed
                         Flood Risk Financing and Protection Scheme will enable the City of Buenos Aires to considerably
                         reduce fiscal outlays on post-flood compensation payments by applying a rational fiscal and
                         budgetary retention capacity and by transferring flood risk exposure to the private insurance and
                         reinsurance markets.
                         •        Flood Risk Social Communication and Education: This sub-component will finance the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         design of contents for communication and educational campaigns (formal and informal) on flood risk
                         topics. Some of the activities could be implemented by local NGOs based on specific proposals
                         aimed at building capacity in flood related topics and the dissemination of information. This sub-
                         component aims at increasing social awareness on flooding risk and educating residents on
                         emergency response plans and recommended behaviors to increase safety before and under an
                         emergency, particularly targeting local neighborhood councils (comunas), civil-society
                         organizations, and NGOs.
                         •        Capacity Building for flood risk management: The objective is to support City institutions in
                         charge of different functions related to flood hazard management including infrastructure planning,
                         emergency response, and operation and maintenance of the City's increasing drainage infrastructure
                         and systems amongst others.

                         Component 2: Flood Mitigation Infrastructure (approximately US$225 Million): This component
                         will finance works for a total of approximately US$215 million. All works will be designed for the
                         10 year storm. This component includes the specialized independent supervision of the works. It will
                         finance the following works in three of the City’s drainage basins:
                         •        Maldonado Stream Basin: Roughly 40 kilometers of secondary and tertiary drainage
                         conduits which will convey water into the large drainage tunnels built with funds from the previous
                         Bank loan;
                         •        Vega Stream Basin: The Project will finance the construction of one large drainage tunnel
                         with an estimated length of 8.4 kilometers, which will act as a second emissary for the Vega stream.
                         The new drainage tunnel will more than double the capacity of the existing one. The Project will also
                         finance 10.5 kilometers of secondary and tertiary networks;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •       Cildáñez Stream Basin: The activities in this basin will include (i) improvements to the
                         existing conduits to increase the drainage capacity in the lower lands of the Cildáñez watershed to
                         reduce the likelihood of flooding, (ii) the environmental recovery of Lake Soldati by diverting both
                         sewage and storm runoff currently discharging into the lake, and (iii) the use of this pond as a flood
                         retention basin to delay flows towards the Riachuelo River.

                         Component 3: Project Management (approximately US$10 million): To finance Project audits,
                         monitoring and evaluation, including an impact evaluation based on baseline and post-project
                         surveys, capacity building, training, and other operating costs.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project is located in City of Buenos Aires (CABA for its initials in Spanish, Ciudad Autónoma
                         de Buenos Aires). The city is located on the south bank of the La Plata River, has a surface area of
                         approximately 200 square kilometers and a population of approximately 3 million inhabitants (8
                         percent of the national population). The specific works and improvements under Component 2 will
                         be located in the Maldonado, Vega, and Cildáñez basins. The Maldonado and Vega basins comprise
                         over 30% of the city's area and population and cover the central area of the city. The Vega basin has
                         a population of over 300,000. It borders on the north and east with the Medrano and White basins, on
                         the south with the Maldonado basin, and to the east with the La Plata River where it ultimately
                         drains. The Vega basin’s total surface area, of which practically all is highly urbanized, is
                         approximately 1,700 hectares; urban green areas account for only 7 percent of the total basin area.
                         Due to the long existing man-made physical modifications to the basin, the existing natural habitats’
                         conditions have been totally replaced by urban components. The Cildañez basin covers a suburban
                         area in the southern part of the city of Buenos Aires. The basin is populated by around 50,000 low-
                         income residents dwelling in informal settlements and precarious social housing. Lake Soldati is a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         small pond located in a low-income sector within the Cildañez watershed. The Lake is connected to
                         the Cildañez stream, which in turn receives diverted flows (up to 100 cubic meters per second) from
                         the Maldonado drainage system. During heavy storm events the Cildañez stream floods the lake
                         area. The Cildañez stream flows into the Riachuelo River.

                         There are two relevant groundwater systems in the project area:

                         (i)       Epipuelches is a multilayer aquifer located in the Pampeano sediments (aquifer of medium
                         productivity) and Postpampeano sediments (mostly an aquitard with waters of a high saline content).
                         The water table in the shallow layers of the sediments ranges between 2 and 15 meters below surface
                         elevation and follows the surface morphology. The water table presents high levels of diverse
                         chemical, physical, and biological contaminants originated by human activity;
                         (ii)     Puelches is located in the Puelchenses sands underneath the Epipuelches aquifer and
                         separated from it by a low permeability layer of clay. The Puelchenses sands rest on the impermeable
                         aquiclude Paraná. The Puelches is then an extensive (it extends beyond the Province de Buenos
                         Aires), very productive, semi-confined aquifer, with water that is safe for human consumption,
                         irrigation, and industrial uses. Natural circulation of groundwater is low between the Puelches and
                         Epipuelches aquifers. The Puelchenses sands are found at an average depth of 30 meters below
                         surface elevation.
                         According to the pre-design study of the works and the corresponding feasibility technical studies of
                         the main tunnel (new Vega´s second emissary), 2.4 kilometers of it will be excavated using
                         traditional methods. The upper part of the tunnel will be located between 10 and 15 meters below
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the surface and cut across the Pampeano sediments and water table. The other 6 kilometers of the
                         tunnel will be excavated using a tunnel boring machine of the Earth Pressure Balance type (TBM-
                         EPB) at a depth ranging between 23 and 30 meters below surface (tunnel ceiling). This portion of the
                         tunnel will be mostly located at the base of the Pampeano formation, but a segment of it will intersect
                         the Puelches formation. The discharge chamber to be constructed in the margin of the La Plata River
                         will traverse both the Pampeano and Puelches formations. The foundation of this chamber will reach
                         the Paraná formation.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The City of Buenos Aries Ministry of Finance (MoF), through its Unit for Multilateral Financing
                         (UMF), would act as the main Project counterpart and overall Project coordinator. The plan builds
                         upon implementation arrangements developed under the previous Urban Flood Prevention and
                         Drainage Project APL1 (PO88220). The City’s Ministry of Urban Development (MUD) would be
                         responsible for the majority of technical tasks in relation to the works in the Vega and Maldonado
                         basins under Component 2, including the preparation and implementation of the bidding processes,
                         the oversight of the execution of the works (direct supervision would be carried out by an
                         independent firm for the Vega tunnel), and all the safeguard related issues. The MUD has
                         demonstrated effective and adequate capacity for carrying out the activities envisioned under the
                         proposed Project based upon the results from the previous APL1. This MUD has a team of highly
                         qualified staff, including personnel that manage social and environmental aspects. The MoF has
                         recently hired a social expert that will undertake the social analysis of the Project in coordination
                         with the Bank. A social analysis based on secondary demographic and socio-economic data (no
                         surveys were conducted) will assess the impact of flooding on two different groups: residents and
                         visitors.
                         As a result of the devastating floods that took place on April 2, 2013, the next stage will include a
                         stakeholder analysis and a study of the perception of the affected population with the purpose of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strengthening the current claims management system through the creation of a sound grievance and
                         redress mechanism.

                         Through its Urban Drainage Unit, CABA’s Ministry of Environment and Public Spaces will be
                         responsible for the execution of the project in the Cildañez basin area under Component 2. It will
                         coordinate, on an as-needed basis, with the MoF and the Secretariat of Habitat and the oversight of
                         the execution of the works (direct supervision would be carried out by an independent firm) and the
                         corresponding safeguard aspects. No previous work relationship exists between the CABA’s
                         Ministry of Environment and Public Spaces - Urban Drainage Unit and the Bank. An assessment of
                         the implementing agencies’ ability to manage safeguards issues is being completed as part of the
                         preparation process for the Project. Taking into account the nature and size of the proposed Project,
                         this assessment will determine the potential weaknesses of the MUD and the Urban Drainage Unit (e.
                         g., additional environmental and social specialists). Once identified, strengthening measures will be
                         included under Component 3 of the Project.

                         Another city agency involved in the Project is the CABA’s Ministry of Justice and Security through
                         its Unified Center for the Control and Coordination of Emergencies (Centro Único de Coordinación
                         y Control de Emergencias – CUCC for its initials in Spanish) within the Sub-secretary of
                         Emergencies. The CUCC will be responsible for the operation of the hydro-meteorological
                         surveillance network and the alert-warning and response system SIHVIGILA, and will serve as the
                           operational base for the Inter-institutional Committee in charge of the implementation of the City’s
                           Strategic Master Plan. The Inter-institutional Committee will comprise all of the aforementioned
                           institutions as well as representatives from other ministries as required (i.e. health and education); the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           committee will also have the responsibility of implementing the social communication and education
                           sub-component, coordinating as needed with the MoF.

                           Based on the lessons learned from the Maldonado Project, and given the social complexities of the
                           project’s investments and operating environment, a robust grievance mechanism will be developed
                           by the Buenos Aires City Government, including procedures and agencies to prevent and manage
                           project related information requests, simple complaints, and grievances.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Jose Vicente Zevallos (LCSSO)
                           Ricardo Schusterman (LCSSO)
                           Elba Lydia Gaggero (LCSEN)
                           Robert H. Montgomery (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              The Project physical interventions/works in
                           BP 4.01                                                Component 2 are: i) in the Maldonado basin, the
                                                                                  construction of nearly 40 kilometers of
                                                                                  secondary and tertiary drainage conduits that
                                                                                  will convey water into the large drainage
                                                                                  tunnels previously built with a loan from the
                                                                                  Bank; ii) in the Vega basin, the construction of a
                                                                                  large drainage tunnel with a total estimated
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  length of 8.4 kilometers (second emissary for
                                                                                  the Vega stream) and complementary works
                                                                                  (connector pipes that will link the main drainage
                                                                                  conduit to the emissaries, a discharge chamber,
                                                                                  and a pump station on the riverbank of the La
                                                                                  Plata River), as well as 10.5 kilometers of
                                                                                  secondary and tertiary drainage networks; and
                                                                                  iii) in the Cildáñez basin, a) improvements to
                                                                                  the existing drainage conduit to increase
                                                                                  drainage capacity in the lower lands of the
                                                                                  Cildáñez area; and b) the environmental
                                                                                  recovery and reclamation of Lake Soldati.
                                                                                  The Project is classified as a Category A project
                                                                                  under OP/BP 4.01 given the magnitude of the
                                                                                  proposed investment under Component 2, the
                                                                                  relative complexity of the Project’s location
                                                                                  (city of Buenos Aires), and the subsequent
                                                                                  potential environmental and social impacts. The
                                                                                  major potential socio-environmental adverse
                                                                                  effects are associated with the construction of
                         the tunnel and complementary works in the
                         Vega basin, but are not considered irreversible
                         or immitigable. Key considerations associated
Public Disclosure Copy




                         with the physical location and characteristics of
                         the project area include health and safety issues
                         (for workers and the population), disruptions to
                         a highly congested part of the city, and specific
                         groundwater quality characteristics, as well as
                         the management of excavation and the hauling
                         of soil and waste generated during the
                         construction of the drainage tunnel, ,and the
                         capacity and location of the disposal sites.
                         Management of waste materials from
                         excavation activities will require a detailed
                         traffic control plan, as well as a monitoring and
                         control program to determine their quality and
                         establish the appropriate handling, transport,
                         and disposal conditions per applicable
                         regulations. The EIA of the works will establish
                         specific mitigation measures to ensure the
                         proper management of waste materials from
                         excavations, and identify and assess alternatives
                         of potential disposal sites.
                         One of the options proposes the use of waste
                         soil to fill the depressed areas of flat lands in the
                         Province of Buenos Aires (in compliance with
                         provincial and municipal regulations) similar to
                         how it was addressed in APL1.The other works
Public Disclosure Copy




                         envisioned in the Maldonado and Cildáñez
                         basins are expected to have few adverse
                         potential effects, are site specific, non-
                         irreversible, and can be readily mitigated. The
                         new Vega tunnel will discharge into the La
                         Plata River, a river subject to severe pollution
                         from domestic and industrial waste. Thus
                         potentially significant impacts to the water
                         quantity and/or quality of the La Plata River are
                         not expected since the proposed works would
                         not affect the drainage balance of the basin, and
                         the discharged storm water would be of similar
                         quality as that currently being discharged by the
                         existing Vega emissary (higher water quality
                         than the La Plata River, the receiving body).
                         Anticipated positive Project impacts associated
                         with increased City resilience to flooding events
                         include betterment of the population’s quality of
                         life, a reduction in related economic losses, and
                         the efficient delivery of essential services such
                         as energy, transportation, health and education,
                         among other benefits. In addition, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development of a large scale drainage
                         infrastructure will strengthen the construction
                         sector and create jobs.
                         Given that three different works in different
                         areas of the city are foreseeable under the
                         Project, three separate Environmental Impact
                         Assessments (EIA) will be developed in
                         accordance with the World Bank's
                         Environmental and Social Safeguards Policies.
                         The city of Buenos Aires began drafting a risk
                         management scheme to reduce the City’s
                         vulnerability to flooding under the Bank-
                         financed Flood Protection Project (AR- 4117)
                         which closed in 2006. This project financed the
                         preparation of the Plan Director de Obras
                         Hidráulicas (Strategic Master Plan, SMP), an
                         urban drainage master plan for the city which
                         outlines specific investments in urban drainage
                         infrastructure and identifies the most viable
                         solution to reduce flooding in the different
                         basins within the City. The SMP is the roadmap
                         for the City to guide its i nterventions on flood
                         hazard management as it establishes a set of
                         priority structural and non-structural measures
                         that will promote and encourage sustainable
Public Disclosure Copy




                         flood management. The Maldonado and Vega
                         basins have been considered the priority areas
                         for investment because together they comprise
                         over 30% of the City’s area and population, are
                         of significant importance in the overall transport
                         system linking the northern metropolitan area to
                         the center of the city, and are highly vulnerable
                         to flood recurrence. The City started the
                         implementation of the SMP under the Bank’s
                         Urban Flood Prevention and Drainage Project
                         APL1 (AR-7289) which closed in 2012. The
                         Project financed a new drainage system in the
                         Maldonado Stream Basin. The current proposed
                         Project will finish the previously planned works
                         in the Maldonado basin, implement the
                         envisioned works in the Vega basin, and support
                         several interventions in the Cildañez basin
                         associated in part with the Maldonado drainage
                         system
                         The current Project will also fulfill the non-
                         structural measures identified in the SMP that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         could not be brought to fruition under the
                         previous loan. The analysis of alternatives and
                         early consultations with stakeholders on the
                         Vega and Maldonado interventions were part of
                         the preliminary socio-environmental studies
                         developed under the AR-4117. Outreach to
                         residents of the Vega basin in regards to the
                         proposed interventions was performed during
                         the implementation of APL1. In addition, the
                         MUD has been meeting with interested
                         stakeholders since 2012. The objective of these
                         meetings is to better define the ToR for the
                         EIAs. The consultation process with
                         stakeholders will be continuous and reinforced
                         during Project preparation. The MoF-MUD has
                         retained the services of a consulting firm to
                         develop the EIA for the Vega basin works. The
                         EIA will update and delve into the above
                         mentioned preliminary studies based on the
                         findings of the pre-design report for the works.
                         The MUD is also updating the EIA of
                         Maldonado’s secondary and tertiary drainage
                         conduits originally developed for the APL1. The
                         Urban Drainage Unit from the Ministry of
                         Environment and Public Spaces is developing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the EIA of the Cildañez interventions.
                         The EIAs will (i) identify and assess potential
                         environmental and social impacts based on the
                         type and scope of physical interventions and site
                         characteristics; (ii) design appropriate
                         mitigation, management, and monitoring
                         measures; and (iii) organize those measures
                         under an Environmental Management Plan.
                         Environmental requirements will be specified in
                         the construction contracts.
                         Once drafts EIAs have been developed, the
                         partaking agencies will perform public
                         consultations on these instruments in
                         accordance with Bank policies and local
                         legislation. The final EIAs will document the
                         results of the consultations and will take into
                         account the stakeholders’ input.
                         The activities of Components 1 and 3 do not
                         represent significant potential negative
                                                                 environmental impacts but will enhance the
                                                                 positive outcomes, long-term benefits, and
                                                                 sustainability of the Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    This policy should not be triggered since the
                                                                 Project does not require the significant
                                                                 conversion of natural habitats or critical natural
                                                                 habitats and will not take place in protected
                                                                 areas or ecologically important sites. However,
                                                                 the EIAs will assess the potential impacts on
                                                                 non-critical natural habitats as part of the EIA
                                                                 process.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    This policy should not be triggered since the
                                                                 project will affect neither forests nor forest-
                                                                 dependent communities, nor will it involve
                                                                 changes in the management of forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    This policy should not be triggered since the
                                                                 project does not require the purchase or use of
                                                                 significant quantities of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Several Historic Protection Areas (APH, Áreas
                         BP 4.11                                 de Protección Histórica) have been established
                                                                 within the limits of the Vega basin. Some of
                                                                 them are located in the potential area of
                                                                 influence of the projected works. However, the
                                                                 projected tunnel alignment does not define a
                                                                 linear area of influence because most of the
                                                                 construction would take place at great depths
                                                                 while minimizing expected impacts on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 surface. The critical environmentally and
                                                                 socially sensitive spots in the area of influence
                                                                 of the project (due to surface works such as
                                                                 tunnel construction shafts, connection and
                                                                 derivation chambers, etc.) have been
                                                                 preliminarily identified and none of them would
                                                                 affect the areas that require PCR protection. No
                                                                 known or suspected archeological sites have
                                                                 been documented in Project related studies or
                                                                 literature in areas that may be directly impacted
                                                                 by the Project. However, Component 2 works
                                                                 entail large excavations and soil movement, and
                                                                 potential exists for the accidental discovery of
                                                                 physical cultural resources. Thus policy is
                                                                 triggered. The necessary mitigation measures
                                                                 will be considered within OP/BP 4.01 and the
                                                                 specific EA instruments (e.g., EMP with chance
                                                                 finds procedures).
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            This policy is not triggered since project
                                                                                                                                 activities will not affect indigenous peoples as
                                                                                                                                 defined in the policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The civil works needed to divert sewage and
                                 4.12                                                                                            storm runoff currently discharging into Lake
                                                                                                                                 Soldati (Component 2) could affect a small
                                                                                                                                 number of houses in an informal settlement
                                                                                                                                 adjacent to this lake. The exact zone of impact
                                                                                                                                 of the civil works will not be known by project
                                                                                                                                 appraisal; therefore, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                                 Framework (RPF) will be prepared and
                                                                                                                                 disclosed prior to appraisal. If the civil works
                                                                                                                                 carried out to protect Lake Soldati cause
                                                                                                                                 resettlement, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
                                                                                                                                 will be prepared prior to the start of the works.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The Project will not support the construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
                                                                                                                                 investments which rely on the services of
                                                                                                                                 existing dams. Therefore, the Policy is not
                                                                                                                                 triggered.
                                 Projects on International                                         Yes                           The Project involves the construction of a new
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            drainage tunnel that discharges storm water into
                                                                                                                                 the La Plata River which triggers the Policy.
                                                                                                                                 The notification process will be confirmed
                                                                                                                                 during Project preparation. The proposed
                                                                                                                                 Project works will result in the expansion of the
                                                                                                                                 existing storm drainage systems; no adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 changes to the quality or quantity of the water
                                                                                                                                 flows by the use of riparian organisms are
                                                                                                                                 anticipated.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The Policy is not triggered because the Project
                                 7.60                                                                                            will not be implemented in areas known to
                                                                                                                                 involve disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Jan-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The safeguard-related studies have already started. The present estimated date for completion is
                                      January 15, 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Christophe Prevost

                                 Approved By:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Maria Elena Garcia Mora (RSA)   Date: 30-Dec-2013
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Wambui G. Gichuri (SM)          Date: 28-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
