                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSR1004
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Brazil                                       Project ID:           P106768
                            Project Name:       Rio de Janeiro Public Sector Modernization (P106768)
                            Task Team           Lorena Vinuela
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           02-Apr-2010                                  Estimated   26-Aug-2010
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GGODR                                        Lending     Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:             General public administration sector (36%), Public administration- Education
                                                (27%), Public administration- Health (18%), Health (10% ), Information
                                                technology (9%)
                            Theme:              Managing for development results (29%), Health system performance (30%),
                                                Education for all (27%), Social safety nets (14%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                         No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        27.83           Total Bank Financing:                                        18.67
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                               9.16
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                 18.67
                              Total                                                                                                 27.83
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The proposed Technical Assistance Project will support the GORJ's actions to: (i) reduce operational


                                                                                 Page 1 of 10
                         costs; (ii) promote results-based management in key line de
                         partments, including training specialized public managers and developing informa
                         tion systems to improve efficiency and expand evidenced-based policy making; (ii
Public Disclosure Copy




                         i) improve human resources and management in the education sector to drive learn
                         ing improvements; and (iv) improve quality monitoring and resource utilization i
                         n the state's health network.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The proposed Technical Assistance Project will support the GORJ's actions to: (i) reduce operational
                         costs; (ii) promote results-based management in key line de
                         partments, including training specialized public managers and developing informa
                         tion systems to improve efficiency and expand evidenced-based policy making; (ii
                         i) improve human resources and management in the education sector to drive learn
                         ing improvements; and (iv) improve quality monitoring and resource utilization i
                         n the state's health network.
                          3. Project Description
                         The restructured project consists of the following components:

                         Component 1. Core Administrative Systems and Management Tools for Improved Performance and
                         Efficiency [US$ 6.87 million] supports: (a) the identification of suitable performance indicators and
                         the design of an instrument for result-based management, as well as the acquisition of related
                         information and technology (IT) hardware; (b) data collection for the Government of Rio de Janeiro
                         (GORJ)’s real estate property database; and (c) strengthening of the GORJ’s social security
                         management.

                         Component 2. Strengthening Education Management Capacity, Teacher Instructional Practice and
                         Incentives for School Effectiveness [US$ 2.39 million] provides support to: (a) evaluate the impacts
                         and cost effectiveness of GORJ’s strategic programs; and (b) develop effective in-service training
Public Disclosure Copy




                         courses for teachers at the GORJ’s Escola SEEDUC.

                         Component 3. Health Management and Information Systems [US$1.89 million] supports: (a) the
                         implementation of a new information system for medical supply-chain management; and (b) a new
                         monitoring system to improve the incentive effects of the Program to Support Municipal Hospitals.

                         Component 4 [NEW]. Development of Institutional and Technological Capacity for Preventing and
                         Performing during High-intensity Weather Events [US$ 7.1 million] supports: (a) the development
                         and implementation of an institutional and operational arrangement for disaster risk management;
                         and (b) the acquisition and installation of two weather radar systems.

                         Component 5 [NEW]. Project Management that supports the strengthening of [US$ 0.2 million]
                         supports the strengthening of GORJ’s capacity in Project management for the carrying out of
                         activities associated with Project execution, monitoring, supervision and evaluation of the Project.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The environmental problems of the State of Rio de Janeiro are diverse. Key environmental issues are
                         related to a massive urban development in an environmentally sensitive area. The Metropolitan area
                         is characterized by a diverse topography. A significant portion of the Region is formed by mountains


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         and low lands. Natural vegetation remains in the mountains and steep terrains, with most low land
                         being used for urban settlements.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Metropolitan areas face numerous environmental problems, such as unplanned occupation of
                         steep slopes and river margins, water quality degradation, air quality problems in specific areas and
                         progressive degradation of the remaining preserved Atlantic Forest spots. The Rio de Janeiro
                         Metropolitan area has Atlantic Forest ecosystems with high rates of biodiversity. Natural vegetation
                         still responds for approximately one fourth of the area, including forest, mangroves, salt marshes and
                         beaches, essential to the environmental equilibrium. The most significant remaining forest and
                         conservation units are located in the foothills of the central mountainous region or close to the
                         shoreline, in swampy areas in the vicinity of the Guanabara Bay, and the Western city of Rio de
                         Janeiro. The forests, marshes and mangroves are located in regions where physical obstacles placed
                         limits on expansion of economic activities or where they have stagnated due to socioeconomic
                         realities and political conditions, allowing native vegetation to regenerate. The environment is
                         unique and fragile, characterized by diverse topography and encroachment of urban settlements into
                         environmentally sensitive areas, causing progressive environmental degradation. The World Bank
                         support the Government of Rio de Janeiro in the strengthening of policies related to urban planning
                         and environmental planning through operations and advisory work.

                         A social assessment was completed to explore the potential social impacts of the various components
                         during the preparation of the second Technical Assistance Loan, initially designed as an Additional
                         Finance to this project. It relied on secondary sources−mostly social assessments and poverty and
                         social impact analyses carried out for previous DPL operations with the State and Municipality of
                         Rio de Janeiro. These previous assessments relied on demographic and census data, ethnographic
                         studies of the conditions of daily life of poor people, youth, women and vulnerable groups, and social
                         assessment consultations. These previous assessments show that, despite having recently begun to
                         improve after decades of economic stagnation and social deterioration, the State of Rio de Janeiro
                         has not been able to convert economic growth into widespread, improved social well-being.
                         Although the proportion of poor and extremely poor in the State's population is smaller than in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         rest of the country, social and economic inequality remains high in Rio de Janeiro. All regions of the
                         State, metropolitan and non-metropolitan, present challenges to further reduce poverty and improve
                         well-being.

                         These assessments tend to concur with the proposition that lower incomes, poverty and extreme
                         poverty are closely and meaningfully correlated with race, generation and gender issues, lower levels
                         of education, more limited access to public services, inadequate housing and higher vulnerability to
                         violence and crime. Also, there is strong evidence that poverty and extreme poverty are considerably
                         more widespread in the metropolitan region and disproportionately and overwhelmingly affect
                         female-headed households with children (a trend towards a feminization of poverty) and afro-
                         descendants who reside in precarious settlements and at-risk areas. The metropolitan region has
                         expanded in the last decade toward peripheral zones and vertically within the favelas in a unique and
                         fragile natural environment. The absence of a formal housing market and state policies for low-
                         income housing has led poor families to locate themselves in underserviced peripheral areas. Thus,
                         the percentage of people living in substandard housing under precarious conditions and in at-risk
                         areas has increased and, in recent years, at a rate three times faster than the growth rate of the city's
                         population.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Gunars H. Platais (GENDR)


                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                         Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (GSURR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes           The technical assistance project is expected to
                         BP 4.01                                      have positive indirect environmental impacts,
                                                                      given focus on capacity building of key
                                                                      institutions of the Rio de Janeiro Government,
                                                                      including the State Institute for the Environment.
                                                                      The fourth component "Development of
                                                                      Institutional and Technological Capacity for
                                                                      Preventing and Performing during High-intensity
                                                                      Weather Events," which entails the strengthening
                                                                      of disaster risk management systems, include the
                                                                      only activities that may have indirect
                                                                      environmental implications. This includes the
                                                                      acquisition and installation of two meteorological
                                                                      radar systems which involve construction
                                                                      activities with limited adverse environmental
                                                                      impacts. For this reason, the project has been re-
                                                                      categorized from “C” to "B" and safeguard
                                                                      policies have been triggered for Environmental
                                                                      Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). An Environmental and
                                                                      Social Management Framework (EMF) was
                                                                      prepared and disclosed in December 20, 2011.
                                                                      The document provides an overview of the
                                                                      environmental situation of the state and its legal
                                                                      framework; it discusses the potential impacts,
                                                                      preventive measures and those to mitigate them;
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      and addresses subcomponents screening and
                                                                      eligibility and provides guidelines for the
                                                                      effective and timely implementation of
                                                                      environmental safeguards during Project
                                                                      implementation. It is available at: http://www.
                                                                      progestao.rj.gov.br/salvaguardas_ambientais.asp
                                                                      The Environmental Assessment Safeguard is
                                                                      mandatory to all projects that may potentially
                                                                      have an environmental impact. The Involuntary
                                                                      Resettlement Safeguard is also triggered.
                                                                      The environmental and social assessments
                                                                      prepared for the Additional Finance, later
                                                                      approved as a separate project (P126735 -
                                                                      Strengthening Public Management and Integrated
                                                                      Territorial Development Technical Assistance
                                                                      Loan), covers the activities corresponding to
                                                                      strengthening of disaster risk management, which
                                                                      have been transferred to Component 4.




                                                              Page 4 of 10
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           The project does not include conversion or
                                                                         degradation of critical natural habitats, and no
                                                                         significant impact on natural habitats is expected.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         However, due to potential unforeseen activities
                                                                         related to DRM this policy is triggered on a
                                                                         precautionary basis. The Environmental and
                                                                         Social Management Framework provides an
                                                                         analysis of the potential impacts on natural
                                                                         habitats and provides guidance on how to
                                                                         mitigate and minimize these.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            None of the project's activities will directly or
                                                                         indirectly influence the management or use of
                                                                         natural or plantation forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project will not support the procurement or
                                                                         use of pesticides or other agricultural chemicals,
                                                                         or lead to the increased use of such chemicals.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The project does not involve excavations, earth
                         BP 4.11                                         movement, flooding or other major
                                                                         environmental changes.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            The project does not affect Indigenous Peoples
                                                                         and this policy has not been triggered. A
                                                                         screening exercise—relying on official
                                                                         information available from the National Agency
                                                                         of Indigenous Affairs (Fundacao Nacional do
                                                                         Indio)— did not reveal the presence of
                                                                         Indigenous Peoples with the four characteristics
                                                                         considered by this Policy within the project area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Indigenous Peoples in the State of Rio de Janeiro
                                                                         are found at the southernmost municipalities of
                                                                         Angra dos Reis and Parati, which are not affected
                                                                         by the project.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The sites for the installation of the two Weather
                         4.12                                            Radar Systems have already been identified and
                                                                         are public and unoccupied lands.
                                                                         The Involuntary Resettlement policy is triggered
                                                                         nevertheless because the project supports
                                                                         technical assistance activities for disaster risk
                                                                         management that aims to propose an Action Plan
                                                                         for Implementation of the Proposals for the
                                                                         Disaster Risk Management Improvement Plan.
                                                                         This Disaster Risk Management Plan will include
                                                                         proposals of actions to handle adverse events that
                                                                         may include temporary or permanent preventive
                                                                         evacuation.
                                                                         The Involuntary Resettlement Policy was
                                                                         consequently triggered to ensure that actions for



                                                                 Page 5 of 10
                                                                              handling adverse events through preventive
                                                                              evacuation will:
                                                                              (i)      take into consideration the impacts on (a)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              the preventively relocated population, (b) the
                                                                              population that may continue living at the sites
                                                                              because the areas at high risk that cannot be
                                                                              controlled by any other measure but relocation is
                                                                              not always entirely coterminous with the territory
                                                                              of the community settled at the sites (such as, the
                                                                              breakdown of relationships and socioeconomic
                                                                              networks), and (c) the host population in the
                                                                              neighboring communities of the new settlements
                                                                              (such as, additional demands on public services
                                                                              and existing resources); and,
                                                                              (ii)     include proper principles and guidelines
                                                                              to be applied by the State when: (a) any land
                                                                              acquisition might be undertaken by the State for
                                                                              the preventive relocation of people living in risk-
                                                                              prone areas and/or for the post-disaster relocation
                                                                              of affected people in places other than their
                                                                              original residences and places of business; and,
                                                                              (b) the abandoned lands that reverted to the State
                                                                              for relocation were encumbered by pre-existing
                                                                              use claims.
                                                                              A Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared
                                                                              by the State to set the principles and guidelines to
                                                                              be followed by the technical assistance project
                                                                              and will guide the preparation of the Plan for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              Disaster Risk Management. The RPF has been
                                                                              publicly disseminated on the project's website
                                                                              prior to approval of the second Technical
                                                                              Assistance Loan (http://www.progestao.rj.gov.br/
                                                                              salvaguardas_ambientais.asp).
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              The project will not finance construction or
                                                                              rehabilitation of dams nor its activities rely on the
                                                                              operation of any existing dams.
                            Projects on International        No               The project will not finance activities related to
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                              international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No               The project will not finance activities in disputed
                            7.60                                              areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:




                                                                      Page 6 of 10
                            No direct negative environmental impacts are expected from project activities. However, due to
                           activities related to the acquisition and installation of two weather alert radars, Environmental
                           Safeguard Policy (OP/BP 4.01) is triggered to ensure that proper consideration is given to small
Public Disclosure Copy




                           civil works and potential future positive impacts that may result from better disaster risk
                           prevention and management.

                           No direct negative social impacts are expected from project activities. However, due to activities
                           related to the proposal of a Plan for Disaster Risk Management, the Involuntary Resettlement
                           Policy (OP/BP 4.12) is triggered to ensure that proper consideration is given to set in this Plan
                           proper principles to guide handling actions that may require the preventive relocation/evacuation
                           of people living in high-risk areas.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The Project includes activities related to the strengthening of institutional and operational
                           arrangements for Disaster Risk Management and the acquisition, installation and
                           operationalization of two weather radar systems to improve the capacity of the State of Rio de
                           Janeiro to prevent and manage high-intensity weather events. Indirect environmental and social
                           impacts may arise from the improvement in the State's capacity to forecast weather events creating
                           risks of landslides and through the impacts of future programs and changes in the State's disaster
                           risk management and urban development policies involving the preservation of areas and the
                           resettlement of populations living in regions vulnerable to landslides.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Not applicable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The Government of Rio de Janeiro is making significant progress to improve its environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                           management system. The Environmental Management Framework proposes institutional capacity
                           strengthening measures and institutional arrangements to implement the Project. The State
                           Environmental Institute (INEA) is fully capable of overseeing the implementation of the
                           Framework and the resulting plans. It will also be the implementing agency for Component 4
                           (Development of Institutional and Technological Capacity for Preventing and Performing during
                           High-intensity Weather Events).
                           Additionally, the State of Rio de Janeiro has notably improved its involuntary resettlement
                           legislation and procedures in recent years and is capable of handling, monitoring, and
                           implementing the social safeguards issues that may indirectly arise from future projects and
                           programs or changes in the disaster risk management policy that involve resettlement of
                           populations living in areas at high risk of landslides. Decree 41,148/2008 introduces as its main
                           guidelines: (i) the participation of the affected people in all states of the resettlement process; (ii)
                           the provision of resettlement options; (iii) strong mechanisms of communication with the
                           population; and (iv) extensive consultation processes with the main stakeholders to address their
                           concerns during implementation. These procedures are in accordance with most of the provisions
                           of the Bank's resettlement policies.
                           It is important to underscore that as part of the preparation of the Strengthening Public
                           Management and Integrated Territorial Development (P126735) and the restructuring of this
                           project (which was intended originally as an Additional Finance to the first project), the World
                           Bank team advised the State of Rio de Janeiro on how to strengthen resettlement policies and


                                                                       Page 7 of 10
                           worked closely with the relevant agencies to prepare, between July and December 2011, a
                           Resettlement Policy Framework . The RPF, prepared, covers gaps between the state regulatory
                           framework and the Bank’s Involuntary Resettlement Policy. The Resettlement Policy Framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                           addresses the remaining gaps between the State's policies and the Involuntary Resettlement Policy
                           (OP/BP 4.12) with regards to compensation of affected people without land tenure rights,
                           compensation of losses related to economic displacement, compensation according to replacement
                           value, and provision of easily accessible and responsive grievance mechanisms. The framework
                           sets the principles and guidelines to be followed by the government in the situations in which
                           activities, projects, programs and policies supported by the project may cause involuntary
                           resettlement.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             For this operation, the key stakeholders are the State agencies whose institutional capacity will be
                           strengthened through the supported activities. The State Secretariats of Planning and
                           Management, Education, and Health, and the State Environmental Institute have been involved in
                           the discussion and preparation of all safeguards documents and their capacity to meet safeguards
                           requirements of the World Bank has been assessed. Safeguards have been triggered on a
                           precautionary basis as most of Technical Assistance activities do not have direct adverse
                           environmental or social impacts, but a few may lead indirectly to impacts when implemented
                           through future programs or projects. By triggering such safeguards policies, agreements have
                           been reached with the client on the need to incorporate environmental or social concerns that meet
                           the World Bank's requirements on the preparation of the Terms of Reference underlying project
                           activities. In addition to this, the State has a well-developed Environmental Management
                           Framework and Resettlement Policy Framework and the necessary institutional capacity to
                           minimize any potential negative impacts associated with the project. The Framework emphasizes
                           the use of consultative processes in case specific plans need to be developed for any underlying
                           activity.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         13-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      19-Dec-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                              20-Dec-2011
                           Comments: The Environmental Management Framework was prepared in 2011 to cover the
                                         components of the restructured Rio de Janeiro Public Sector Modernization
                                         (P106768) and the Strengthening Public Management and Integrated Territorial
                                         Development (P126735) Technical Assistance Loans. The latter was initially
                                         designed as an Additional Financing to the first project and as such originally
                                         included all the components of the first Technical Assistance Loan. The document is
                                         available at: http://www.progestao.rj.gov.br/salvaguardas_ambientais.asp.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?


                                                                      Page 8 of 10
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         13-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      19-Dec-2011
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Brazil                                                              20-Dec-2011
                           Comments: The Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared in 2011 to cover the components
                                         of the restructured Rio de Janeiro Public Sector Modernization (P106768) and the
                                         Strengthening Public Management and Integrated Territorial Development
                                         (P126735) Technical Assistance Loans. The latter was initially designed as an
                                         Additional Financing to the first project and as such originally included all the
                                         components of the first Technical Assistance Loan. The document is available at:
                                         http://www.progestao.rj.gov.br/salvaguardas_ambientais.asp.
                         Technical Assistance Project
                         For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
                         indicate type of document disclosed, if any.
                         Not applicable.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         Not applicable.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?



                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Lorena Vinuela
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                          Date: 26-Sep-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Practice Manager/   Name:                                                Date:
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
