                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA8322
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Lebanon                           Project ID:    P149242
                            Project Name:      Emergency Nat'l Poverty Targeting Proj (P149242)
                            Task Team          Haneen Ismail Sayed
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          28-Feb-2014                       Estimated   16-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSSP                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Social safety nets (50%), Social risk mitigation (25%), Vulnerability assessment
                                              and monitoring (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      96.10           Total Bank Financing:                   0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   85.00
                              Lebanon Syrian Crisis Trust Fund                                                            8.10
                              UN High Commissioner for Refugees                                                           3.00
                              Total                                                                                      96.10
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the Project is to expand the coverage and enhance the social assistance package of
                           the National Poverty Targeting Program (NPTP) to Lebanese affected by the Syrian crisis and all
                           Lebanese households under the extreme poverty line.


                                                                       Page 1 of 5
                         3. Project Description
                         The Emergency NPTP project consists of two technical components and a fiduciary operations
                         component. Specifically, the components are: (i) administration of the NPTP, (ii) provision of Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Assistance, and (iii) fiduciary Operations.

                         Component 1: Administration of the National Poverty Targeting Program (US$14 million total cost,
                         of which US$3.9 million financed from TFL, and US$6.9 million from the GOL for social workers)

                         This component’s objective is to ensure an effective and efficient administration and implementation
                         of the NPTP through its structures in the MOSA and the PCM, so that it can expand the coverage and
                         enhance the social assistance to extremely poor Lebanese households and those affected by the
                         Syrian crisis. This component will also improve the efficiency of the NPTP. To achieve its objective,
                         this component will finance technical assistance for the following activities:

                         •       Supporting the program management team in the MOSA and the PCM;
                         •       Recertification of applicants including refining the program application forms and Proxy-
                         Mean Testing (PMT) questionnaire;
                         •       Upgrading the NPTP management information system (MIS);
                         •       Refining the grievance and redress mechanism for improved efficiency and transparency;
                         •       Monitoring and evaluation of the program, including evaluating the business processes of the
                         NPTP, and implementation of short quantitative and qualitative surveys (beneficiary assessments,
                         opinion polls on awareness, etc.);
                         •       Carrying out an outreach campaign to enroll new beneficiaries particularly in the poorer and
                         remote areas;
                         •       Provision of technical assistance for the training, distribution, assessment and monitoring,
                         and card management of the e-card food voucher component;
                         •       Provision and maintenance of the e-cards for the food vouchers;
                         •       Capacity building and training for NPTP staff and social workers;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •       Provision and maintenance of IT and other equipment for the program; and
                         •       Additional incentives for the NPTP social workers to enhance their productivity in the form
                         of transportation and other allowances.

                         Component 2: Provision of Social Assistance (US$203 million total cost, of which US$3.6 million
                         financed from TFL; US$3 million from the UNHCR; US$78 million from the GOL)

                         This component provides a package of social assistance benefits for 350,000 extremely poor
                         Lebanese households and those affected by the Syrian crisis for a three year period. The package of
                         assistance consists of: (i) comprehensive health coverage in public and private hospitals through the
                         waiver of 10-15 percent copayments for hospitalization; (ii) comprehensive primary health care
                         coverage at Ministry of Public Health (MOPH) primary health care facilities or at the MOSA Social
                         Development Centers; (iii) coverage of chronic disease prescription medications; (iv) registration fee
                         waivers and free books for students in primary and secondary public schools; and (v) basic food
                         needs through the e-card food voucher program. In addition to addressing basic food needs of
                         extremely poor Lebanese households, the introduction of the food component in this phase of the
                         NPTP will help mitigate tensions between the Syrian refugee and Lebanese host communities by
                         somewhat harmonizing benefits among them.

                         The GOL will continue to finance the costs of the health, medication, and education benefits, while


                                                                      Page 2 of 5
                         the project will finance the provision of e-card food vouchers for the 18,500 beneficiaries in the first
                         year. Reaching the intended 50,000 e-card food voucher beneficiaries in the first year is subject to the
                         availability of funds, and more specifically a financing gap of US$11.3 million in the first year of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project. The e-card system is currently being implemented by the WFP for approximately 500,000
                         Syrian refugees. The NPTP will use the same system as that deployed by the WFP, with some
                         modifications to align it with the implementation modality of the NPTP.

                         Component 3: Fiduciary Operations Team (FOT) (US$0.6 million total cost, financed from TFL)

                         The Fiduciary Operations Team (FOT) will be responsible for implementation of the procurement
                         and financial functions of the project, working closely with the teams in MOSA and the PCM who
                         are implementing the program activities. The FOT will play two key roles in the project: (i)
                         managing the procurement process through the various stages for all contracts (goods, consulting
                         services, and operating costs), as well as updating and implementing the procurement plan; and (ii)
                         handling financial management, including payments for all contracts, financial reporting, and
                         ensuring external audits are undertaken in compliance with requirements. The FOT will be composed
                         of: (i) Procurement Specialist, (ii) Procurement Officer, (iii) Financial Management Specialist, (iv)
                         Procurement Assistant, and (v) an internal auditor.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         National

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Nina Bhatt (MNSSU)
                         Alaa Ahmed Sarhan (MNSEE)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No               This project will not involve any physical
                          BP 4.01                                              investments and will have minimal or no adverse
                                                                               environmental impacts. Given that, the Bank’s
                                                                               OP 4.01 is not triggered and thus, no EA is
                                                                               required.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               The Bank’s OP 4.12 policy does not apply to this
                          4.12                                                 project. The project components which are
                                                                               focused on the administrative aspects of the



                                                                       Page 3 of 5
                                                                                 national poverty targeting program and
                                                                                 additional activities in the areas of social
                                                                                 assistance provision and establishing fiduciary
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 and financial management controls are not
                                                                                 expected to result in any adverse impacts related
                                                                                 to the involuntary taking of land resulting in
                                                                                 relocation or loss of shelter, loss of assets or
                                                                                 access to assets, or loss of income/means of
                                                                                 livelihoods.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              There are no social or environmental safeguards issues or impacts anticipated under this project.
                              As described above, the Bank’s social and environmental safeguards policies will not apply to this
                              project.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              No potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated activities in the project area are
Public Disclosure Copy




                              expected under this project.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              N/A
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              N/A
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                                                         Page 4 of 5
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Haneen Ismail Sayed
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                      Date: 17-Apr-2014
                            Advisor:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Sector Manager:     Name: Yasser Aabdel-Aleem Awny El-                   Date: 17-Apr-2014
                                                           Gammal (SM)




                                                                      Page 5 of 5
