                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA1007
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bangladesh                         Project ID:    P146520
                            Project Name:      Income Support for the Poorest through Local Government (P146520)
                            Task Team          Iffath Anwar Sharif
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          24-Aug-2014                        Estimated   01-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSPDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (90%), Public administration- Other social services (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Social safety nets (70%), Nutrition and food security (15%), Child health (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        315.00                 Total Bank Financing:       300.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            15.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                  300.00
                              Total                                                                                        315.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to benefit the poorest households with coordinated safety net
                           delivery at the local level to improve their access to basic child nutrition and development services.
                            3. Project Description
                           To achieve the PDO the project will be implemented in 28 of the poorest Upazilas (UPs) and cover
                           about 500,000 families over a five year period. The proposed project will support three components

                                                                        Page 1 of 7
                         via an Investment Project Financing (IPF) amounting to approximately USD 300 million and GoB
                         contribution of approximately USD 15 million for a period of five years (FY15-19), and will be
                         implemented by LGD of MoLGRD&C.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Cash transfers for beneficiary households (USD 260 million). This component will
                         finance quarterly cash transfers to eligible households. Eligibility will be determined by the
                         following two characteristics: (i) household will have to belong to the bottom two expenditure
                         quintiles, and b) such households much have pregnant women and/or mothers of children below the
                         age of 60 months. There would be four types of co-responsibilities depending on the household
                         demographic composition (see Table 3 below). Cash transfers will be given conditional on utilizing
                         the following services: (i) up to 3 antenatal care visits by pregnant beneficiaries; (ii) monthly growth
                         monitoring (GM) of children from 0-24 months; (iii) quarterly GM for children from 2 to 5 years of
                         age; (iv) monthly attendance at child nutrition and development (CND) awareness sessions by all
                         eligible women. The incentives emphasize the importance of GM among 0 to 24 month old children,
                         and that of growth promotion and child development awareness among all children below 5. There
                         is a natural exit mechanism whereby the maternal benefit will end once the mother gives birth, and
                         the child cash transfer will cease once the child reaches 5 five years of age. Further details regarding
                         program rules including possible exceptions will be described in the Shombhob Operations Manual.

                         To remain consistent with the Government family panning policy, each household will be entitled to
                         benefit payments for only the first and second born child. This implies the average size of the
                         monthly benefit would be about BDT 1000 or about USD 15, which would be around 3% of the
                         estimated 2013 monthly per capita income in Bangladesh and about 10% of the national poverty line.
                         The benefit amount will be indexed to national inflation rates. Evidence from CCT programs in other
                         developing countries suggest limited labor disincentive impacts especially when the level of benefits
                         is within 20 percent of household income.

                         Component 2: Strengthening local level capacity and coordination (USD 50 million). This
                         component would provide the necessary inputs to LGD to facilitate the implementation of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         proposed cash transfers. This will include strengthening the capacity of: (i) Union Parishads (i.e.
                         union level elected councils) to supervise beneficiary enrolment and administer grievance redress
                         mechanisms; (ii) Community Clinics (CCs) to deliver the ANC and GM services, and the CND
                         awareness sessions; and (iii) union Post Offices to make electronic payments to beneficiaries using
                         the Postal Cash Cards (PCCs) upon compliance with co-responsibilities. To facilitate the Union
                         Parishad activities, a “Safety Net Beneficiary Cell” (SNC) will be established at the existing Union
                         Parishad Offices, staffed by one Safety Net Program Assistant (SPA). An enrolment agency will be
                         hired to support in managing the initial large volumes of enrolments in Shombhob in the first two
                         years of implementation. The SNC will mainly liase with the elected members of the Union Parishad
                         and will report to the local level administration officials (namely the Upazila Nirbahi Office (UNO).
                         Training of the relevant government officials to implement a grievance redress system through the
                         office of the UNO and District Commissioner (DC) will also be financed.

                         Given the legal mandate of Union Parishads to support the implementation of all SSNs, the SNCs
                         will function as a safety net “one stop shop” for providing citizens with information on these
                         programs, their eligibility criteria, etc. The SPA will be responsible for facilitating this information,
                         and for compiling the beneficiary lists (and their updates through new enrolments) major SSNs that
                         operate nationally (e.g. EGPP, FFW, TR, Vulnerable Group Feeding, Gratuitous Relief, Old Age
                         Allowance, Widow Allowance, etc.) in addition to managing the Shombhob beneficiary lists. Such
                         local level coordination will allow SNCs to track SSN beneficiaries receiving benefits from different

                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         programs in each Union. This information can eventually feed into the central level beneficiary
                         registry tracking system being developed by the Ministry of Finance (MoF) with support from
                         DFID, and the MoDMR for its programs (FFW, EGPP, TR, VGF and GR) as part of the SNSP
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project.

                         To ensure regularity in service provision by the CCs that allow the fulfillment of beneficiary co-
                         responsibility, and to avoid over-burdening the CC staff, a NGO will be hired to extend ANC
                         services and GM services to the Shombhob beneficiaries. This NGO will also be responsible for
                         offering the awareness sessions on CND. To support the BPO payments system, the component will
                         help procure the hardware and software needed to install a biometric-enabled system that links
                         electronic payments with beneficiary unique identity and compliance with their respective co-
                         responsibilities. This IT-enabled system will allow for better coordination between the three sets of
                         community institutions – the SNC, the CC, and the PO (Post Office). Once the payments platform is
                         set up, it can be availed by other cash based SSNs to adopt similar electronic payments.

                         The coordination between these three local entities will be supervised by the UNO (as per the rules
                         of business) who will be assisted by a Safety Net Program Supervisor (SPS). The SPS will liase with:
                         (i) Regional Statistics Officers (RSOs) of the Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS) to determine the
                         beneficiary lists from the Bangladesh Poverty Database (BPD), (ii) the Bangladesh Election
                         Commission (BEC) to ensure all beneficiaries possess the unique National Identification (NID)
                         number; (iii) the Bangladesh Post Office (BPO). All of these activities will be underpinned by an
                         Operations Manual, as well as MOUs signed by LGD with BBS, BEC, and Ministry of Health &
                         Family Welfare (MoHFW), and a service agreement signed with Ministry of Post and
                         Telecommunications (MoPT).

                         Component 3: Monitoring and evaluation (USD 5 million) A robust monitoring and evaluation
                         (M&E) framework will be critical to assess progress in achieving the project’s objectives, and the
                         impact of cash transfers on household poverty and on CND outcomes. This component will thus
                         provide the necessary inputs to set up a project level Monitoring and Evaluation Unit (MEU) at LGD
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to monitor beneficiary selection, enrolment, compliance with co-responsibilities, payments, case
                         management as well as any grievances or appeals. To facilitate these activities, this component will
                         develop an automated Management Information System (MIS) by building on the existing
                         Shombhob Pilot MIS. This MIS will be linked to the MIS set up by the Directorate General of Health
                         Services (DGHS) to share data on service utilization by Shombhob beneficiaries. In addition, an
                         effort will be made to develop an interface with the MISs being built by BBS, MoF and MoDMR to
                         allow central review of beneficiary information.

                         To ensure that the project activities are being carried out effectively, this component will also support
                         third party monitoring which will cover: (i) an annual evaluation of the project cycle processes to
                         assess administrative issues and constraints for a sample of locations; and (ii) bi-annual KAP
                         assessments on a random sample of beneficiaries to track project outcomes. These assessments will
                         help to assess and identify areas that require remedial measures and course correction, and thus will
                         be used to inform necessary changes and updates needed to the Operations Manual. Additionally
                         both qualitative and quantitative evaluations will be conducted to assess the impact of the project
                         activities on household poverty and CND outcomes based on household level surveys.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project will be located in 5 of the poorest districts with a total poor population of over


                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                         one million households. The districts were selected based on the following criteria: (i) Upazila level
                         poverty rate and (ii) the probability of under-nutrition among children below the age of five. A
                         supply side assessment of these services was conducted in the proposed locations to ascertain the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         availability of these services. The assessment found that while most of the Union Parishad
                         Complexes are well established, not all Community Clinics (CC) are well-equipped to deliver all of
                         the ANC and growth monitoring services. The proposed project will provide reinforcements where
                         needed - including providing the services of NGO(s) to avoid over-burdening existing CC staff and
                         procuring growth monitoring equipment and medical instruments.

                         The project will work in areas where ethnic communities live as confirmed by a Social Assessment
                         that was carried out. OP 4.10 has been triggered for the project and a Small Ethnic Communities Plan
                         has been prepared and disclosed. The Plan was prepared on the basis of feedback from extensive
                         consultation with ethnic communities. Regular consultations will continue to be held with them in
                         accordance with the Plan throughout implementation of the project. The PMU will prepare an annual
                         report on compliance with social safeguards as required by the World Bank.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (GENDR)
                         Sabah Moyeen (GURDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         No              Environmental impact is not envisaged under the
                         BP 4.01                                              project activities.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09              No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        Yes             There is presence of ethnic communities in the
                                                                              proposed project locations. The project has
                                                                              prepared a Small Ethnic Communities Plan to
                                                                              ensure maximum coverage of ethnic populations
                                                                              which fall within the eligibility criteria (i.e.
                                                                              poverty and other demographic characteristics)
                                                                              through consultation and dissemination of project
                                                                              information in a participatory manner.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                         4.12
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                         Projects on International            No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50




                                                                      Page 4 of 7
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental impact is not envisaged under the proposed project activities.

                             The proposed project covers locations with the presence of small ethnic communities, specifically
                             in Mymensingh and Jamalpur districts. The ethnic communities in these districts are mostly Garo.
                             Garos are largely mixed with mainstream Bengali communities. Their medium of communication
                             is Bangla although they have their own dialect as well.

                              The proposed project activities will not have any adverse social impacts on ethnic communities or
                              other social groups. Rather, the proposed project is expected to provide benefits to poor peoples
                              though better maternity and child healthcare knowledge and practices through provision of
                              services and cash transfers.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              There are no foreseeable impacts of anticipate future activities.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              There are no adverse impacts associated with the proposed project and thus no project alternative
                              was considered.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The Local Government Division (LGD) under the Ministry of Local Government, Rural
                              Development & Cooperative will be the implementing agency under the proposed project. LGD
                              has implemented a number of Bank projects, including the Local Governance Support Program
                              (LGSP I and II) which has strengthened safeguard capacity at both central and UP levels. Studies
                              carried out during the Mid-Term Review (MTR) for LGSP I confirm adherence to the ESMF
                              guidelines and indicate that UPs are able to prioritize needs and implement projects in ways that
                              reflect the participatory process.

                              A Small Ethnic Communities Plan (SECP) has been prepared following extensive consultation
                              with stakeholders (ethnic communities, ethnic community leaders, local government officials) in
                              sample locations and describes the principles, procedures and organizational arrangements that
                              will be applied under the project. The SECP will be made available to ethnic communities in the
                              project areas in a language, form and manner understandable to them.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              The SECP provides for informed consultations during implementation of the project as well as
                              conducting public information campaigns to ensure that stakeholders (i.e. ethnic communities,
                              ethnic community leaders, local government officials, local government elected officials) and


                                                                       Page 5 of 7
                           eligible beneficiaries are aware of program rules, entitlements and grievance redress mechanisms
                           under the project. This may include cultural activities at the Upazila and Union level, using
                           popular folk media and singers to promote awareness of the services and benefits provided
Public Disclosure Copy




                           through the program.

                           The Upazila Nirbahi Officer (UNO), other relevant government officials, Union Parishad
                           chairman and members and ethnic community welfare associations at the local level will be
                           provided adequate orientation and guidance by the Project Implementation Unit (with relevant
                           advisory support of WB specialists and experts on ethnic community issues) in the
                           implementation of the SECP.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   26-Aug-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bangladesh                                                       26-Aug-2014
                           Comments: The Small Ethnic Communities Plan (SECP) has been disclosed on the LGD website
                                         (www.lgd.gov.bd)
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Iffath Anwar Sharif
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                     Date: 01-Sep-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Pablo Gottret (PMGR)                         Date: 02-Sep-2014
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 7 of 7
