                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                      Report No.: ISDSA1005

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Aug-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Aug-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Haiti                             Project ID:    P132756
                                                        Parent         P124134
                                                        Project ID:
   Project Name:      AF GPE to Haiti Education for All Project - Phase II (P132756)
   Parent Project     Haiti - Education for All Project - Phase II (P124134)
   Name:
   Task Team          Patrick Philippe Ramanant
   Leader:
   Estimated          24-Feb-2014                       Estimated   15-Sep-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
   Managing Unit:     GEDDR                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                        Instrument:
   Sector(s):         Primary education (100%)
   Theme(s):         Education for all (82%), Nutrition and food security (11%), Rural services and
                     infrastructure (7%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      24.10           Total Bank Financing:                  0.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                        Amount
     Borrower                                                                                   0.00
     Education for All Supervising Entity                                                      24.10
     Total                                                                                     24.10
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a          No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                              Page 1 of 9
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The objective of the Project is to support the Strategy for Rebuilding the Education System
   through the implementation of sustainable programs to improve: (a) access, particularly of under-
   served populations, to Primary Education; (b) quality of Primary Education; and (c) the
   institutional capacity in the Recipient's education sector.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The objective of the Project is to support: (i) enrollment of students in select non-public primary
   schools in disadvantaged areas;(ii) student attendance in select public and non-public primary
   schools in disadvantaged areas; and (iii) strengthened management of the Recipient’s primary
   education sector.
   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
The AF maintains the restructured parent Project structure, approach and components. It would
finance existing and new activities under the existing components, as explained below.

Component 1: Support to Primary Education Enrollment. Under sub-component 1.1 – Enhance the
Tuition Waiver Program (TWP), to make up for a financing shortfall from other development
partners, the AF would cover about 102,000 students and 39,390 student in the 2014-15 and 2015-16
school years, respectively, to allow them to continue to attend non-public school tuition-free. These
numbers were agreed in coordination with other partner financing for the TWP, which combined,
would ensure enrollment of students in non-public primary schools for about 129,000 students in
2014-15 and 76,000 students in 2015-16.The AF would also finance training sessions for TWP
school directors and School Management Committees (SMCs) to remind these stakeholders of their
TWP-related responsibilities. Finally, the AF would cover the cost associated with annual
independent verification of TWP schools.

There would be no changes to sub-component 1.2 – Support to Communities. However, a new sub-
component 1.3 – Information for Non-Public School Accountability would be added. This sub-
component would finance technical assistance and operational costs for the development and
implementation of an information campaign to improve financial accountability in TWP schools.
The campaign would target School Management Committees (SMCs) and other local-level
stakeholders, and would highlight the rights and responsibilities of SMCs, their intended function
and minimum operating procedures as a key part of the TWP, as well as of resources at their disposal
to monitor schools. Training sessions already planned under Component 1.1 of the parent Project
would provide the SMCs with tools and advice to monitor schools. The sub-component would be
implemented using a phased approach. In the first year of AF implementation, focus groups would be
conducted with TWP stakeholders (SMC members, parents, school directors…) to identify key
information gaps and impediments to optimal TWP functioning at the school level. Focus group
findings would inform the development of the approach and the campaign content; the tools would
be developed in tested in this first year. In the second year of implementation, the campaign would
be rolled out to a subset of TWP schools.

Component 2: Support to Improved Student Attendance. There would be no changes to sub-
components 2.1 (Pre-Service Teacher Training) and 2.2 (Support to the quality of Reading
Instruction). However, for sub-component 2.3 – School Health and Nutrition (SHN), the AF would


                                             Page 2 of 9
finance SHN services for about 34,000 students annually in the 2014-15 and 2015-16 school years,
helping to fill a financing gap as other partners reduce their financing to school feeding. Combined
with other partner financing, the AF would provide SHN service to about 712,000 beneficiaries. The
existing SHN design and eligible budget lines would be maintained. With the availability of a 2013
nutritional map of Haiti, SHN targeting is being revised. The AF could therefore also finance
activities to prepare the transition to financing new schools, such as informing existing beneficiary
schools about the changes and preparing new participating schools during the 2014-15 school year.
Service provision to the revised list of beneficiaries would begin in the 2015-16 school year. In
addition, the AF would finance the gradual introduction of improved stoves for cooking in
beneficiary schools. The sub-component would use existing arrangements for the verification of
service provision, and the AF would therefore also finance firms for verification services.

Component 3: Strengthening Sector Management. Component 3 would be expanded to include
support to the development of revised annual education sector action plans from 2014 to 2017. New
activities to be financed would also include a complete sector diagnostic and a pilot student-
mentoring program for primary schools. To support improved student learning and completion, the
pilot would entail the design and organization at the school level of private mentoring sessions
outside of school hours for children facing academic difficulties. In addition, the sub-component
would include an assessment of the potential for creating a multi-donor trust fund as a future pooled
funding mechanism for the sector. The sub-component would finance technical assistance for action
plan development, including related analyses or other themes related to sector management as
requested by the MENFP; pilot design, monitoring and evaluation; operational costs; and salary top-
ups for teachers.

Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E). This component would
be expanded in scope to include the financing of additional Project management and implementation
coordination costs, undertaking Project financial audits, as well as additional activities to strengthen
MENFP M&E systems. Such activities include, inter alia: the cost of consultancies associated with
the PTU, including new staff recruited in association with new activities; workshops and operational
costs for joint, semi-annual reviews of PIPE implementation by the MENFP and other education
stakeholders; administering two waves of EGRA in coordination with USAID, which finances
EGRA in selected cities; and developing and undertaking one wave of an Early Grade Mathematics
Assessment (EGMA). EGRA would be administered in 2014-15 and 2016-17 to selected Grade 3
cohorts in a nationally and regionally representative sample of Haitian schools, also representative by
category of school (public, non-public, etc.) and location in an urban/rural setting. EGMA would be
developed and tested in 2014-15, and administered in 2016-17 along with the second wave of EGRA
in the same sample of Grade 3 schools. The AF would finance technical assistance for the
development and administering of these assessments, as well as the cost of data processing,
reproduction of questionnaires and publication of results. Given the proposed Project closing date in
June 2017, EGRA and EGMA results for the 2016-17 school year would not be available by Project
closing. It is expected that the AF would finance the tests and data collection, while other
development partner financing would take over the data processing and publication of results of the
2016-17 EGRA and EGMA.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project would be implemented nationwide. With respect to the community-based school sub-
component, activities would focus on the most remote areas in the country. The geographic access to
these parts is typically very difficult, with few roads of any kind. It is not uncommon that footpaths


                                              Page 3 of 9
through the mountains are the only access, requiring several hours of travel. Small-scale
construction activities would take place on land that will be donated by communities or
municipalities.

With respect to the SHN program, it is expected the AF would finance school health and nutrition
activities in four geographical departments already benefiting from the services (Sud, Ouest, Centre,
Artibonite). Regardless of location, until improved cooking technology is introduced in all AF-
financed schools (introduction expected to begin by mid-2014), there is a risk that cooking practices
involving the use of charcoal as cooking fuel may contribute to minor adverse environmental impacts
if not adequately managed.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Peter F. B. A. Lafere (GURDR)
Robert H. Montgomery (GENDR)

6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The Project will continue to have an
BP 4.01                                              environmental risk category of “B”. The team has
                                                     triggered this safeguard because of the planned
                                                     and ongoing small-scale infrastructure works for
                                                     rural education. An Environmental and Social
                                                     Management Framework (ESMF) was already
                                                     prepared for the parent Project and focuses on,
                                                     among other issues, how to address the impacts
                                                     from construction and ensure community and
                                                     worker health and safety. Infrastructure
                                                     incorporates safe building designs, essential
                                                     safety equipment and adequate sanitary facilities.
                                                     For each existing construction site, an
                                                     Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was
                                                     developed and community members will be
                                                     trained on its implementation. This approach will
                                                     continue for new sites. Training on EMP
                                                     implementation is expected to occur for existing
                                                     sites by October 2014.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               TThe team does not expect to impact natural
                                                     habitats given the limited scale of the investments
                                                     and any potential for impact has been screened-
                                                     out in the ESMF for the parent Project.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               This policy is not triggered given that Project
                                                     activities will not impact the welfare of forests
                                                     nor impact forest dependent communities.
Pest Management OP 4.09             No               This policy is not triggered since the Project will
                                                     not finance the purchase or significant use of
                                                     pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               This policy is not triggered given that Project
                                                     activities are not expected to impact physical


                                             Page 4 of 9
BP 4.11                                        cultural resources.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No            This policy is not triggered given that Indigenous
                                               Peoples as defined by OP 4.10 are not present in
                                               the
                                               Project’s area of influence.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           No involuntary resettlement was expected for the
4.12                                           parent Project, as it was assessed that the
                                               construction of community schools could be done
                                               on public land or with voluntary land donations
                                               only without the need to resettle affected people.
                                               However, given the scarcity of available land in
                                               some of the sub-project locations, OP 4.12 was
                                               triggered to allow municipalities to identify
                                               terrains where minor resettlement would be
                                               required and to ensure the affected people would
                                               be provided with the assistance under the policy.
                                               The screening criteria within the parent Project's
                                               ESMF were adapted from screening out all
                                               potential involuntary resettlement impacts to
                                               minimize resettlement and ensure mitigation of
                                               negative impacts in accordance with the policy.
                                               This screening tool will be used for all sites that
                                               are yet to be selected. If there is any need to
                                               acquire land on sites currently not known or if it
                                               is determined that any of the identified sites
                                               where sub-projects are yet to be developed
                                               require the involuntary taking of land, the Project
                                               will apply the Resettlement Policy Framework
                                               (RPF) that was prepared as part of the June 2014
                                               Project Restructuring. The RPF requires that land
                                               acquisition be carried out in accordance with OP
                                               4.12 and reflects the following principles:
                                                - Prior to the approval of sub-projects, the client
                                               will need to ensure that the sites, boundaries and
                                               ownerships of the relevant land plots are clearly
                                               identified and confirmed using a community-
                                               based mapping exercise that goes beyond simply
                                               checking for legal title.
                                                - In case resettlement is required, agreement on
                                               the compensation scheme and its payment or
                                               realization will be settled prior to the
                                               commencement of that particular sub-project.
                                               Sites that were pre-identified using the parent
                                               Project’s screening criteria will be re-evaluated
                                               under the new screening criteria, and if necessary
                                               remedial action (inter alia, consultation,


                                       Page 5 of 9
        compensation, and development of Abbreviated
        Resettlement Action Plans) in accordance with
        the policy and national legislation will be taken.
        For one of the 10 pilot communities for
        community school construction, a site was
        identified that required resettlement of six
        families who had lived on public land. The
        community, the municipality of Rosier, and the
        affected families came to an agreement to resettle
        the families to plots adjacent to the site where
        they originally occupied (that will now be used
        for the school construction) and agreed on a
        number of compensation measures using the
        consultative mechanisms the Project had put in
        place. After this agreement was reached, a
        Remedial Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan
        (RARAP) was developed, consulted and
        published in accordance with the Resettlement
        Policy Framework to ensure that all negative
        impacts of resettlement were mitigated and that
        the affected persons are able to enjoy the full
        protection of the safeguards accorded to them
        under Bank policy. Additional supervision
        arrangements, including the recruitment of a
        social and environmental specialist within the
        PTU will ensure that this RARAP will be fully
        implemented and reported on. Due diligence spot
        checks will also be carried out to ensure that other
        cases of land acquisition are not required for the
        other sites already identified.

        None of the activities under the AF are expected
        to have additional resettlement impacts. Under
        component 2.3 of the project, the AF would
        finance the gradual introduction of improved
        cooking stoves in selected School Health and
        Nutrition Program beneficiary schools. These
        schools will be selected based on
        recommendations of a feasibility study, which
        will help to identify schools with the appropriate
        infrastructure, land/space, and other conditions to
        most readily receive these stoves. In addition,
        under the same component, additional schools are
        expected to receive a daily morning snack and hot
        meal during school days in the SHN Program.
        These additional schools will have already been
        receiving school services previously financed by



Page 6 of 9
                                                        other development partners, and are therefore
                                                        expected to have the infrastructure in place to
                                                        participate in the SHN Program without requiring
                                                        additional works or land acquisition.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               This policy is not triggered given that the Project
                                                        will not finance the construction or rehabilitation
                                                        of dams nor will rely on the operations of existing
                                                        dams.
   Projects on International           No               This policy is not triggered since the Project will
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 not finance any activities that impact international
                                                        waterways as defined by the policy.
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  This policy is not triggered as the Project will not
   7.60                                                 finance activities in disputed areas as defined by
                                                        the policy.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     No large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are associated with the project.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     No indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities are expected.
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.
     The project considered continuing screening out any potential project sites that might involve
     resettlement and relying on voluntary donation of land where necessary. Given the expansion of
     the community based school program from 10 to 80 and the availability of such suitable sites, it
     was necessary to adapt the screening criteria to minimize rather than exclude involuntary
     resettlement to ensure sites could be identified in all communities of the project. Any involuntary
     resettlement associated with the project will be minimized, compensated and consulted in
     according with OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.
   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
     assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     The MENFP has undertaken several measures to date to implement the ESMF. These include:
     informing communities where schools are being built of the of the ESMF, its contents and its
     application, including through face to face sessions and written supports in Haitian Creole; and
     supporting the communities in hiring and supervising construction supervisors who ensure school
     construction firms are managing minor environmental impacts in accordance with the ESMF. The
     MENFP has also applied a social and environmental screening tool (defined in the ESMF) in the
     selection of each site chosen to participate in the Project. This tool includes screening criteria to
     help ensure that Project-financed schools are located in areas safe from natural risks.

     Under the June 2014 Restructuring and AF, based on lessons learned from community-based
     school component implementation, the borrower updated the ESMF, and prepared and disclosed


                                                Page 7 of 9
  an RPF. A social and environmental safeguard specialist is currently being recruited to ensure
  closer implementation of the environmental and social safeguard policy frameworks, and is
  expected to begin working in mid-August 2014. This specialist will be responsible for training
  communities in the implementation of the EMPs, and supporting the MENFP in supervising their
  implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders are the local community members, the Directorate for School Construction
  (DGS) at the MENFP, the National School Feeding Program (PNCS) at the MENFP and the
  Ministry of Environment. For the preparation of the ESMF, the PTU organized a workshop in
  order to discuss the document with the DGS, the PNCS, the Ministry of Environment and
  representatives of the main local NGOs working in the SHN Program. For the preparation of the
  RPF, the MENFP discussed with local communities and decentralized education and territorial
  administration in selected communes. Both the ESMF and the RPF were published on the website
  of the MENFP.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   10-Jun-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                10-Jun-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Haiti                                                         10-Jun-2014
  Comments: The disclosure dates refer to the updated Environmental and Social Management
                Framework.
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   18-Mar-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                01-Apr-2014
"In country" Disclosure
  Haiti                                                         31-Mar-2014
  Comments: A Resettlement Policy Framework was produced and published in-country and by
                the Bank.

                There was also a Remedial Resettlement Action Plan published. The dates for the
                RAP are as follows:
                Date of Receipt by the Bank: 31 March 2014
                Date of submission to InfoShop: 11 April 2014
                In-country Disclosure: 10 April 2014
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                          Page 8 of 9
  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
   OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    report?
   OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
    Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Practice Manager review the plan?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Patrick Philippe Ramanant
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                             Date: 13-Aug-2014
   Advisor:
   Practice Manager:   Name: Barbara Bruns (PMGR)                              Date: 13-Aug-2014




                                               Page 9 of 9
