                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC6252

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ecuador                          Project ID:       P147280
                            Project Name:      EC Ibarra Transport Infrastructure Improvement Project (P147280)
                            Task Team          Anna R. Okola
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          20-Mar-2014                      Estimated         29-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSTR                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General transportation sector (50%), Urban Transport (50%)
                            Theme(s):          City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (80%), Other urban development
                                               (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     20.00                      Total Bank Financing:         15.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       5.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         15.00
                              Total                                                                         20.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           9.     The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve accessibility in the
                           Municipality of Ibarra and enhance mobility within its recreational and touristic urban spaces.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project would achieve the above mentioned objective through the implementation of
                           four components:
                         Component 1: Municipal road infrastructure improvement (IBRD $7.5 million, local US$2.5million).
                         This component will support infrastructure investments including: (i) labor intensive brick paving
Public Disclosure Copy




                         works; (ii) capacity expansion asphalt road improvement works; and (iii) associated works
                         supervision. The brick paving works will take place within the existing right of way. The second sub-
                         component consists of the widening of a major access roadway linking to Yahuarcocha to add
                         capacity (two lane to four lane) and alleviate congestion.

                         Component 2: Neighborhood improvement (IBRD $2.5 million, local US$0.75million). This
                         component aimed to improve public spaces, will support construction and restoration of
                         infrastructure to support sustainable tourism including the provision of sidewalks, footpaths, cycle
                         infrastructure, as well as enhancing streetscapes, urban environment, green spaces and installation of
                         urban community equipment to promote social interactions and potentially increase economic
                         activities.

                         Component 3: Bridge construction (IBRD $4.5 million, local US$1.25million). This component will
                         support the rehabilitation of community bridges to improve vehicular (and non-motorized) access to
                         isolated indigenous communities in the peri-urban parishes of Ibarra. The component also includes
                         the two-lane to four lane capacity expansion of the Tahuando Bridge that links to the access road to
                         the Yahuarcocha Lagoon. This component will also seek to incorporate measures to enhance
                         resilience and mitigate the risks of flooding in the future, as some of the bridges were destroyed by
                         flooding in 2010.

                         Component 4: Technical assistance (IBRD US$0.5 million, local US$0.5million). This component
                         will provide technical assistance to support units in the Municipality of Ibarra responsible for
                         mobility, public works, traffic, and urban planning. The activities will be focused to strengthen
                         institutional capacity for road asset management, transport planning with a focus on strategies to
                         improve urban mobility, cycle inclusive planning, and the citizen-municipality interface and
                         engagement on these topics, as well as community participation to support and promote sustainable
Public Disclosure Copy




                         tourism. During preparation, the team will explore opportunities to incorporate resilience to natural
                         disasters and climate change as well as gender aspects in the project scope and activities, and
                         possibility of leveraging additional grant resources.

                         This component will also finance targeted incremental costs associated with overall project
                         management, such as project-related audits, monitoring and evaluation, environmental and social
                         management, beneficiary assessments, feedback mechanisms, public communications campaign on
                         sustainable waste management (lake contamination) and use of cycling as active (sustainable, green,
                         healthy) mode of transport.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project is located in the Municipality of Ibarra. Project activities under different components
                         will take place in various locations in the municipality, primarily in urban (such as Ibarra city) and
                         semi-urban areas, with the exception of bridge works which are in more rural areas. The city of
                         Ibarra (pop. 182,000 in 2010, 18% of which is Indigenous and Afro-Ecuadorian; with 77% of the
                         total population in urban areas and 23% in rural parishes) is a medium-sized fast growing mountain
                         city with agriculture, service industry, and tourism as its main economic activities. One of the sub-
                         projects will involve works near the Laguna de Yahuarcocha, which is a sensitive environmental and
                         tourist area. Some of component 2 works will involve community resources such as parks. The
                           bridge works are mostly in non-urban areas near the inactive volcano Imbabura, with the exception
                           of one bridge in a more semi-urban area over the Rio Tahuando (Puente Los Molinos). The proposed
                           works are reportedly not in any environmental protected areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Municipality of Ibarra, specifically the General Administration (GA) is responsible for overall
                           project preparation and implementation of the project. The GA will coordinate across other units
                           responsible for technical aspects (Planning, Public Works, Mobility, Community Participation,
                           Environmental, Tourism, Fiduciary). The works components are overseen by the Public Works
                           Department, while project design is overseen by the Planning Department to ensure linkages to
                           overall municipal development strategy. The Environmental unit will support the GA related to
                           environmental aspects. Community engagement is overseen by the Citizen Participation Department,
                           who are responsible for community relations and outreach, including engagement with women and
                           indigenous persons. Responsibility for land acquisition lies with the Valuation and Cadaster,
                           Planning and Development, Legal and relevant technical department (e.g. Public Works and Transit /
                           Tourism Planning and Development.

                           The Municipality has not previously implemented a WB financed project thus does not have direct
                           experience with bank safeguard policies. However, the municipality does have experience related to
                           environmental and social management of civil works, including development of environmental
                           assessments and environmental permitting.

                           During project preparation, a more thorough review of institutional capacity of the relevant units (in
                           particular Environmental and Public Works) to manage environmental aspects will be performed,
                           and as needed, specific actions developed and included in the project Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework and/or in project component 4.

                           The citizens participation department has significant experience in community outreach and
                           engagement, and a deep knowledge of the communities that will benefit from this project. They are
Public Disclosure Copy




                           well placed to work on the preparation, consultation and implementation of the indigenous peoples
                           plans and a wider consultation-communication process. The Planning and Development, as well as
                           the Valuation and Cadaster Department have experience in completing expropriation using the
                           existing legal framework and negotiating the relocation of vendors. This experience mostly relates to
                           the Autonomous Local Government Law (COOTAD), which includes procedures for expropriation
                           that on the one hand guarantees a just price for expropriated properties, but which also has some
                           important differences with the Bank’s Involuntary Resettlement Policy. Given that the municipality
                           does not have direct experience in applying the Bank’s social safeguards, timely technical assistance
                           will be necessary during preparation and the early stages of implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Jose Vicente Zevallos (LCSSO)
                           Martin Henry Lenihan (LCSSO)
                           Claudio Luis Daniele (LCSTR)
                           Robert H. Montgomery (LCSEN)
                           Miguel Sarabia (LCCEC)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                         Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          The project team proposes an environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                     category of B per OP/BP 4.01, as some of the
                                                                     sub-projects in components 1,2 and 3 involve
                                                                     relatively standard works with no significant
                                                                     long-term environmental or social negative
                                                                     impacts and that can be readily prevented or
                                                                     mitigated with standard measures.

                                                                     An Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) is
                                                                     being prepared for the widening of the
                                                                     Yahuarcocha access roadway (part of
                                                                     Component 1) and expansion of the Tahuando
                                                                     bridge (part of Component 3) to assess the
                                                                     potential environmental and social impacts. The
                                                                     EIA will be consulted with the public and
                                                                     submitted for approved by the Ministry of
                                                                     Environment. The EIA includes an
                                                                     Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The
                                                                     EMP and its implementation will be subject to
                                                                     an environmental audit by a third party, as part
                                                                     of the Environmental License issued by the
                                                                     Ministry of Environment.

                                                                     The other sub-projects under components 1,
                                                                     2and 3 will develop an Environmental
                                                                     Assessment (Ficha Ambiental) and an
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for
                                                                     submission to the Ministry of Environment for
                                                                     review and approval. The works include: brick
                                                                     paving of approximately 17 km of existing
                                                                     roads (component 1); improvements in public
                                                                     spaces in the area of San Antonio and in the
                                                                     Boulevard of Laguna Yahuarcocha brick
                                                                     (component 2); and rehabilitation/construction
                                                                     of 5 small community bridges to improve
                                                                     vehicular (and non-motorized) access to isolated
                                                                     indigenous communities in the peri-urban
                                                                     parishes of Ibarra.

                                                                     All project works/components will be developed
                                                                     and implemented according to Ecuadorian
                                                                     environmental law (e.g., obtaining
                                                                     environmental license, etc.). Appropriate
                                                                     information disclosure and consultation
                                                                     (including disclosure of EIA and EMPs) will be
                                                                     performed. In addition, other actions as deemed
                                                             appropriate will be implemented (e.g.,
                                                             environmental clauses for construction
                                                             contracts, supervision by municipality, use of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             independent environmental supervisors for
                                                             some works, etc.).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   There are no environmental protected areas in
                                                             the direct area of influence of the proposed
                                                             project works and the project will not result in
                                                             any significant conversion or degradation of
                                                             critical natural habitats. Part of Component 1
                                                             and 2 works will be near the Yahuarcocha
                                                             lagoon, which is a sensitive ecosystem.
                                                             However the works will likely not result in any
                                                             direct or indirect significant impacts on the
                                                             lagoon since the works are relatively minor and
                                                             will be carried out in areas already affected. The
                                                             lagoon is located approximately 600 to 700 m
                                                             from the Boulevard, and is separated by an area
                                                             of agriculture, residential and tourist use. The
                                                             EIA and EMP will provide an assessment and
                                                             mitigation of potential environmental impacts.
                                                             The EIA will also specifically assess the
                                                             potential indirect impacts that could occur due
                                                             to the proposed project, such as those caused by
                                                             increased traffic and increased tourism in the
                                                             project's area of influence.

                                                             During some of the works, it may be necessary
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             that a few isolated trees located in the new
                                                             bridge area or the widening of the access
                                                             roadway linking to Yahuarcocha will be
                                                             removed and new ones planted. Given the types
                                                             of works and planned locations, this policy will
                                                             be triggered and the assessment and mitigation
                                                             of any potential impacts will be managed by the
                                                             EIA developed under OP/BP 4.01. The relevant
                                                             EMPs will include the appropriate measures to
                                                             mitigate the impacts, including long term
                                                             potential impacts due to the increased activity in
                                                             this area.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    There are no forests, as defined under OP/BP
                                                             4.36, in the project area. Nevertheless, any
                                                             potential impacts on forest habitats will be
                                                             evaluated as part of the EIA which will include
                                                             screening mechanisms.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    The project will not involve the purchase or use
                                                             of any significant quantities of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Component 2 will support construction and
                         BP 4.11                                 restoration of infrastructure for community use
                                                                 and cultural heritage preservation, in the area of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 San Antonio and the Boulevard by Yahuarcocha
                                                                 lagoon. The National Institute of Cultural
                                                                 Heritage declared the Yahuarcocha Laguna as
                                                                 the third sacred lake of the country. The lagoon
                                                                 and its surrounding area have been heavily
                                                                 modified, being a major attraction of tourism,
                                                                 sports and recreation, residential and
                                                                 agricultural use. The area is reportedly visited
                                                                 by more than 20,000 people per month. There
                                                                 are some existing environmental problems with
                                                                 the lagoon, including water pollution
                                                                 (eutrophication). Works (to more than 600 m of
                                                                 the lagoon) are made on a wide Avenue in an
                                                                 already fully modified environment.
                                                                 However, no significant or long-term negative
                                                                 impacts are expected on the cultural heritage in
                                                                 Ibarra or of the lagoon. Regardless, this policy
                                                                 will be triggered for precautionary measures,
                                                                 and as required, applicable measures included in
                                                                 the EIA (see OP/BP 4.01) which will include
                                                                 specific screening provisions for evaluating
                                                                 potential impacts on cultural resources and
                                                                 provide specific guidance on chance finds
                                                                 procedures.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 The project-related EIA/EA for works near the
                                                                 Yahuarcocha lagoon will assess potential
                                                                 impacts and the relevant EMPs include
                                                                 appropriate mitigation measures.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   Ibarra is a multicultural Canton with indigenous
                                                                 and afro-descendent people, which account for
                                                                 18% of the population. According to the 2001
                                                                 Census, 9% of the population is indigenous. The
                                                                 four major indigenous groups in Ibarra include
                                                                 the Karanki, Imbaya, and Natabuela, who
                                                                 mostly speak Kichwi, as well as the Awá,
                                                                 whose language is Awapít. These communities
                                                                 will need to be actively engaged in planning
                                                                 culturally appropriate improvements to
                                                                 connectivity and public spaces to be financed
                                                                 under the project. Investments that will be
                                                                 especially relevant to indigenous people include
                                                                 the bridges financed under Component 3, and
                                                                 culturally important public spaces under
                                                                                                                                 Component 2. Given that the location of
                                                                                                                                 activities will be known prior to appraisal, site
                                                                                                                                 specific social assessments and indigenous
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 peoples plans will be prepared, in particular for
                                                                                                                                 the bridges under Component 3. The overall
                                                                                                                                 project engagement, consultation and
                                                                                                                                 participation strategy, will accommodate
                                                                                                                                 different sub-populations within the urban
                                                                                                                                 contexts, being sensitive to the needs of women
                                                                                                                                 and indigenous communities in those areas.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           This policy is triggered because one of the
                                 4.12                                                                                            activities in Component 1 includes widening of
                                                                                                                                 a major access roadway, the two-lane to four
                                                                                                                                 lane capacity expansion of the Tahuando
                                                                                                                                 Bridge, as well as the acquisition of other small
                                                                                                                                 parcels of rural land under Component2, and the
                                                                                                                                 possibility of the temporary displacement of
                                                                                                                                 vendors from public spaces under Component 3.
                                                                                                                                 Given that the location of activities will be
                                                                                                                                 known prior to appraisal, site specific
                                                                                                                                 resettlement plans will be prepared
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The Project will not support the construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of dams nor will support other
                                                                                                                                 investments which rely on the services of
                                                                                                                                 existing dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             Project activities will not affect international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The Project will not be implemented in areas
                                 7.60                                                                                            known to involve disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 20-Mar-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and Environmental Assessment/Environmental
                                      Management Plans will be developed for the relevant sub-projects prior to appraisal of the Project.
                                      During project preparation, a review of institutional capacity to manage environmental aspects
                                      will be performed, and as needed, specific actions developed and included in the project
                                      operations manual and/or in project component 4.

                                      The project will require the preparation of resettlement and indigenous people’s plans over the
                                      coming months. Work is commencing on these instruments, and with timely technical assistance,
                                      these should be finalized in time for appraisal by the beginning of March. During implementation
                                      the task team will continue to provide timely support to the client on the execution of these plans,
                                      and the incorporation of the principles of both social safeguards into technical assistance delivered




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             under Component 4, especially those TA activities related to urban planning, transport planning
                             and sustainable tourism.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Anna R. Okola

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                             Date: 03-Feb-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Aurelio Menendez (SM)                             Date: 03-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
