                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC1136

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Jan-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Jan-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Chile                            Project ID:      P152319
                            Project Name:      CL Integrated Water Resources Management & Infrastructure Development
                                               (P152319)
                            Task Team          Marie-Laure Lajaunie
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       07-May-2015                         Estimated        25-Aug-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GWADR                                Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (60%), General
                                               transportation sector (20%), Public administration- Transportat ion (10%),
                                               Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Water resource management (65%), Other public sector governance (15%),
                                               Administrative and civil service reform (10%), Infrastructure services for private
Public Disclosure Copy




                                               sector development (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     45.00                     Total Bank Financing:         45.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        45.00
                              Total                                                                        45.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Public
                         Works for water resources management and public infrastructure development at national level and
                         in selected river basins.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Water Resources Management (US$35 million)
                         This component aims at improving WRM, through the strengthening of the Ministry of Public
                         Works’ capacity for participatory, integrated, basin-scale WRM, at central level and in selected river
                         basins. It will include 4 sub-components:
                         (a) Modernization of the institutional framework for water resource management. This activity is
                         aimed at improving the Ministry’s capacity at the central and basin levels by supporting the
                         implementation of new WRM institutional arrangements proposed by the joint-study program and
                         adopted by the Government, i.e., the creation of a Water Resources Sub-secretary under MOPW and
                         the strengthening of the current DGA that will be under it. More specifically, the Project will finance,
                         through consulting services and training: (i) the detailed design of the new water resources
                         management organizational structure at national and basin levels; (ii) the revision and improvement
                         of related regulatory instruments; operating guidelines, procedures and manuals; (iii) the
                         identification and development of WRM financing mechanisms and (iv) the formulation of a human
                         resources capacity building program and its partial financing.
                         (b) Strengthening the National Water Information System. This activity will finance: (i) the
                         upgrading of the national water information system, including observation networks (water quantity,
                         quality and use); studies/modeling (groundwater and surface water modeling in priority basins); and
                         water information platform; and (ii) the updating of the National Water Use Rights Registry and the
                         development of a water market transaction information system.
                         (c) Development and improvement of WRM instruments. This activity will finance: (i) the
                         methodology for and the formulation of the national water plan and the regulatory instruments
                         insuring its effective use; (ii) the methodology for the formulation of participatory, integrated, basin-
                         scale plans and the regulatory instruments insuring their effective use; (iii) the design and
                         implementation of a strengthened water users control and enforcement system, and (iv) large
                         hydraulic infrastructure inventory, safety assessment and risk management plan formulation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         selected dams.
                         (d) Improving WRM in selected basins. This subcomponent aims at supporting the implementation
                         of the new institutional framework and WRM tools developed in (a), (b) and (c) in selected river
                         basins. More specifically, the Project will support: (i) the formulation of participatory, integrated,
                         basin-scale planning; (ii) the establishment of stakeholders participatory mechanisms for basin
                         planning and management; (iii) the updating of the water rights registry; (iv) the implementation and
                         testing of the water market transaction information system and (v) the implementation and testing of
                         the strengthened water users control and enforcement system.

                         Component 2: Infrastructure Planning and Concession (US$8 millions). This component aims at
                         strengthening MOPW capacity to implement its growing public infrastructure program through the
                         following activities:
                         (a) Infrastructure Planning. This activity will strengthen the MOPW capacity for infrastructure,
                         including concession, planning at national and sub-national level. This will include revising the
                         methodology and its implementation in selected regions.
                         (b) Institutional and regulatory framework for infrastructure concessions. This activity is aimed at
                         improving the institutional capacity (CCOP) and regulatory framework for the generation and
                         management of infrastructure concessions.
                         (c) Infrastructure concessions monitoring and information systems. This activity will improve
                         internal and external (other government agencies and general public) access to information for
                           project monitoring, control and evaluation. It will include the development of grievance mechanisms.
                           (d) Contract management. This activity will strengthen themanagement of infrastructure concession
                           contracts during both construction and operation phases, insuring that feedback and lessons learned
Public Disclosure Copy




                           are generated and used in the development and structuring of future concession contracts.

                           Component 3: Project implementation (US$2 million). This component will finance overall project
                           implementation, monitoring and evaluation.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Chile in general and priority regions to be determined in particular (component 1).

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           This loan will finance consultancies (e.g. assessments, institutional and regulatory frameworks
                           formulation, planning, capacity building, etc.) and goods for the institutional strengthening of the
                           Ministry of Public Works’ National Directorate for Water Resources. This loan does not include the
                           financing of civil works or infrastructure. The Ministry of Public Works, the Project executing
                           agency, is familiar with Bank environmental and social safeguards. MOPW’s National Directorate
                           for Water resources has a team of experienced and seasoned staff. Under the National Directorate for
                           Water Resources is the Water Resources Conservation and protection Department. This Department
                           has a team of 15 specialists (e.g. environmental engineers, geographers, biologists, etc.)
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Alonso Zarzar Casis (GSURR)
                           Raul Tolmos (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            The Project is categorized as environmental risk
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      Category B because while it does not finance any
                                                                           physical works, nor detailed designs for civil works,
                                                                           it will support the formulation of WRM and
                                                                           infrastructure plans. The activities prioritized in the
                                                                           plans, will not be implemented by the Project,
                                                                           however some of them may have potential adverse
                                                                           social and environmental impacts. For this reason,
                                                                           the Environment Assessment policy applies. To
                                                                           ensure conformity with this policy, the methodology/
                                                                           terms of reference for the formulation of the plans
                                                                           will consider the Bank's environmental and social
                                                                           policies, include specific reference to understanding
                                                                           social and environmental risks, and will follow
                                                                           rigorous consultation processes with relevant
                                                                           stakeholders. TORs will include an assessment of
                                                                           key relevant environmental issues, and be subject to
                                                                           prior review by the Bank. A summary of the
                                                                           environmental and social approach to be followed in
                                                              the planning process will be disclosed before
                                                              appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    TBD   It is not clear at this stage whether the policy should
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              be triggered or not because the basins in which the
                                                              Project will intervene have not been identified yet. In
                                                              any case, the Project is not expected to have negative
                                                              impacts on biodiversity or natural habitats and the
                                                              planning processes will take into account such
                                                              potential impacts.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No    This policy does not apply since the Project does not
                                                              involve, nor support, conversion of forest lands to
                                                              other economic alternatives and does not involve any
                                                              changes to forest management
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No    This policy does not apply since the Project does not
                                                              involve procurement or use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources    No    This policy does not apply since the Project activities
                         OP/BP 4.11                           consist of technical assistance for institutional
                                                              strengthening and improvement in planning
                                                              capacities and tools. Nevertheless, the terms of
                                                              reference/methodology for the plans would make
                                                              sure that, during the planning process, the prioritized
                                                              interventions that, when implemented, may have
                                                              negative impacts on physical cultural resources be
                                                              identified.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       TBD   The decision to trigger this policy or not will depend
                         4.10                                 on the basins selected for the basin planning
                                                              interventions. The team will consider how the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              principles of OP 4.10 relating to social assessment,
                                                              stakeholder engagement and meaningful consultation
                                                              could be incorporated into the guidelines and other
                                                              planning instruments to be developed that will later
                                                              be used for contacting civil works.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   TBD   This project is financing primarily capacity building
                         BP 4.12                              with no specific civil works but because this
                                                              technical assistance will strengthen the Ministry of
                                                              Public Works’ capacity in infrastructure planning
                                                              and concession, including for a variety of water
                                                              infrastructure as well as improvement of regulatory
                                                              instruments such as guidelines, operating manuals,
                                                              and procedures, the project will consider how
                                                              principles of OP 4.12 could be incorporated into the
                                                              guidelines and other instruments to be developed that
                                                              will later be used for contracting civil works.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No    This policy does not apply because the Project will
                                                              not support the construction or rehabilitation of dams
                                                              nor will it support any other investments which rely
                                                                                                                        on the services of existing dams. Since the project
                                                                                                                        includes dam safety assessment and risk
                                                                                                                        management,explicit reference to the application of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        international standards and good practice on dam
                                                                                                                        safety will be included in the operations Manual.
                                 Projects on International                                   No                         This policy is not triggered given that the project is
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   not financing any civil works, detailed design
                                                                                                                        studies, nor any activity that will involve the use or
                                                                                                                        pollution of international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project will not finance activities in disputed
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                areas as defined in the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 16-Mar-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Before appraisal, the environmental and social approach to be followed in the planning processes
                                      will be disclosed. It would be a 4-5 page document including a brief description of the project, the
                                      generic environmental and social benefits and risks associated with the planning processes, the
                                      social and environmental approach to be followed during the planning process to comply with the
                                      Bank safeguards and the associated responsibilities/implementation arrangements. The cost of the
                                      approach will be an integral part of the cost of the planning process.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Marie-Laure Lajaunie
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards                             Name:                                                                                             Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/                               Name:                                                                                             Date:
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
