                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA8077
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Guinea-Bissau                      Project ID:    P127209
                            Project Name:     Private Sector Rehabilitation & Agribusiness Development (P127209)
                            Task Team         Francisco Moraes Leitao C
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         06-Mar-2014                        Estimated   22-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTFW                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Industry and trade (12%), Agro-industry, marketing, and
                                              trade (66%), General industry and trade sector (22%)
                            Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (45%), Other Private Sector
                                              Development (55%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       8.20           Total Bank Financing:                 8.20
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                8.20
                              Total                                                                                      8.20
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to support inclusive development of the cashew
                           agribusiness sector and to promote entrepreneurship in other sectors of the economy.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 15
                         Project Components

                         Component 1: Promoting the development of agribusiness (US$ 5.0 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component supports the development of the cashew value chain through an integrated approach.
                         This value chain development is complemented by activities to promote rice production. The
                         component will include three sub-components: (i) agriculture; (ii) cashew agro-processing; and (iii)
                         institutional building. The integrated approach to developing agribusiness – agriculture and agro-
                         processing together - is critical to address emergency food security issues, increase the resilience of
                         farmers to external shocks, obtain buy-in from rural communities on working throughout the value
                         chains, develop sustainable and new economic opportunities in agriculture, and inform future
                         policies on structural change.

                         The first sub-component aims to increase the income of farmers, while improving their resilience to
                         shocks in prices. This will be done by seeking to (i) increase their productivity and diversification,
                         while (ii) improving farmers’ bargaining power. The project will work on securing the long-term
                         sustainability of the cashew sector by improving productivity, while seeking to smooth incomes and
                         promote diversification, notably into rice. The project will promote improved farming practices
                         including addressing issues such as tree density, as well as intercropping cashew trees with staple
                         crops such as upland rice. Additionally, the project will expand the support to rice plantations under
                         the Bank-supported PEASA projects and address informational and financial constraints to
                         increasing productivity of farms. This will help reduce the over-dependence on external markets in a
                         country with high political risk, while increasing the supply of rice for auto-consumption and to be
                         traded with cashew in the local market. Rice production is also a strong economic opportunity for
                         Guinea-Bissau.

                         To improve cashew farmer’s bargaining power, the project will finance a price information system
                         and the installation of communal storage facilities. The storage facilities serve the double purpose of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improving farmers’ bargaining power and strengthening linkages with local processors. Farmers will
                         not be forced to sell their entire harvest at once and thus will be able to negotiate better prices. By
                         linking with processing plants supported in component 1.2, farmers will be able to participate in the
                         returns from those investments while securing a fair price for their raw cashew.

                         On cashew agro-processing, the component will focus on (i) addressing the coordination and
                         financial constraints in establishing community-level facilities, as well as on (ii) attracting medium-
                         size investors into Guinea-Bissau. The first will be done in sequence and in the same areas to the
                         organization of cashew farmers. The EU/SNV recent experience in establishing community-level
                         processing plants has shown that connecting farmers with processors helps alleviate capital
                         constraints and facilitates the development of a processing industry. The second part will target
                         medium-size investors. Preparing business plans and marketing materials and presenting them to the
                         right investors can promote large international investment into the economy.

                         In spite of its relevance in the country, Guinea-Bissau’s cashew sector only represents 4% percent of
                         the world market of cashew, which totals $ 4.3 billion. In order to gain an increased share in the
                         world market, the project will invest to upgrade the value chain and promote the processing industry.
                         The intervention will be informed by past failures and recent successes of other international
                         development agencies in order to put in place a system that (i) is sustainable and operates at a
                         profitable scale; and (ii) favors the currently most disadvantaged groups through more equitable


                                                                      Page 2 of 15
                         growth.

                         Sub-component 1.1: Agriculture (US$ 1.8 million).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Improving plantations’ productivity and promoting diversification. The sub-component will finance
                         the cost of extension services and, on a declining basis, the non-salary operating costs for the
                         introduction of optimal tree-density and pruning strategies, as well as intercropping of cashew with
                         other staple (e.g. upland rice) and cash crops (e.g. sesame) in old plantations. In order to facilitate
                         potential future scale-up, the project will finance the production of manuals for recommended
                         agronomic practices and strategies to diffuse this knowledge among farmers.

                         The implementation will involve specialized private service providers such as agricultural research
                         institutions and/or NGOs. The potential partner organizations include the Agricultural Research
                         Institute (INPA - Instituto Nacional de Pesquisa Agrária) and the Cashew regulator (ANCA -
                         Agência Nacional de Caju). The cost-effective selection of the implementation agency will be based
                         on (i) strong technical skills, and (ii) its ability to establish extensions services in selected areas close
                         to the sites of the communal storage facilities.

                         The introduction of intercropping will promote farmers’ resilience through two separate channels.
                         First, farmers can improve their food security by feeding themselves with staple crops grown
                         between the cashew trees. Food security represents a critical challenge among cashew growers .
                         Second, farmers can diversify their production and gain experience with potential alternative export
                         crops such as cash crops like sesame. Indeed, relying on a monoculture exposes farmers to large
                         income and consumption fluctuations due to volatility in cashew price and potentially production.
                         Moreover the introduction of intercropping has the potential to increase cashew productivity, as
                         farmers can re-plant older plantations according to proper farming recommendations.

                         Moreover, the project will provide agricultural inputs - seeds and fertilizer - for rice production. This
                         activity will expand the work led by the Ministry of Agriculture under the First and Second
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Emergency Food Security Support Projects (P148886) by reaching additional farmers in targeted
                         regions. The project will provide assistance to plantations producing less than 1.5 tons per hectare.
                         By using appropriate seeds’ varieties and fertilizer, the objective is to substantially increase the yield
                         in targeted farms. Priority will be given to cashew farmers with additional land available or already
                         producing rice. This will support their food security and income smoothing by reducing exposure in
                         incomes to fluctuations of cashew price. The intervention may also serve as an additional instrument
                         to strengthen farmers’ bargaining power with cashew traders. In the context of a thin market for
                         trading rice in Guinea-Bissau, increasing local production can improve food security, while
                         supporting incomes of rice producers. Finally, this intervention has the significant advantage of being
                         the continuation of existing work, which will facilitate timely implementation in the context of weak
                         capacity. The results from this intervention will inform Bank’s larger-scale involvement in
                         addressing the problems in the rice sub-sector.

                         Strengthening farmers’ bargaining power. The project will support (i) technical assistance to develop
                         a cashew price information system; and (ii) the rental of communal cashew nuts storage facilities.
                         This will improve cashew farmers’ bargaining power. Currently smallholder cashew farmers sell in
                         bulk at harvest as they (i) need revenues to make ends meet, and (ii) lack storage facilities to safely
                         save their stocks. Farmers earn a lower income and international price volatility is largely transferred
                         on them by buyers. The sub-component aims to address these issues by potentially increasing farm-
                         gate price and reducing its volatility.

                                                                         Page 3 of 15
                         The sub-component will support the design and operations (on a declining basis) of an efficient price
                         information system to strengthen producers’ access to timely information and their bargaining power.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The system comprises data analysis of international prices, estimations of prices for Guinea-Bissau’s
                         marketing campaign, and sharing of price information using mobile technology. The system will be
                         managed by ANCA, the cashew regulatory body. The financing would be gradually taken over by
                         ANCA’s internal budget, which FUNPI aims to support.

                         In selected villages, the sub-component will fund installation and rehabilitation costs for four
                         communal cashew storage facilities for farmers. The sub-component will also provide handling
                         equipment, in the form of pallets and jute bags, to the selected villages. The storage facilities will be
                         located in close proximity of community-based processing plants supported under sub-component
                         1.2. The storage facilities can ease integration of the value chain through promoting cooperatives at
                         the farm-level, vertically integrating production and processing before marketing. The project will be
                         informed by the experience of SNV among local producers and processors building local community
                         cooperatives . The community-level storage facilities can also leverage the introduction of IFC’s
                         Global Warehouse Facility Program (GWFP) in Guinea-Bissau.

                         Access to communal warehouses will allow farmers to store their raw cashew nuts and better smooth
                         out sales over the course of the year, earning higher income as prices tend to rise during the season.
                         Better informed and equipped farmers will also be able to command a higher price. Pooling their
                         produce together they could sell in larger batches, which are preferred by buyers, without over
                         demanding from individual contributions. Additionally, farmers will be able to sell their raw cashews
                         directly to the community processing cluster, which they will be linked to through storage facilities,
                         and participate in a share of their profits further enhancing their welfare.
                         Sub-component 1.2: Cashew agro-processing (US$ 3.0 million)

                         A number of studies have attested that Guinea-Bissau’s processed cashew can be competitive
                         internationally. Cost and revenue estimates vary depending on the scale of each processing unit; and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         different type of investors can be interested in the sector at different stages, as such, the project will
                         support both a community-based processing model and a larger scale industrial processing model.
                         Guinea-Bissau already has experience with various types of shelling plants with varying degrees of
                         success. Using the preparation funds, the project will also fund a more thorough case-by-case review
                         of successful and unsuccessful cashew processing plants to understand the main risks in
                         implementation.

                         Community based processing. Experiences from India, Vietnam, and Mozambique have shown that
                         small cashew processing units established at the village level can operate competitively if working
                         together. The Gates Foundation has been investing with some success in the development of
                         processing plants in neighboring countries such as Cote D’Ivoire, Ghana and Benin. The small
                         decentralized units are not viable / competitive by themselves; instead they must be organized as part
                         of a cluster of primary units organized around a central unit, which provides services and facilitates
                         access to markets. These units are of a small size but the procedure for transforming RCN into a
                         good quality kernel is highly labor intensive and thus can be a large employer of primarily female
                         labor in low-income rural communities. The intervention supported under this project will enable
                         these units to connect directly with FUNDEI’s Centro de Promoção de Caju (CPC) in Bissau to
                         provide access to international markets.

                         Under this sub-component, the project will support a 3-year pilot program implemented in a suitable

                                                                       Page 4 of 15
                         cashew producing region to promote the development of community processing. The pilot operation
                         will set up four small community-based processing units (about 200 tons of cashew nuts per year per
                         unit) clustered around a central unit, so in aggregate, the cluster reaches a commercially viable size
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (about 800 tons of RCN or one container of processed cashew per month).

                         The sites for each primary unit will be aligned with the community warehouses built under sub-
                         component 1.1 so that local farmers can store their RCN and then sell them directly to the processing
                         unit. The pilot is built on the hub and spoke model of cashew processing piloted in Brazil, which has
                         been implemented in Guinea-Bissau under the EU-financed project “Local transformation of
                         cashew” (2011-2013) by SNV in the Bafata and Cacheu regions.

                         The sub-component will (i) support the establishment of four new primary units in the regional
                         cluster, enabling the cluster to reach a commercially viable scale; (ii) provide equipment for the
                         central unit, which will be owned by the local cooperatives; (iii) provide assistance in linking the
                         cluster to the market through an exporter; and (iv) provide support on technical and financial
                         management to the cluster. After the three years of the pilot project, it is expected that that the central
                         commercial unit will take over the necessary assistance to its satellite units. If successful, the project
                         can be demonstrated to FUNPI and other partners for future scale-up.

                         Investment promotion for industrial processing. According to various reports, there is strong
                         potential for a medium scale model (2,000-3,000 tons of raw cashew nuts/year) to be set up in
                         Guinea-Bissau. Such a model was implemented in Mozambique and Cote D’Ivoire, using manual
                         technology with gradual modernization and a gradual increase in scale. Hence, this sub-component
                         will provide support for investment promotion of the opportunity to invest in these medium scale
                         processing plants. This will be undertaken under the guidance of IFC PPP Advisory and IFC
                         investment arm. This sub-component will provide support to develop business plans and promotional
                         materials dedicated to the potential returns for investors into industrial cashew processing. The
                         business plans will inform how to structure a potential transaction – eg: concession - including roles
                         and responsibilities of all parties. All materials will also include discussion of the on-demand support
Public Disclosure Copy




                         available to potential investors in industrial cashew processing. Success at the community-based
                         processing plants will also be helpful in demonstrating results to larger investors looking for
                         opportunities throughout Africa.

                         In addition to promotional materials, this sub-component will provide support to authorities (DGPIP,
                         ANCA, etc) to map and target specific international investors and attend trade shows and investment
                         conferences to promote investments in the Guinea-Bissau cashew agro-processing. These round
                         tables include the Sustainable Agribusiness Round Table event led by the IFC in the region. Other
                         events include the African Cashew Alliance, an important source of leads for potential investors.
                         Sub-component 1.3: Institutional Building (US$ 0.2 million)

                         FUNPI was created in May 2011 as a public-private institution responsible for the development –
                         production, marketing and processing – of agricultural value chains. It is funded by a para-fiscal levy
                         collected on its behalf on the export of raw cashew nuts. In October 2013, FUNPI’s statutes were
                         formally adopted, establishing a 30/70 split in the usage of its funds, with 30 percent allocated to the
                         private sector and public agencies, and the remaining 70 percent towards direct financing of activities
                         in agribusiness and other industries.

                         The impact of FUNPI’s activities will largely depend on its effectiveness and equity in using its
                         resources. The different players in the cashew sector each have differing degrees of bargaining

                                                                       Page 5 of 15
                         power. Given these competing needs, the World Bank funded project should lead the way in terms of
                         activities that address the most binding constraints to the development of the sector rather than
                         providing its resources directly to FUNPI while it is becoming operational. Through the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         demonstration of successful scalable interventions, the project can attract further attention, chiefly by
                         FUNPI.

                         The work with FUNPI during project implementation should be concentrated on activities that can
                         promote its governance. Only through sound fiduciary systems can FUNPI gain the credibility that
                         the GoGB hopes it can have. That is a pre-condition for FUNPI’s long-term sustainability and to be
                         able to support the development of the sector. In this regard, the project will provide technical
                         assistance to FUNPI’s management while it is becoming fully operational to ensure that FUNPI’s
                         resources are targeted at priority activities (including agricultural productivity enhancing activities).
                         This can also reduce the risks of governance problems.

                         The project will provide technical assistance to the management of FUNPI on financial management
                         and operational/administrative management by hiring two specialist consultants in these fields. This
                         will provide support to FUNPI management as FUNPI’s team is being put in place and initial
                         activities are undertaken. Additionally, under the project Preparation Advance (PPA), the project will
                         finance the development of FUNPI’s operational manual, a critical tool for its operations. This
                         manual will include clear environmental and social guidelines, the preparation of which is also being
                         financed under the PPA. FUNPI teams will also be trained on environmental and social guidelines
                         for their projects.

                         Component 2: Developing Entrepreneurship (US$ 2.0 million)

                         This component aims to revitalize the private sector in Guinea-Bissau, where agriculture generates
                         80 percent of employment and 90 percent of exports (primarily through cashew nuts). More
                         specifically, this component promotes the creation of new MSMEs and employment, with a set of
                         interventions that have been designed to tackle both demand and supply sided constraints, as well as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         inefficiencies in the overall business environment, driving the current sub-optimal level of
                         entrepreneurship in Guinea-Bissau outside the agriculture sector.

                         This component will seek to: (i) relax both financial and managerial constraints within a competitive
                         environment that fosters innovative business ideas, (ii) increase the supply and quality of local
                         business development services, and (iii) promote a more efficient investment climate. The main
                         objective of this component is to foster new entrepreneurship in Guinea-Bissau, particularly in
                         sectors of the economy that have yet to be fully explored and that have export potential. This
                         component is composed of two sub-components.

                         Sub-Component 2.1: Launching Young Start-Ups (US$ 1.4 million)

                         This sub-component aims at equipping new young entrepreneurs in Guinea-Bissau with seed capital
                         and managerial skills in order to launch sustainable new business ideas. These resources will be
                         allocated through a business plan competition (BPC), in order to foster innovativeness among
                         potential entrepreneurs. This BPC will attract business ideas in sectors of activity that can potentially
                         generate substantial added value to the economy and create a significant number of new jobs. It will
                         also use a number of mechanisms to ensure a balanced gender ratio of beneficiaries throughout its
                         different stages. The effectiveness of this type of intervention is currently being validated by a couple
                         of very recent randomized evaluations in Uganda. The Ugandan Youth Opportunities Program

                                                                       Page 6 of 15
                         (YOP), which invited groups of young adults to submit competing written proposals on how they
                         would use grants for skills training and enterprise start-up costs, had significant impacts on
                         entrepreneurship. In a different program, providing women with cash grants and basic business skills
Public Disclosure Copy




                         training in northern Uganda, again after a business plan screening, led to large increases in business
                         creation.

                         Over the duration of the project (in two windows of applications), around 300-500 eligible applicants
                         to the BPC, aged between 18-35 years, are expected to receive intensive training in entrepreneurship
                         and business plan development. Of these, the top 100 applicants showcasing the most promising
                         business plans will receive seed in-kind grants. Each winner will be eligible for an amount of up
                         CFA 4 million (approximately US$ 8,000). These will be provided through in-kind grants rather than
                         cash grants to reduce the risks of pressure from family and friends to share the grant, as well as
                         minimize self-control problems.

                         Each winner will also receive personalized consulting services from local providers during the first
                         year of operation. Local providers of business development services will in turn receive technical
                         support and capacity building to enable them to cope with this increased demand for their services. A
                         certification process, as well as a feedback/evaluation mechanism, will be included to make sure that
                         these local providers of BDS perform well. As planned in the submitted business plans and as
                         implementation requires, the component will facilitate the linkage between winners of the BPC and
                         investors for new early funding rounds. The component will support regular round tables with
                         investors for investments in the first two years of operation. Similarly, the project will link
                         entrepreneurs with financial institutions for debt financing when appropriate. This will leverage on
                         the ongoing work by UNDP to promote microfinance and access to credit.

                         The program will target young entrepreneurs because in the current market structure they are more
                         affected by the constraints in access to finance, having more difficulty in showing their
                         trustworthiness to financial institutions in the absence of credit history and collateral. It will
                         oversample women in order to tackle the systematic gender gaps in productivity, earnings, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         economic opportunities.

                         This sub-component will be implemented by an external agency with an excellent track record in
                         conducting business plan competitions and/or providing business development services in Africa.
                         This agency will be recruited using World Bank procurement rules and will be required to submit
                         regular reports to the World Bank. External sources administered by the World Bank will finance a
                         rigorous impact evaluation of this sub-component of the project.

                         Sub-Component 2.2: Improving climate for new investments (US$ 0.6 million)

                         The previous sub-component will fall short of their effectiveness if it is not supplemented with an
                         increased efficiency on fundamental aspects of the environment for new investments. This sub-
                         component, supervised by the IFC, will focus on three priority areas of the investment climate: (i)
                         streamlining import/export procedures and improving coordination among agencies; (ii) increasing
                         transparency and reducing corruption in both the customs and tax systems; and (iii) simplified
                         MSME tax regime.

                         Streamlining import/export procedures and improving coordination among agencies. This activity
                         aims at reducing the time and cost to import/export by assessing areas for reforms and streamlining
                         procedures. The project will fund the necessary technical assistance to (i) re-engineer and simplify

                                                                     Page 7 of 15
                         the import and export procedures; and (ii) provide technical assistance to review and rationalize
                         documentary requirements, import/export/transit procedures, and regulations including those
                         supervising industrial investment. This activity will aim at facilitating trade of cashew, rice and other
Public Disclosure Copy




                         tradable goods supported under the project. This will in sequence facilitate entrepreneurship and
                         competitiveness of local enterprises.

                         Increasing transparency and reducing corruption in the customs and tax systems. This activity aims
                         to introduce small pilots that can reduce corruption at the border and in tax collection. To increase
                         transparency and reduce corruption in the customs and tax systems, this activity will finance (i) the
                         design and implementation of a pilot system of incentives that reward good behavior by customs/tax
                         officials; and (ii) communication activities at the customs/tax authorities, including the creation of
                         consultative mechanisms to discuss trade facilitation.

                         Support to the design and implementation of a simplified MSME tax regime. This activity will
                         finance technical assistance for the implementation of a simplified tax registration system –
                         entreprenant status - for small businesses within the CFE and DGCI. This will include legal drafting,
                         and developing administrative guidelines, as well as communications materials to support the roll-out
                         of the new regime. The WBG’s Investment Climate Department will contribute with its strong
                         expertise on this field and will provide technical assistance in its implementation. With guidance
                         from the IMF, the activity will also comprise technical assistance and IT software to ensure that the
                         tax authority (DGCI) is equipped with an adequate integrated tax administration system. This will
                         enable DGCI to perform core functions efficiently, transparently and in direct connection with other
                         key government agencies. This will help reduce the time taken by entrepreneurs in dealing with taxes
                         and the policy uncertainty.

                         Component 3: Project Coordination Unit (US$ 1.0 million)

                         This component will support the establishment and operation of the Project Coordination Unit
                         (PCU). The component will support project implementation costs as follows:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (a)     Salaries and training for the Project Coordinator, Agribusiness Development Specialist,
                         Entrepreneurship Specialist, Environmental and Social Safeguard Specialist (part time), Procurement
                         Specialist, Financial Management Specialist, and support staff.
                         (b)     Operational costs necessary for the functioning of the PCU
                         (c)     Technical assistance and capacity building for monitoring and evaluation
                         (d)     Technical assistance and consultancies related to the implementation of the Project activities
                         (e)     Capacity and institutional building in the Ministries involved to prepare them to the next
                         phase of engagement

                         This component will be implemented through close coordination between the project team and the
                         local government. Capacity building will be included as part of the Terms of Reference of the PCU
                         (Project Coordination Unit) to emphasize its importance.

                         This component aims at establishing an effective monitoring and evaluating system to ensure
                         accurate and timely information on the progress towards achieving the objectives set out in
                         Components 1 and 2. This component is important to detect any possible deficiency in the design or
                         implementation of the project at an early stage and thus be able to perform the necessary
                         adjustments. More specifically, this component will partner with external World Bank managed
                         funds to evaluate the overall project’s impact on both the PDO and the Intermediate level results

                                                                       Page 8 of 15
                         indicators outlined in the Results Framework in Annex 1. Adherence to the project’s environmental
                         and social safeguard instruments will also be monitored on an ongoing basis .
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented country wide. Component one will support seed and fertilizer
                         distribution to lowland rice farmers in targeted regions to be selected before implementation. The
                         cashew-focused agricultural extension services will give priority to areas with aging cashew
                         plantations such as Biombo; while installation of communal storage facilities and community
                         processing facilities will be aligned and located in two suitable cashew producing regions. These
                         regions, as for the promotion of investment opportunities for a larger scale industrial processing
                         model, will be selected based on proximity to local areas with high density of orchards producing
                         high quality RCN, and ease of access to destination markets. The coastal regions have been
                         identified as complying with these conditions. The cashew price information system will be designed
                         to function nationwide, but will initially be implemented in targeted areas.

                         Component two aims at equipping new young entrepreneurs in Guinea-Bissau with seed capital (in-
                         kind) and managerial skills in order to launch sustainable new business ideas, and improving the
                         efficiency on fundamental aspects of the investment environment, which are relevant country wide.
                         The Business Plan Competition will be run out of Bissau and hence most of the proposals are
                         expected to come from within the capital.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Tanya Lisa Yudelman (AFTN3)
                         Upulee Iresha Dasanayake (AFCF1)

                          6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes             The project is proposed as Category B. It will
                          BP 4.01                                           primarily finance technical assistance, capacity
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            building activities, selected agricultural inputs,
                                                                            limited physical infrastructure rehabilitation, and
                                                                            provide seed capital (in-kind) to MSMEs. It is not
                                                                            expected to have any significant direct,
                                                                            irreversible negative environmental or social
                                                                            impacts. However, it may induce private sector
                                                                            investment which in turn could give rise to
                                                                            minimal to moderate negative impacts.

                                                                            To address these risks, the Environmental
                                                                            Assessment safeguard policy (OP4.01) has been
                                                                            triggered and three safeguard instruments have
                                                                            been prepared to govern the project: (i) a SESA;
                                                                            (ii) FUNPI’s environmental and social guidelines;
                                                                            and (iii) a simplified ESMF/P.

                                                                            The Strategic Environmental and Social
                                                                            Assessment (SESA) will identify and address the
                                                                            project’s potential positive and negative



                                                                    Page 9 of 15
                                  environmental and social impacts of the cashew
                                  related agricultural and agribusiness sectors
                                  supported under Component 1 along the value
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  chain – production and processing. Specifically,
                                  the SESA will examine inter alia potential risks
                                  posed to natural habitats, forests, physical cultural
                                  resources, human health, pest management, and
                                  access to land, as well as the institutional, policy
                                  and legal framework and capacity in place to
                                  address these. The SESA will provide strategic
                                  guidance for enhancing environmental
                                  sustainability and social equity of the agricultural
                                  and agribusiness sectors supported under
                                  Component 1 as a whole and specific
                                  recommendations to be incorporated into the
                                  project’s technical assistance under Component 1
                                  as well as into national policies and programs.
                                  Terms of Reference (TORs) for preparing the
                                  SESA were publically disclosed in-country and in
                                  the Infoshop on February 29, 2012. The TORs
                                  have been updated and re-disclosed by appraisal.

                                  The environmental and social guidelines to orient
                                  FUNPI-financed activities and investments will
                                  be prepared; these will be operationalized as part
                                  of the FUNPI Operational Manual to be supported
                                  with the PPA. Again terms of reference for the
                                  preparation of these guidelines were developed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  and publically disclosed in-country and in the
                                  Infoshop on February 29, 2012. These have been
                                  updated and public disclosed by appraisal.

                                  Given the limited number and low-risk topology
                                  of works to be supported, as well as the small
                                  scale MSME in-kind grants to be awarded, a
                                  simplified Environmental and Social
                                  Management Framework/Plan (ESMF/P) has
                                  been prepared. This ESMF/P prepared using the
                                  EMP Checklist format, is designed to meet the
                                  World Bank Environmental Assessment
                                  requirements under OP 4.01 for civil works
                                  contracts with small, localized impacts. This
                                  ESMF/P also describes the eligibility criteria,
                                  capacity building and screening procedures for
                                  the MSME in-kind grants. An ESMF/P outlining
                                  the safeguard procedures to be followed was
                                  prepared and disclosed in-country and in the



                         Page 10 of 15
                                                                             Infoshop on February 29, 2012. This has been
                                                                             updated and public disclosed by appraisal.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No             The Involuntary Resettlement policy is not
                            4.12                                             triggered for the project as activities financed
                                                                             under the project will be limited to existing
                                                                             agricultural land, and rehabilitation of existing
                                                                             structures. Hence, the project activities will not
                                                                             result in the acquisition of land and/or restriction
                                                                             of access to sources of income of people in any
                                                                             areas where project activities are planned.
                                                                             Similarly, MSME proposals which require
                                                                             acquisition of land leading to involuntary
                                                                             resettlement or restrict access to sources of
                                                                             income of people in any areas where project
                                                                             activities are planned will be ineligible for
                                                                             financing.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             The three safeguards instruments being prepared
                                                                             to govern the project: the SESA, FUNPI’s
                                                                             environmental and social guidelines and ESMF/P
                                                                             will take into account social impacts that could
                                                                             arise as part of agriculture and agri-business
                                                                             sector development and/or MSMEs supported by
                                                                             the project.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


                                                                    Page 11 of 15
                           Project activities are thus not expected to have any significant direct negative environmental or
                           social impacts. The project will primarily finance technical assistance, capacity building activities,
                           selected agricultural inputs, limited physical infrastructure rehabilitation, and provide seed capital
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (in-kind) for small scale MSMEs. The BPC process will have specific eligibility criteria and
                           screening processes such that only MSME BPs for which impacts will be limited, site specific and
                           temporary will receive support. These potential impacts may include inter alia: increased noise, air
                           pollution, solid and liquid waste, use of hazardous materials, increased vehicular and foot traffic,
                           etc. ESMPs will be prepared to mitigate potential negative impacts for selected MSMEs, as
                           needed, and for the minor rehabilitation works supported under the project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Project efforts to stimulate agricultural production, private sector investment in the cashew
                           agribusiness sub-sectors, and launch of new MSMEs (e.g., agroindustry, manufacturing and
                           services), might induce activities which could in their turn generate negative environmental or
                           social impacts. These might include inter alia: at the production level, increased use of pesticides
                           for rice and other crops; expansion of the cashew production with all the attendant impacts on
                           biodiversity, ecosystems, soil and increased vulnerability to pests and diseases; and at the
                           processing level, increased demand for fuel wood, water and land, and the generation of outputs
                           such as cashew nut shells, Cashew Nut Shell Liquid (CNSL), and fumes from burning shells for
                           cashew roasting, all of which may contribute negatively to the health of the environment and
                           people. At the exporting level, increased processing might also lead to increased transportation
                           activities to and from community processing centers.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           No large scale, significant and/or irreversible social and environmental impacts are expected to
                           arise directly from project investments. However, given the potential for induced impacts –through
                           non-project related private sector investments -, a SESA is being prepared to identify and address
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the project’s potential positive and negative environmental and social impacts of the agricultural
                           and agribusiness sectors supported under Component 1 – production and processing. The SESA
                           will provide strategic guidance for enhancing environmental sustainability and social equity of
                           these sectors as a whole and its specific recommendations will be incorporated into the service
                           providers’ technical assistance under Component 1 as well as into national policies and programs
                           governing the sector as appropriate. In addition, in order to ensure that an appropriate analysis and
                           consideration of alternatives are considered for any future activities to be financed through
                           FUNPI, environmental and social guidelines will be prepared and integrated into FUNPI’s
                           operational manual. Lastly, an ESMF/P has been prepared to ensure that any negative
                           environmental and social impacts of agricultural, agribusiness and MSME BP activities supported
                           by the project are clearly identified and mitigated.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           As mentioned above, although the direct impacts expected to arise as a result of project financing
                           are likely to be extremely limited in scale and reversible the borrower is nevertheless preparing
                           three safeguard instruments to orient and guide sector development: (i) a SESA, (ii) environmental
                           and social guidelines for future FUNPI investments, and (iii) simplified ESMF/Ps for the project’s
                           agricultural and MSME initiatives. TORs for the SESA and the FUNPI guidelines, and the ESMF/
                           P were prepared and publicly disclosed in country and through the Infoshop on February 29, 2012,
                           and have been updated and re-disclosed by appraisal.


                                                                     Page 12 of 15
                          Limited Borrower capacity to prepare and implement each of these safeguard instruments already
                          exists. From a policy and legal framework standpoint, Guinea Bissau, with assistance from a
Public Disclosure Copy




                          previously supported World Bank, GEF and EU financed Coastal and Biodiversity Management
                          project (CBMP), has put in place the basic framework and capacity for implementation of
                          environmental and social safeguards. A national EIA Law, in line with international good practice,
                          was promulgated in July 2010. Implementation of this law is overseen by the Cell for
                          Environmental Impact Assessment (CAIA), created under the Office of the Prime Minister and
                          since relocated within the State Secretariat for Environment and Tourism, in collaboration with
                          sectoral focal points appointed within each of the technical ministries. Sectoral environmental
                          assessment technical guidelines were prepared for nine sectors including inter alia agriculture,
                          industry, and infrastructure. CAIA’s staff and the sectoral focal points received environmental and
                          social safeguard training under the CBMP, and CAIA itself has five years of practical experience
                          in the application of the CBMP World Bank project Environmental and Social Management
                          Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy/Process Framework (RPF/PF) policies and
                          procedures. In addition, with support from other donors, a series of trainings on environmental and
                          social assessment more generally have been provided to members of the government, NGOs and
                          civil society. Nevertheless, these institutional structures are young and their capacity limited.
                          Further capacity building for CAIA and key stakeholders will also be financed under a State and
                          Peace Building Project focused on extractive industries supported by the World Bank.

                          More specifically, the Ministry of Economy, Planning and Regional Integration (MEPRI), through
                          a dedicated Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will lead the implementation of the PSRADP;
                          although, implementation will require the involvement of several other ministries, notably, the
                          Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development. The PCU will be
                          staffed by the following competitively recruited team: Project Coordinator, cashew development
                          expert, entrepreneurship specialist, procurement specialist, financial management specialist,
                          environmental and social safeguard specialist (part time) and support staff. A high level multi-
                          institutional Steering Committee will meet twice a year or ad hoc as needed to provide overall
Public Disclosure Copy




                          strategic guidance, as well as help resolve inter-institutional conflicts.

                           The PCU will have two distinct safeguard roles: implementation and monitoring. While the
                           Project Coordinator will have the overall responsibility for ensuring that the project safeguard
                           requirements are met, the Component Leaders will have the day-to-day responsibility for ensuring
                           their implementation and monitoring. They will be assisted in this by a part-time safeguards
                           specialist with experience in both environmental and social issues, who will provide guidance to
                           and assist the Component Leaders to oversee preparation of the SESA and FUNPI guidelines, and
                           to monitor preparation and implementation of the ESMF/Ps. The service providers responsible for
                           providing TA to the cashew producers, processors and investors under Component 1, as well as
                           those running the BPC and supporting skill development under Component 2, will incorporate the
                           findings of the SESA as well as the ESMF/P into their support. Similarly, FUNPI staff will receive
                           targeted training in their environmental and social guidelines.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project, by the nature of its development objectives, brings together a group of stakeholders
                           and beneficiaries, including cashew farmers, processors, business owners and employees, and
                           government agencies. Amongst these, the project has been carefully designed to target the most
                           vulnerable populations in Guinea-Bissau, in particular, the rural poor and unemployed youth.


                                                                    Page 13 of 15
                           Further, one of its key goals is to promote an egalitarian distribution of its effects across gender.
                           The TORs for both the SESA and the FUNPI guidelines as well as the ESMF/P have been updated
                           and was rediscussed with stakeholder representatives and disclosed in country and through the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Bank’s InfoShop by project appraisal. The SESA itself will be prepared following a highly
                           participatory approach, including regional visits and meetings with stakeholders around the
                           country. The draft SESA report will similarly be subject to a discussion and validation with
                           representative groups of these key stakeholders. The proposed environmental and social
                           guidelines for the FUNPI will also be discussed amongst the various stakeholders prior to being
                           presented to and adopted by the FUNPI Board.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      03-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Guinea-Bissau                                                    06-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?

                                                                     Page 14 of 15
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Francisco Moraes Leitao C
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 22-Apr-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: John F. Speakman (SM)                        Date: 22-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 15 of 15
