                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC3272

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Indonesia                         Project ID:      P144269
                            Project Name:       Forest Investment Program: Forest Management Unit Development (P144269)
                            Task Team           Werner L. Kornexl
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           21-Jan-2014                       Estimated        01-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASIS                             Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Forestry (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Other human development (40%), Other environment and natural resources
                                                management (40%), Participation and civic engagement (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     17.00                       Total Bank Financing:           0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        0.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                   17.00
                              Total                                                                          17.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project aims to help Indonesia reduce institutional barriers to sustainable forest management and
                           REDD+ implementation at the national and sub-national levels.

                           The sub-objectives of the Project are:
                           a.     At the national level, to strengthen institutional, financial, and technical capacity and support
                           FMU policy dialoque within the national Government
                         b.      At the sub-national level, to generate knowledge by investing in participatory forest land-use
                         planning
                         c.      At the site level, to assist a small number of pilot FMUs to become operational and to engage
Public Disclosure Copy




                         with local communities and other stakeholders to improve livelihood and economic activities from
                         sustainable forest management
                         C. Project Description
                         The Project will have three components. Component 1 will help build national (both intra- and inter-
                         ministerial) coordination, understanding and ownership, information and advice, and support base for
                         FMU development and operation within the MOFOR and potentially the Ministry of Home Affairs
                         (MOHA). The Project will support activities that can add value to the FMU process, such as
                         analytical and policy work including studies in support of policy improvements for FMU operation,
                         sustainable forest management and REDD+, South-South operations, etc.

                         Capacity constraints at national and local level for FMU development and operation may also be
                         addressed by supporting capacity development programs in close collaboration with the universities
                         (e.g. a student attachment and fresh graduate recruitment program).

                         The establishment of a centralized FMU Knowledge and Management Information System (KMIS)
                         will be supported. The System would collate, store, analyze, and make available information,
                         experiences, and lessons learned related to the FMUs, such as maps and imagery, statistical data,
                         plans, budgets, technical and financial reports, performance, studies, business plans, land-use plans,
                         etc. and would also provide information on FMUs to the wider public. It would also build the base
                         for reporting on the FIP development indicators and specific project indicators. KMIS would manage
                         information generated from component 2 and 3 and will feed into the policy dialogue outlined below.

                         The project would also support policy work in cooperation with other national stakeholders -- Policy
                         work financed by the project will be contracted through the Indonesian National Forestry Council
                         (Dewan Kehutanan Nasional, DKN) and recommendations presented to the Steering Committee.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2 will support a number of ‘Model FMUs’ with participatory land-use planning
                         activities, with the objective of addressing issues in connection with such processes and ultimately
                         learning from those approaches. The term ‘Model FMUs’ is a term used by the Ministry of Forestry
                         to refer to those 60 FMUs that have received early development support for planning, institutional
                         set-up, and area determination. Encroachment and land use conflicts are critical issues in many of the
                         Model FMUs. MOFOR will competitively call for proposals from stakeholders that can support
                         participatory forest land-use planning process within FMUs . The participatory planning activities
                         can include, but are not limited to participatory land use mapping, stakeholder assessments, socio-
                         economic surveys, participatory rural appraisals (PRA), consultations, and mediation and conflict
                         resolution mechanisms related to forest access (area and resources) and encroachment. Planning
                         processes will take into account indigenous and customary rights and local knowledge and gender
                         equity. Results will be documented and analyzed for learning and dissemination. This component
                         will not invest in livelihood or other activities/infrastructure on the ground. Funds for this activity
                         will either be managed by Ministry of Forestry directly or by a suitable entity.

                         Component 3 will provide financial support to 3 Pilot FMUs to assist local stakeholders to
                         implement economic activities. Out of the 60 existing Model FMUs a limited number of Pilot FMUs,
                         3 will be selected in a consultative selection process. The 3 Pilot FMUs will (i) have attained a
                         certain degree of operational capacity, including having established participatory forest land use
                         planning processes (financed by component 2 or other), (ii) have multiple support systems in place,
                         (iii) not be constrained by serious social issues and land use conflicts, and (iv) hold good potential for
                         business development, revenue generation, and long-term economic independence.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Grants for economic activities and livelihood activities will be managed by Ministry of Forestry
                         directly or an appropriate entity. The purpose of the grant scheme is to provide multiyear and flexible
                         grants to community organizations and NGOs to promote sustainable community forest and non-
                         timber forest product initiatives in pilot FMUs. The aim will be to support existing local forest-based
                         business development and management demonstration activities with potential to reach sustainability
                         in a short term. This component is intended to demonstrate that FMUs can eventually generate
                         sustainable economic benefits from forest management, through engagement with local communities,
                         service providers, and industry supported by appropriate governance mechanisms.

                         Only FMUs that have already gone through the process of establishing a Development and Business
                         Plan and participatory forest land use planning processes would be able to access funds for livelihood
                         and economic activities. During the first year of project implementation, the FMUs would be
                         identified and necessary analysis, such as environmental and social assessments, stakeholder analysis
                         and consultations would be financed by the project, before investments on the ground can take place.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project intervention activities of Component 1 will be at the national level with a strong
                         emphasis on capacity building. The activities in Components 2 and 3 will be located in conservation,
                         protection and production forests formally designated by the Minister of Forestry (MoFor), and will
                         work with: (i) approximately ten selected recipients from across the 60 Model FMUs in Component
                         2; and (ii) FMU staff, communities and entities in 3-5 pilot FMUs from the pool of 60 Model FMUs
                         in Component 3. Activities in Components 2 and 3 will include support for participatory land-use
                         planning processes to develop more transparency, with fair and equitable inclusion of local
                         communities in land use planning, resource monitoring, and, in Component 3, productive forest
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities.

                         Because the selection of the specific FMUs for participation in Components 2 and 3 will only take
                         place during the first year of project implementation, an Environmental and Social Management
                         Framework (ESMF) and a Community Participatory Framework (CPF) will be created during project
                         preparation. In these documents, all the consultation and participation requirements and guidelines
                         for OP 4.01, 4.10, 4.11, 4.12 and 4.36 will be consolidated, along with a grievance procedure. This
                         CPF will contain the project’s Indigenous People’s Planning Framework and the Access Restriction
                         Policy Framework (the term used for Process Framework in Indonesia).
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The main counterpart of the project will be the Ministry of Forestry, which will be responsible
                         overall for social and environmental safeguard issues and thus for the implementation of the ESMF
                         and the various elements of the Community Participatory Framework. The MOFOR has the
                         experience in the establishment of SESA under FCPF scheme, that will be good lesson learned for
                         this project preparation and implementation. Forestry agencies at kabupaten and/or provincial level
                         will also have oversight responsibility, whose capacities will need to be upgraded with regards to
                         safeguards implementation, and FMUs will be directly responsible for implementation of measures
                         contained in instruments prepared pursuant to the ESMF: ESMPs, IPPs, etc. The ESMF will include
                         an environmental and social impact management capacity assessment of the MOFOR along with
                           recommendations for strengthening, and the safeguards instruments for individual FMU’s will
                           include the same elements for kabupaten and, where relevant, provincial forestry agencies.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Thomas E. Walton (EASNS)
                           Juan Martinez (EASIS)
                           Virza S. Sasmitawidjaja (EASIS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The project will provide financial support in
                           BP 4.01                                            Component 3 to a limited number (3) of ‘pilot
                                                                              FMUs’ that will be selected during the first year
                                                                              of the project. This could involve the protection
                                                                              and beneficial uses of the forest resources. An
                                                                              Environmental and Social Management
                                                                              Framework (ESMF) will be prepared by the
                                                                              implementing agency during the project design
                                                                              stage before appraisal. The appropriate level of
                                                                              environmental and social assessment as
                                                                              determined by the ESMF screening procedure
                                                                              will accompany the pilot FMU selection during
                                                                              the first year of project implementation. This
                                                                              assessment will take stock of and analyze the
                                                                              salient environmental and socio-economic
                                                                              characteristics of the proposed project areas,
                                                                              assess potential impacts, both negative and
                                                                              positive, of the productive forest activities,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              which may include harvesting of NTFP,
                                                                              replanting, sustainable economic livelihood
                                                                              activities, and prepare management and
                                                                              mitigation measures to be applied to the
                                                                              activities in the pilot FMU. A full baseline
                                                                              database for all participating project
                                                                              communities will be compiled as part of this
                                                                              assessment process. The ESMF will incorporate
                                                                              outputs of the REDD+ SESA process that is
                                                                              ongoing in Indonesia, including in particular the
                                                                              principles, criteria and indicators (PRISAI) and
                                                                              their operating guidelines that will apply to all
                                                                              REDD+ activities regardless of the source of
                                                                              funding. Guidance on ESMF implementation
                                                                              will be included in the program level Operations
                                                                              Manual along with fiduciary rules and
                                                                              procedures.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        Yes             Potential project areas in Components 2 and 3
                                                                              may be located in Conservation, Protection
                                                    (Hutan Lindung), Production, and in some areas
                                                    Village Forests (Hutan Desa). The overall
                                                    impacts on natural habitat are expected to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                    positive, but some potential activities could
                                                    have negative impacts such sustainable
                                                    economic or livelihood activities. The
                                                    identification and mapping of sloping lands,
                                                    riparian zones, and High Conservation Value
                                                    Forest (HCVF) will be included as part of the
                                                    basis for forest use planning in Components 2
                                                    and 3, for the purposes of enhancing positive
                                                    impacts and minimizing adverse impacts on
                                                    natural habitat. When the environmental
                                                    assessments for the FMUs to be supported under
                                                    Component 3 are conducted, activities that
                                                    could affect critical natural habitat for which it
                                                    cannot be demonstrated that conversion or
                                                    degradation will be avoided will be rejected for
                                                    support.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36   Yes   In Component 1, the project will contribute to
                                                    the development of legal and regulatory
                                                    frameworks, financial incentives and capacity
                                                    building activities to undertake SFM planning at
                                                    the national, provincial and local levels. The
                                                    project will establish a support base for FMUs
                                                    within the MOFOR and potentially MOHA. The
                                                    Project will support activities that add value to
                                                    the FMU process, such as analytical and policy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                    work, including potential studies in support of
                                                    policy improvements for FMU operation,
                                                    sustainable forest management and REDD+,
                                                    South-South operations, etc. It will link closely
                                                    with national REDD+ preparation, in particular
                                                    the principles, criteria and indicators (PRISAI)
                                                    being developed for REDD+ financing.
                                                    Capacity constraints at national and local level
                                                    for FMU development and operation may also
                                                    be addressed by supporting capacity
                                                    development programs in collaboration with the
                                                    universities (e.g. a student attachment and fresh
                                                    graduate recruitment program). The
                                                    establishment of a centralized FMU Knowledge
                                                    and Management Information System (KMIS)
                                                    will be supported. The project will support the
                                                    institutional establishment of FMUs. FMUs will
                                                    prepare forest management plans in
                                                    collaboration with local communities during the
                                                                 project implementation phase. This follows
                                                                 FMU regulations established by MOFOR. The
                                                                 ESMF will incorporate a screening procedure
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 that will determine what environmental
                                                                 assessment and/or ESMP is appropriate for each
                                                                 proposed intervention. The ESMF will include
                                                                 requirements for consultation. In addition, there
                                                                 will be a Community Participatory Framework
                                                                 in which all consultation and participation
                                                                 requirements and guidelines for OP 4.01, 4.10,
                                                                 4.11, 4.12 and 4.36 will be consolidated.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD   Forest plantations, tree nurseries, and some
                                                                 timber and non-timber product processing could
                                                                 require insecticides, herbicides, or fungicides. If
                                                                 during ESMF preparation pesticide use is
                                                                 determined to be likely, whether or not the
                                                                 pesticides are procured with project funds, the
                                                                 policy will be triggered and the ESMF will
                                                                 include a Pest Management Plan template for
                                                                 use in the environmental assessments for
                                                                 activities in the pilot FMUs.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Mapping and protection of PCR will be
                         BP 4.11                                 incorporated in forest use planning in
                                                                 Component 2 and in the selection, design and
                                                                 implementation of forest management plans and
                                                                 activities in Component 3.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The project may finance activities where there is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 a presence of adat communities. This policy
                                                                 applies to all three project components and a
                                                                 social assessment and resulting IPPF will
                                                                 indicate the project’s potential impacts and
                                                                 benefits for indigenous peoples for all project
                                                                 activities and that the IPPF will include how the
                                                                 project intends to approach land tenure issues
                                                                 The proposed framework approach is proposed
                                                                 where adat communities will work together with
                                                                 FMU staff to develop community plans for
                                                                 sustainable natural resources management and
                                                                 improved livelihoods. An Indigenous Peoples
                                                                 Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared as
                                                                 part of the Community Participatory Framework
                                                                 by the implementing agency before appraisal. It
                                                                 is anticipated that the project will have positive
                                                                 impacts for adat communities by strengthening
                                                                 access to and control over forest resources,
                                                                 clarifying community boundaries in selected
                                                                 areas, and ensuring communities that manage
                                                                forest resources receive a share of revenue from
                                                                forest. Particular attention will be paid at the
                                                                community level to ensure priorities and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                preferences are identified and included in forest
                                                                management and village development planning
                                                                and implementation. Communities will choose
                                                                whether or not they wish to engage in
                                                                participatory management of the forests. A
                                                                participatory framework will be developed that
                                                                sets out processes and procedures to ensure that
                                                                free, prior and informed consultations are
                                                                conducted with project affected people.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   The Community Participatory Framework
                         4.12                                   (CPF) will apply to all participating
                                                                communities. Village Development Plans will
                                                                be developed with participating villages to
                                                                ensure that losses in revenue streams as a result
                                                                of any natural resource access restrictions are
                                                                fully and sustainably mitigated in line with OP
                                                                4.12. The social assessment undertaken during
                                                                project preparation should assess among other
                                                                things potential impacts on livelihoods and
                                                                related to access restrictions due to project
                                                                activities. This should be included in a Process
                                                                Framework as part of the combined safeguard
                                                                and participatory planning to be included in the
                                                                Community Engagement Framework.
                                                                If communities choose to engage in and endorse
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                access restrictions, it is anticipated that losses
                                                                will be compensated by the FMUs and/or
                                                                participating organizations. Community
                                                                members will also benefit from improved
                                                                management of the forests, which will enhance
                                                                the sustainability of forest resource production
                                                                and environmental services upon which local
                                                                communities are economically dependent. No
                                                                land acquisition is anticipated for the project;
                                                                however an Process Framework (PF) will be
                                                                prepared prior to appraisal as an element of the
                                                                CPF for use in the (unlikely) event that it is
                                                                needed in specific project areas.
                                                                Also an Involuntary Resettlement Policy
                                                                Framework will be prepared as part of the
                                                                project preparation. The project should not
                                                                exclude involuntary resettlement.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will neither finance new dams nor
                                                                                                                                 depend on existing dams for achievement of its
                                                                                                                                 development objectives.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International                                         No                            There are no international waterways in the
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            parts of Indonesia in which FMUs will be
                                                                                                                                 selected for Components 2 or 3.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             There is no disputed territory in the parts of
                                 7.60                                                                                            Indonesia in which FMUs will be selected for
                                                                                                                                 Components 2 or 3.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 18-Nov-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), the IPPF and the ARPF will be
                                      prepared before project appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Werner L. Kornexl

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 21-Nov-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Nathan M. Belete (SM)                                                                                                Date: 11-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
