                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA10026
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Jul-2014, 18-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          China                              Project ID:    P126832
                            Project Name:     CH GEF Municipal Solid Waste Management Project (P126832)
                            Task Team         Tijen Arin
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         30-Jun-2014                        Estimated   14-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GENDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              Persistent Organic Pollutants
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Solid waste management (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Pollution management and environmental health (50%), Environmental policies
                                              and institutions (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      32.89           Total Bank Financing:                 0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                20.89
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                       12.00
                              Total                                                                                   32.89
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The project would aim to build capacity and demonstrate best available techniques (BAT) and best
                           environmental practices (BEP) in municipal solid waste (MSW) incineration in accordance with the


                                                                      Page 1 of 14
                         Stockholm Convention.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project would support three components: (1) Capacity Building for Improved Operation and
                         Regulation of MSW Incinerators, (2) Capacity Building for Improved MSW Management Planning,
                         and (3) Project Management.

                         Component 1. Capacity Building for Improved Operation and Regulation of MSW Incinerators
                         This component would support two closely linked sub-components aiming to increase capacity to
                         better operate and regulate MSW incinerators so as to reduce dioxin and other pollutant emissions.

                         Sub-component 1A. Building Capacity for Improved Incinerator Operations and Emissions Control
                         This sub-component would increase capacity at selected demonstration incinerators to improve
                         operations and reduce dioxin and other pollutant emissions in line with Stockholm Convention BAT/
                         BET.

                         The project would support operational and environmental performance audits at four candidate
                         demonstration incinerators in Kunming the first year of project implementation. Based on the audits,
                         an operational improvement program would be designed for each incinerator. Incinerators that
                         commit to implementing these programs and fulfill financial eligibility conditions would be
                         supported during the remainder of the project, including through grant funding for necessary
                         upgrades of equipment relevant for dioxin emission reduction. The project will aim to achieve
                         operational improvements at least three demonstration incinerators. If more than one of Kunming’s
                         four candidate incinerators fails to meet the above-named conditions, the Project may turn to Ningbo
                         or other cities for eligible demonstration incinerators.

                         Specifically, the project would support the following activities:
                         a)       Operational and environmental performance audits that would be carried out during the first
                         9-12 months of project implementation to fill the information gap on operating conditions at four
Public Disclosure Copy




                         incinerators in Kunming (Konggang, Wuhua, Xishan, and Dongjiao) and investments in equipment
                         at these incinerators needed to enable monitoring and their online transmission to Kunming Urban
                         Management Bureau (UMB) and Kunming Environmental Protection Bureau (EPB). Experts of
                         MSW operations with substantial international experience would be hired to design and conduct the
                         audits and help design the operational improvement programs.
                         b)       Dissemination of lessons learned from the audits in Kunming to regulators and incinerator
                         managers in other cities across China. The project would finance a consultancy and incremental costs
                         of dissemination to raise awareness on the linkages between operating conditions and environmental
                         performance for two widely used technologies in China.
                         c)       Operational improvement programs that would be implemented in the demonstration
                         incinerators that commit to such programs and meet financial eligibility criteria, during the remainder
                         of project life with the help of manuals of operational procedures.
                         d)       BAT and BEP training for approximately 250 MSW incinerator managers and operators of
                         which 50 would be from Kunming and Ningbo incinerators, and the rest from 40 MSW incinerators
                         across China.
                         e)       Investments in enhanced equipment to further reduce dioxin emissions for those
                         demonstration incinerators that commit to implementing the operational improvement program and
                         meet the financial eligibility criteria.

                         Sub-component 1B. Capacity Building for Improved Regulation of MSW Incinerators.


                                                                      Page 2 of 14
                         This sub-component would support six activities to promote improved regulation of MSW
                         incinerators:
                         a)       Piloting of integrated permits for selected incinerators, which would specify in detail
Public Disclosure Copy




                         incinerator operating conditions required to meet emission limits for dioxin and other pollutants. The
                         permits would also include inspection manuals for the regulators.
                         b)       Building capacity for improved monitoring by regulators through:
                         i.       Procurement of IT hardware and software to allow Kunming and Ningbo UMBs and EPBs
                         continuous online access to incinerator operating and emission data;
                         ii.      Stack tests for dioxin where standards for such tests are enforced, including maintena nce of
                         normal operating conditions at the time of sampling;
                         iii.     Enhancing the capacity of the Ningbo Dioxin Laboratory through the purchase of equipment
                         and technical assistance.
                         c)       Training of regulators from MOHURD and Ningbo and Kunming EPBs and UMBs through
                         study tours to North American and European cities where BAT and BEP for MSW incineration are
                         implemented;
                         d)       Updating and developing four national-level technical standards for MSW incinerator
                         operations; and
                         e)       Public awareness raising and disclosure of incinerator operating and emissions data on the
                         internet (Kunming and Ningbo) and community bulletin boards (Kunming).

                         Component 2. Capacity Building for Improved MSW Management Planning
                         This component would support four activities to promote improved MSW management planning
                         with a view to reduce solid waste going to MSW incinerators:
                         a)      A study on regional planning of MSW disposal that would identify cost effective disposal
                         options at a regional scale (national level activity);
                         b)      A national level study on the system of statistical indicators and MSW classification;
                         c)      Twinning of Kunming and Ningbo on MSW segregation; and
                         d)      An assessment of the impact of MSW segregation on dioxin emissions in Ningbo.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The component will also support project results monitoring and dissemination.

                         Component 3. Project Management. This Component would support FECO, Yunnan and Ningbo
                         PMOs to carry out day-to-day project management, including procurement and financial
                         management.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The city of Kunming is the capital of Yunnan Province in southwest China. Kunming is located in
                         the middle of Yunnan-Guizhou Plateau. Its overall topography is featured with high northern part
                         and low southern part. Most of the city has an altitude between 1,500m and 2,800m. The city
                         presents low latitude-plateau-monsoon weather feature and has an annual average temperature of 15
                         oC and an annual precipitation of 1,035mm.

                         Kunming has a total area of 21,473km2, divided into 6 districts, 7 counties and a county level city. It
                         has a population of 7.26 million. The urban area has a population of 5.3 million (2013). The city has
                         a GDP of CNY301 billion and an average per capita GDP of CNY 41,458 in 2012. The city is also a
                         critical transport hub in southwestern China by having the fifth largest airport in China, several
                         national expressways and intensive road networks connecting the remainder of the province.



                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                         Kunming has a good ambient air quality compared to most cities in China. Based on Kunming
                         Environmental Quality Reports during 2010-2012, monitored pollutants on a daily basis, including
                         PM10, SO2, and NO2, all met applicable national ambient air quality standard. It also shows a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         slightly improving trend over the period. In 2012, the monitored annual average PM10, SO2 and
                         NO2 concentrations are 67, 34, and 36 ug/m3 respectively. While, national standard Ambient Air
                         Quality Standard (GB3098-2012, issued in 2012 and to be effective on January 1st, 2016) stipulates
                         standards of 70, 60 and 40 ug/m3 for the three air pollutants in Kunming City.

                         The four candidate MSW incinerators are located in suburban or rural areas in Kunming. Wuhua
                         incinerator is in the northwestern Kunming, about 6km from its urban area. Around Wuhua
                         incinerator there are other industrial activities, including a feces treatment plant and construction
                         material plants. Dongjiao incinerator is in the eastern Kunming, about 30km from its urban area. By
                         Dongjiao incinerator there is a landfill that was closed in 2008. Xishan incinerator is in the
                         southwestern Kunming, about 50 km from its urban area. By Xishan incinerator there is a waste
                         recycling plant. Konggang incinerator is in the northeastern Kunming, about 50km from its urban
                         area. For all incinerators, local communities are located at least 500m to them, meeting national
                         requirements for safety distances (>300m).
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chaogang Wang (GURDR)
                         Ning Yang (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project is assigned as Category A project due
                         BP 4.01                                             to sensitivity of dioxins emissions and MSW
                                                                             incineration. Dioxins are extremely biologically
                                                                             toxic and persistent in the environment. Other
                                                                             polluting emissions from MSW incineration may
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             include particulate matters (measured in Total
                                                                             Suspended Particulates, TSP); acidic pollutants
                                                                             such as SO2, NOx and HCl; and heavy metals,
                                                                             etc. In addition, combustion by-product fly ash
                                                                             often contains dioxins and heavy metals; hence it
                                                                             is considered a major environmental concern and
                                                                             should be properly managed.

                                                                             A full Environmental Audit and EMP are
                                                                             prepared for each participating incinerator.

                                                                             Two rounds of public consultation were carried
                                                                             out as part of the EIA procedure.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No              The Project does not involve any natural habitats.
                                                                             The Project will only operate in existing
                                                                             incinerators and no expansion will take place that
                                                                             would impact on natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              The Project would not finance any activity that
                                                                             may involve a major change or degradation of the



                                                                     Page 4 of 14
                                                                             important forest area or related major natural
                                                                             habitat as defined in the Policy. The Project will
                                                                             only operate in existing incinerators and no
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             expansion will take place that would impact on
                                                                             forests.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No             The Project would involve neither purchase of
                                                                             any pesticide nor additional pesticide application.
                                                                             No action is required according to the Policy.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No             No cultural heritage or other physical cultural
                            BP 4.11                                          resource has been found in the project sites. The
                                                                             Project will only operate in existing incinerators
                                                                             and no expansion will take place that would
                                                                             impact on physical cultural resources. Chance-
                                                                             find procedure however is included in the EMP.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No             No indigenous people are associated with the
                                                                             project area or activities, which are all in existing
                                                                             incinerators.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No             Land acquisition for purposes of construction of
                            4.12                                             four MSW incineration plants in Kunming City
                                                                             took place prior to this project (2006-2009). The
                                                                             land acquisition was completed without
                                                                             anticipation to the proposed project. Nevertheless,
                                                                             a retroactive review was carried out. The review
                                                                             concluded that compensation has been paid
                                                                             according to relevant government policies and
                                                                             consistent with the principles and requirement of
                                                                             the Bank policy on Involuntary Resettlement OP
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             4.12. There are no pending issues on land
                                                                             acquisition. Furthermore, no new land
                                                                             acquisition is envisaged under the project as there
                                                                             is no expansion of any of the existing incinerators.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No             There is no dam in the project area.

                            Projects on International        No              There is no international waterway involved in
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                             the project area.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No              There is no disputed Areas involved in the project
                            7.60                                             area.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environment

                             By design, four existing MSW incinerators in Kunming may receive GEF funding to invest in
                             enhanced equipment in order to implement operational improvement programs (Component 1Ad).

                                                                     Page 5 of 14
                         As a precondition to receive the funding, each of the four incinerators will be subject to an
                         intensive operational and environmental performance audit in the first year of project
                         implementation in order to develop the operational improvement programs. In accordance with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         World Bank OP/BP4.01, the project is categorized as Category A for environmental purposes due
                         to sensitivity of dioxins emissions and MSW incineration.

                         Since the identified physical investments are mainly about enhancement of air pollution control
                         facilities in these existing incinerators, during project preparation an environmental audit and an
                         environmental management plan (EMP) for each incinerator, and an EA executive summary for
                         the project were developed following domestic regulations and Bank safeguards requirements. The
                         World Bank Group Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines were incorporated into the
                         environmental audit and EMP where applicable.

                         Other project activities will support enforcement capacity building of regulators, training of
                         incinerator operators, regional planning of MSW disposal, information disclosure, and national
                         level regulatory capacity building for MSW management. Overall, these activities, by improving
                         incinerators’ operation, enhancing governments’ enforcement and engaging the public, are in line
                         with Stockholm Convention BAT/BEP guidelines. Bank safeguards policies apply to these
                         technical assistance activities as well. Environmental and social safeguards considerations will be
                         fully blended with the scope of work and terms of references for these technical assistance
                         activities.

                         Environmental Impacts. The project is expected to have direct environmental benefits by reducing
                         dioxins and other air emissions from the demonstration MSW incinerators. As is well known,
                         dioxin is extremely biologically toxic and persistent in the environment. Other polluting emissions
                         from MSW incineration may include particulate matters (measured in Total Suspended
                         Particulates, TSP); acidic pollutants such as SO2, NOx and HCl; and heavy metals, etc. In
                         addition, combustion by-product fly ash often contains dioxins and heavy metals; hence it is
                         considered a major environmental concern and should be properly managed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Audit. The environmental audit examined regulatory compliance, environmental
                         and social baselines, operating conditions, management of air emissions, wastewater, solid wastes
                         and other environmental, and health and safety issues of the four candidate incinerators in
                         Kunming.

                         Operating Conditions. The four candidate incinerators in Kunming are relatively new having been
                         put into formal operation in the past few years. Specifically, 1) Wuhua incinerator was built in
                         December 2007 and put into formal operation in July 2008; 2) Dongjiao incinerator was built in
                         March 2009 and put into formal operation in March 2011; 3) Xishan incinerator was built in
                         August 2012 and put into formal operation in June 2013; and 4) Konggang incinerator was built in
                         June 2011 and put into formal operation in August 2013. Konggang incinerator uses the mass burn
                         (moving grate) technology, while the other three use the circulated fluidized bed (CFB)
                         technology for combustion. After the combustion process, air pollution control facilities are all in
                         place, typically including semi-dry scrubber that targets removal of acidic pollutants, activated
                         carbon injection that removes dioxin and heavy metals, and bag house that collects particulates.
                         All four incinerators generate electricity. According to the technical review during project
                         preparation, the four incinerators are well maintained, have qualified operational staff and have
                         control systems in place that should allow for ready adaptation of an operati onal and
                         environmental performance enhancement program. However, it is also found that the four

                                                                   Page 6 of 14
                         incinerators have, to varying degrees, scope for improvements in system control to stabilize
                         process conditions, environmental monitoring, and integrate monitoring of process and
                         environmental parameters for process control and optimization.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Dioxins Emissions Standards. A comprehensive review of dioxins emission standards for MSW
                         incinerators around the world shows that EU countries, Japan, Beijing, Hong Kong, and Taiwan
                         all have adopted 0.1 ng TEQ/m3. The United State standards are about 0.2 and 0.5 ng TEQ/m3
                         (after unit conversion) for new and existing MSW incinerators, respectively. China’s current
                         national standard, i.e. Standard for Pollution Control on the MSW Incineration (GB18485-2001),
                         was issued in 2001 and stipulates a dioxin emission standard of 1.0ng TEQ/m3. However, in 2008
                         the Ministry of Environmental Protection (MEP) issued a document stipulating that new MSW
                         incinerators that generate power must meet 0.1 ng TEQ/m3. Since Konggang and Xishan
                         incinerators’ EIAs were approved after the effectiveness of the MEP document, they are required
                         to meet 0.1 ng TEQ/m3. During the project appraisal, MEP issued updated Standard for Pollution
                         Control on the MSW Incineration (GB18485-2014), which stipulates that all existing MSW
                         incinerators will have to meet 0.1 ng TEQ/m3 starting from January 1st, 2016, while the current
                         standard (GB18485-2001) will remain effective for existing MSW incinerators until December 31,
                         2015.

                         Dioxins Emissions. Dioxin emissions from the four candidate incinerators have been tested at least
                         once a year by accredited monitoring institutes as required by Chinese regulations. The results of
                         these tests are as follows: 1) for Wuhua, 12 tests were carried out as of January 2014. Results
                         range from 0.057 to 0.89, and 9 results were lower than 0.1 ng TEQ/m3; 2) for Dongjiao, 39 tests
                         were carried out as of January 2014. Results ranged from 0.001 ng TEQ/m3 to 0.187 ng TEQ/m3,
                         and 36 results were lower than 0.1 ng TEQ/m3; 2) for Xishan, 21 tests were carried out as of June
                         2013. Results ranged from 0.00131 ng TEQ/m3 to 0.078 ng TEQ/m3 and were all below 0.1 ng
                         TEQ/m3; and 4) for Konggang, 12 tests were carried out as of end of 2013. Maximum tested level
                         was 0.011ng TEQ/m3 and all results were below 0.1 ng TEQ/m3.
                         Emission Levels of Other Air Pollutants. Other air emissions from the four candidate incinerators
Public Disclosure Copy




                         were examined by reviewing the results of the environmental acceptance monitoring (which is the
                         precondition of formal operation) and regular inspection monitoring conducted by local
                         environmental protection bureaus and online monitoring records. It should be noted that the EHS
                         Guidelines make reference to EU and US air emission standards for MSW incineration. For some
                         pollutants, either the EU or US standard is more stringent, reflecting different country context,
                         assimilative capacity of the environment, and other factors. The environmental audit found that the
                         EPB inspection monitoring of the four incinerators covered TSP, SO2, NOx, Pb, Cd, Hg and HCl;
                         and the results all met domestic standards. In addition : 1) Konggang fully met the EHS
                         Guidelines; 2) Xishan met NOx, Cd, Hg and HCl of the most stringent standards of the EHS
                         Guidelines, while TSP, SO2 and Pb did not fully meet the most stringent standards of the EHS
                         Guidelines; 3) Wuhua fully met NOx, Pb, Hg and HCl, but did not fully meet the most stringent
                         standards in the EHS Guidelines for TSP, SO2; and 4) Dongjiao fully met NOx, Pb and Hg, but
                         did not fully meet the most stringent standards in the EHS Guidelines for TSP, SO2, Cd and HCl.
                         Further, online monitoring covered TSP, CO, NOx, SO2, and HCl, and some operating related
                         parameter such as O2. Online monitoring results were generally consistent with the EPB
                         inspection findings. However, it is noted online monitoring equipment in the four incinerators
                         sometimes did not work well and reported abnormal data indicating maintenance and validation
                         issues. MEP issued Standard for Pollution Control on the MSW Incineration (GB18485-2014)
                         during the project appraisal, which stipulates air emission limits generally in the same levels of EU
                         and US. The new national standards will be effective for existing MSW incinerators starting from

                                                                   Page 7 of 14
                         January 1st, 2016.

                         Odor Control. Odor and other non-point source air pollutants comprised of H2S, NH3 and TSP
Public Disclosure Copy




                         that are mainly from garbage pit in the incinerators. Local communities are sensitive to odor. It is
                         reported that in the past the public complained odor that were potentially from Wuhua and Xishan
                         incinerators. The four incinerators have implemented odor is control measures including
                         maintaining negative pressure at garbage pits, odor removal facilities and closure structure to the
                         garbage pits. For Wuhua and Xishan, odor may also have come from other industrial activities
                         surrounding the two incinerators. In the past two years, environmental monitoring of above-
                         mentioned H2S, NH3 and TSP at the boundary of the incinerators met domestic standards.

                         Fly Ash and Solid Wastes Management. Fly ash produced in the four candidate incinerators
                         ranged from 5,655t/a to 24,972t/a in 2013. CFB incinerators (i.e. Wuhua, Dongjiao and Xishan)
                         produce more fly ash, accounting for about 6-8% of the MSW incinerated in weight; while mass
                         burn incinerator Konggang produces less, accounting for 3%. Fly ash shall either be sent to local
                         hazardous waste treatment facility, or sent to landfill on the condition that it meets the
                         specifications set at the landfill. Kunming’s current hazardous waste treatment facility was put into
                         operation in 2012 and its capacity is inadequate to receive the fly ash produced in these
                         incinerators. Thus in the four incinerators, fly ash is treated through solidification with cement,
                         stone and a chelating agent in order to meet national standards for leaching toxicity. Solidified fly
                         ash is sent to Kunming Xishan landfills for final disposal. Bottom slag is a non-hazardous solid
                         waste. It is managed separately from fly ash and recycled for producing construction materials.
                         Other solid wastes including garbage and sludge are incinerated.

                         Wastewater management. Wastewater streams produced in the incineration plants include leachate
                         from garbage pits, domestic wastewater and other process wastewater. Wuhua has its leachate
                         incinerated or sent to designated leachate treatment facility when the volume of the leachate is too
                         much. Other three incinerators have advanced leachate/wastewater treatment facilities and
                         discharge no wastewater to the environment. Overall these wastewater streams are effectively
Public Disclosure Copy




                         managed. No noncompliance has been identified in the environmental audit process.

                         Noise. Sources of noises in the four incinerators include crushers, draft fan, turbine and other
                         mechanical equipment. Noise control measures taken by the incinerators include sound insulation,
                         damping pad and silencer, etc. Monitoring of noises have been carried out regularly, no
                         noncompliance has been reported.

                         Risks. Risk analysis shows that the main potential environmental risk during operation would be:
                         (a) accidental breakdown of waste management system, and (c) fire or explosion. Risk prevention
                         and mitigation measures and emergency response plans have been incorporated into the
                         incinerators’ regular management system and in the EMPs. Overall, the risk levels are considered
                         low.

                         EHS Management System. Each incinerator has an existing EHS system in place, including an
                         environmental and safety office and dedicated staff, occupational safety regulations, operational
                         monitoring, wastewater and air emission sampling and analysis. These incinerators are also closely
                         monitored and supervised by local environmental protection bureaus (EPBs) whose environmental
                         monitoring stations carry out regular inspections. In addition, online monitoring of air emissions,
                         as mentioned above, is in place and data are transmitted to local EPBs.



                                                                   Page 8 of 14
                         Findings and Recommendations. The Environmental Audit and technical evaluation carried out
                         during project preparation considered that the incinerators are adequately managed by experienced
                         operators, albeit at uneven levels. Several key issues identified include: 1) all the four incinerators
Public Disclosure Copy




                         often received humid, low heat-value and abnormal size garbage due to poor at-source
                         segregation, which compromise good combustion at furnace if pretreatment in the plants is
                         inadequate. The three CFB incinerators are more vulnerable to the poor quality waste feedstock,
                         which has resulted in quite considerable plant downtime. The four incinerators’ instrumentation
                         and autom atic control system may not be adequate to address these challenges. Overall these
                         unsteady operations bring considerable likelihoods of uncertain emissions. 2) Environmental
                         monitoring seems to be inadequate due to technical and capacity constraints. Some monitoring
                         results seem to be unreliable. This is evident that from the fact that some dioxins monitoring
                         results are at the theoretical minimum under perfect operating conditions, while it is obvious that
                         keeping steady operation is a major challenge to the four incineration plants. It is also found that
                         the online monitoring equipment in the four incineration plants doesn’t work well all the time.; 3)
                         Incinerator operators’ knowledge of process control, comprehensive application of BAT/BEP and
                         environmental compliance need to be further enhanced. In conclusion, the results of
                         Environmental Audit carried out during project preparation prove the necessity of a
                         comprehensive operating and environmental performance audit in the first year of project
                         implementation.

                         Social

                         Social impacts and land acquisition. The social impacts of the proposed Project would be mainly
                         positive. The primary project beneficiaries will be the local environmental protection bureaus in
                         two cities of Kunming and Ningbo and local residents in four districts of Kunming. They will
                         benefit from strengthened capacity for solid waste management and reduced exposure to dioxin
                         emissions from MSW incinerators respectively.

                         A social assessment was carried out through extensive consultation with various stakeholders, a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         questionnaire survey with local residents, a desk review, and participator observations.
                         The assessment aimed at
                         (1)     Identifying the primary stakeholders, and their interests and needs, and their potential
                         impacts on the project and environment;
                         (2)     Learning the potential positive and negative impacts, and social risks of the project;
                         (3)     Learning public perceptions and ideas of information disclosure on the project and air
                         emissions, identifying the primary stakeholders’ needs for information disclosure and public
                         participation, and developing strategies suited to local culture and customs;
                         (4)     Proposing a social management plan that optimizes the project design, improves
                         information disclosure and promotes public participation through extensive consultation, thereby
                         evading risks and promoting the realization of the project objectives.

                         Topics discussed with stakeholders ranged from waste management in general, such as service
                         coverage and waste management fees, to incineration in particular, including the stakeholders’
                         perceptions of health and other impacts of incineration, as well pollution control technologies that
                         may be supported by the project. The findings of the social assessment reinforced the fact that
                         public reactions against dioxin emissions from MSW incinerators have become more common in
                         China’s large cities in recent years, and there is also significant lack of confidence in the
                         information shared with the public on these emissions.



                                                                    Page 9 of 14
                          The social assessment found that women declared to know less than men about hazardous
                          emissions from incinerators, but women expressed more concern about incinerators’ impact on
                          health and quality of life. Women were also less aware than men of environmental information
Public Disclosure Copy




                          disclosed by incinerators and less satisfied with the information disclosed. Women were
                          significantly more interested in information on health impacts than men. Finally, women differed
                          from men in their preferred mode of access to information. These differences have been reflected
                          in the information disclosure plan in Kunming.

                          The main outcome of the social assessment was a public information disclosure and public
                          awareness raising strategy, which have been fully incorporated in project design (see section 5
                          below) and results indicators. Notably, during the project, local communities’ awareness of
                          information disclosure of incinerators pollutant emissions will be monitored, in a gender-
                          segregated way, as part of the Project Results Framework.

                          Land acquisition for purposes of construction of four incinerators in Kunming City took place
                          prior to this project. It was completed without anticipation to the proposed project. Nevertheless, a
                          retroactive due diligence review of the land acquisition was carried out. The review included a
                          comprehensive review of the land acquisition and resettlement processes of the Xishan and
                          Konggang incinerators and concluded that these processes complied with the Land Administration
                          Law of the People’s Republic of China, and the regulations and policies of Yunnan Province and
                          Kunming City on resettlement. Surveys of affected households indicated that all sampled
                          households had enhanced incomes and expenditures after compensation and resettlement,
                          reflecting that the affected households’ incomes and living standards were restored and improved
                          effectively. All affected persons interviewed were satisfied with the compensation and process.

                          In the case of Dongjiao and Wuhua, land acquisition was completed 16 and 8 years ago,
                          respectively. While, due to the time that had elapsed, it was impossible to carry out as detailed a
                          review as in the case of Xishan and Konggang, key information on the impacts of land acquisition
                          in terms of type, area, number of affected people (Wuhua) as well as on compensation payments
Public Disclosure Copy




                          made (Wuhua) was collected. In addition, in the case of Wuhua, a few affected persons attended
                          the focus group discussions of the project social assessment. These individuals said that since
                          most of the acquired land was wasteland, their production and livelihoods were not affected, and
                          some local residents stated that this plant had improved the local environment and their quality of
                          life to some extent. No complaints were voiced.

                          Overall, the due diligence review concluded that although the land acquisition was implemented
                          mainly followed the relevant government policies and regulations, it was consistent with the
                          requirements of the Bank Policy on Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12. The review did not find
                          any pending issues on land acquisition carried out prior to the Project.

                          No new land acquisition is envisaged under the project as there is no expansion of any of the
                          existing incinerators.

                           There are no ethnic minority communities in the project area.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The project aims to demonstrate good practices in enhancing enforcement capacity and
                           systematically introducing BAT/BEP to the MSW incinerators. In demonstration city Kunming,


                                                                    Page 10 of 14
                           the project activities are expected to result in consistently lower emissions of dioxins and other air
                           emissions than present levels by combining technical, regulatory and public efforts. At
                           demonstration city Ningbo, the project activities will complement with ongoing Bank loan project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on MSW segregation. At national level, capacity building activities that aim to strengthen MSW
                           related technical standards, planning and management. In addition, by engaging the public, the
                           project is expected to raise public knowledge and awareness on the proper operation of MSW
                           incineration, hazards of dioxins and the importance of public oversight. Overall, in long term the
                           project have both considerable environmental and social benefits.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Several alternatives were considered during project preparation, including the number of
                           demonstration cities and selection of new or existing incinerators.

                           Given the nature of the GEF project in the context of country implementation of Stockholm
                           Convention, it was decided that the project interventions will place emphasis on one city, namely
                           Kunming, while meeting the needs of national level activities and taking advantage of ongoing
                           MSW management project financed by Bank loan project in Ningbo, in order to maximize the
                           potential demonstration value of the project.

                           Since the project by nature is to help reduce dioxins emissions rather than support MSW
                           incineration in China, it was decided to carry out interventions on existing MSW incinerators
                           rather than financing building of new incinerators.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The four candidate incinerators in Kunming, with technical support from MEP/FECO and local
                           environmental protection bureaus, conducted environmental audit and prepared environmental
                           management plan during project preparation. The environmental audits comprehensively
                           examined regulatory compliance, environmental and social baselines, operating conditions, air
Public Disclosure Copy




                           emissions control, solid wastes management, wastewater management and environmental risks of
                           the four candidate incinerators in Kunming.

                           The project by nature can be considered action plans to help the incinerators improve its
                           operations and environmental compliance. After the operating and environmental performance
                           audit in the first year of project implementation, emission targets for each incinerator will be
                           determined and are expected to meet newly issued Chinese national standards for MSW
                           incineration, i.e. Standard for Pollution Control on the MSW Incineration (GB18485-2014). The
                           new national standard is in general in the same level of EU and US standards.

                           An EMP for each incinerator was prepared by incorporating designed project interventions. The
                           EMP details the institutional arrangements for environmental management and supervision,
                           responsibilities of all concerned parties, international accepted BAT/BEPs and other relevant
                           mitigation measures for both implementation and operational stages, “emergency preparedness
                           plan”, capacity training plan, public engagement plan, environmental monitoring plan, and budget
                           estimates for implementing the EMP. The EMPs will be updated once the results of the first year
                           operational and environmental performance audit of the four incinerators are out. The updated
                           EMPs will be integrated into the Performance Improvement Program of the four incinerators,
                           which will be supported by the project.



                                                                      Page 11 of 14
                          MEP/FECO will be responsible for overall environmental management during project
                          implementation. In Kunming, each incinerator will be responsible for the implementation of its
                          site-specific EMP. Environmental management responsibility will be built into the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                          management structure within MEP/FECO, provincial/local EPBs, and participating incinerators’
                          management, through their existing environmental management office and dedicated staff.
                          Environmental mitigation measures developed in the EMP will be fully incorporated into the
                          environmental, health and safety management systems.

                           Under Component 2, the project will support a “Study on Regional Planning of MSW Disposal”,
                           which will involve case studies to compare strictly local MSW disposal options with regional
                           alternatives from the point of view of economic, financial, and environmental point of view.
                           Concerns under most safeguards policies would be relevant to this study. Therefore, the study
                           terms of reference (TOR) will incorporate all relevant safeguards policies and consultant outputs
                           will be reviewed to ensure that the analysis and recommendations reflect these policies. The TORs
                           for the other studies under Component 2 will also incorporate safeguard policies and requirements
                           as relevant.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           During project preparation, public consultations were carried out jointly by social and
                           environmental assessment consultants with support from MEP/FECO, local EPBs and candidate
                           incinerator owners. Two rounds of public consultations were conducted in accordance with Bank
                           OP 4.01. A combination of questionnaire surveys, focused group meetings, interviews and public
                           meetings within the project’s area of influence was implemented. Public concerns have been
                           incorporated either in the project design or in the EMP.

                          The public consultations show that communities lack knowledge of MSW incineration and dioxins
                          emissions. They also lack confidence on the shared information with the public on the
                          environmental management of the incinerators. Of the four incinerators, Wuhua incinerator has
Public Disclosure Copy




                          mostly populated communities in its vicinity, and the opinions obtained from the people consulted
                          show obvious concerns and aversions to the MSW incineration. However, through the public
                          consultations carried out during project preparation, people consulted expressed welcome to the
                          project and willingness to join the designed public engagement programs.

                          A comprehensive public engagement program was developed and incorporated in the project
                          design, including: 1) information disclosure and public participation program including public
                          disclosure of real-time incinerator emission and operating data, dioxin monitoring data, knowledge
                          dissemination of MSW incineration and health impacts, MSW segregation and its linkage with
                          incineration, interactions between incinerators and nearby communities, etc. and 2) Grievance
                          redresses mechanism that includes a telephone hotline, document filing and specialized complaint
                          institution located at incinerators, community/village, environmental protection bureau, urban
                          management bureau. This mechanism will cover grievances concerning the deficient performance
                          or coverage of Project activities, including any grievances related to legacy issues for land
                          acquired for the construction of four MSW incineration plants in Kunming City.

                          Information disclosure has been carried out as part of the environmental and social assessments
                          through public bulletins, local newspaper, and the internet. All draft full environmental audit
                          reports, environmental management plans and social assessment reports were made available
                          locally on March 10, 2014, and in the InfoShop on March 25, 2014, and as such, are accessible to


                                                                   Page 12 of 14
                           the general public.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   25-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      16-Jun-2014
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            10-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?



                                                                   Page 13 of 14
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Tijen Arin
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Surhid P. Gautam (RSA)    Date: 05-Aug-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Iain G. Shuker (PMGR)     Date: 18-Aug-2014
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                Page 14 of 14
