                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                           ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                   Report No.: ISDSA6130

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Nov-2013
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Dec-2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Jamaica                         Project ID:    P147074
                                                     Parent         P095673
                                                     Project ID:
   Project Name:     Early Childhood Development Project (P147074)
   Parent Project    Jamaica Early Childhood Development Project (P095673)
   Name:
   Task Team         Harriet Nannyonjo
   Leader:
   Estimated                                         Estimated   11-Feb-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    LCSHE                           Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                     Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Pre-primary education (100%)
   Theme(s):         Child health (100%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:         14.00              Total Bank Financing: 12.00
   Financing Gap:                0.00
     Financing Source                                                                  Amount
     Borrower                                                                             2.00
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                               12.00
     Total                                                                               14.00
   Environmental C - Not Required
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)



                                           Page 1 of 6
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The Project endorses the objectives of the National Strategic Plan. Its Development Objective is
   to: (i) improve the monitoring of children's development, the screening of household-level risks,
   and the risk mitigation and early intervention systems; (ii) enhance the quality of early childhood
   schools and care facilities; and (iii) strengthen Early Childhood organizations and institutions.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   The Project endorses the objectives of the National Strategic Plan. Its development objectives are
   to: (i) improve parenting education and support programs; (ii) improve monitoring of children’s
   development, the screening of household level risks, and the risk mitigation and early intervention
   systems, (iii) enhance the quality of early childhood schools and care facilities; and (iv)
   strengthen early childhood organizations and institutions.
3. Project Description
The structure and components of AF would remain unchanged and the proposed new activities would
be implemented under the existing components as follows:
Component 1: The AF will support a subset of the NSP 2013-2018 activities that will help in
ensuring quality of ECD services, and strengthen the foundation for sustaining ECD investments in
Jamaica. Eligible budget lines will remain the same as those of the parent Project: grants to
community schools; grants to the Early Childhood Commission; grants to parenting education and
support programs, and grants to health centers providing well-child services.

a.      Parenting education and support. Improving parenting education and support programs
through revision and implementation of the communications strategy to educate parents and raise
awareness about ECD, parenting and nutrition practices, and expanded implementation of
assessment and certification

b.       Preventive health care and nutritional support: Enhancing the preventive health care services
and early childhood care facilities through capture and analysis of data from the CHDP for timely
identification of areas where action is needed, implementation of the pilot phase and roll out of the
service delivery model for nutrition for children ages 0-3 years, and assessment of health centers
offering well-child clinics.

c.      Screening, diagnosis, and early intervention: Improving monitoring of children’s
development, the screening of household level risks, and the risk mitigation and early intervention
system through approval and implementation of the service delivery model for screening, diagnosis
and early intervention for child development risks, and the deployment of child development
therapists as ECE practitioners trained in special needs education.

d.        Safe, learner-centered facilities. Enhancing the quality of early childhood schools and care
facilities through supporting ECIs to implement improvement plans to enable them to meet the
standards required for registration/permit to operate.

e.      Trained Early Childhood Practitioners and Teachers. Enhancing the quality of early
childhood schools through supporting ECD practitioners to acquire level III or above qualifications
and implementation of the ECD curriculum.


                                              Page 2 of 6
f.       Early childhood sector governance. Strengthening early childhood organizations and
institutions through development and and implementation of a community service delivery model for
comprehensive delivery of ECD services, including a strategy to coordinate with NGOs providing
ECD services, and developing and ECD policy and a resource mobilization strategy for financing of
ECD.

g.       Evidence-based decision-making. Implementing age 4 school readiness evaluation,
establishing a baseline and reporting on performance of ECD sector and outcomes, including school
readiness, nutrition status and growth.

Component 2: The following areas would be support under this component: (a) revising and
implementing the communication strategy for ECD; (b) monitoring and evaluating the
communication strategy using national surveys on nutritional status and feeding practices; (c)
updating the Health Management Information System to capture information from the CHDP; (d)
piloting and evaluating the use of on-line courses to upgrade qualifications of EC teachers and
practitioners; (e) implementing the standardized curriculum in ECIs; (f) providing equipment for
development officers and inspectors; (g) training of ECD practitioners to upgrade their qualifications
to support children with special needs; (h) evaluating the NSP 2013-2018 and developing NSP
2019-2022; and (i) monitoring of parish-level performance on PDO indicators.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project is national in scope. There are no salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN)

 6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/        No
 BP 4.01
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

 Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

 Pest Management OP 4.09             No

 Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
 BP 4.11
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
 4.12
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No




                                              Page 3 of 6
   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The project will not finance construction or expansion of any ECD infrastructure. The AF will
     support assessment and certification of health centers offering well-child clinics based on specific
     standards, but will not finance any activities that will generate health care waste.

     Regarding the Maroon and Rastafarian communities, although Bank safeguard mechanisms are
     not triggered (since they are not considered ethnic groups) the social assessment recommended
     that a culturally sensitive approach to service delivery be introduced as an incentive to attract and
     retain Rastafarian and Maroon children into the ECD system.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     None are expected.
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.
     N/A
   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
     assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     The financing and accountability rules for the Grant to Community Schools may change during
     project implementation and permit for minor refurbishments of existing infrastructure. Such
     small-scale activities would be limited to minor interior building remodeling and are not expected
     to generate negative environmental impacts requiring attention under OP/BP 4.01. Nonetheless,
     as a good practice measure, basic construction rules for contractors detailing provisions to
     minimize dust, noise and other nuisances, safeguard worker health and safety, and require
     adequate disposal of any construction materials will be outlined in the Project Operational Manual,
     and will be incorporated into all bidding documents.

     The Project applies a culturally sensitive approach to the delivery of health and education services,
     including in the parenting education and support strategy, service delivery model for ECD and
     curriculum offerings. In addition, the following have been undertaken to respond to the
     recommendations: (a) a Level III course for ECI practitioners has been introduced to train
     practitioners to identify and support children with disabilities and be culturally sensitive in the
     delivery of ECI instruction; (b) instructional materials have been made culturally sensitive; (c)
     development officers have been trained and deployed in the field to provide support to ECIs on
     ECI standards and parenting practices.
   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
     on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
     The main stakeholders of the project are Government policy makers, implementing agency staff,


                                                Page 4 of 6
    not-for-profit ECD service providers, parents and community/church
    leaders.

     During project preparation a participatory community socio-economic diagnostic study was
    undertaken and also a comprehensive stakeholder analysis.

     The project documents will all be posted on the ECC✇ s webpage (http://www.ecc.gov.jm/).
  B. Disclosure Requirements
   If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
   respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
   Audit/or EMP.
   If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
   OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
    Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
    be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
    issue, been prepared
    Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the OP?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:       Name: Harriet Nannyonjo
   Approved By


                                                Page 5 of 6
Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)   Date: 28-Nov-2013
Advisor:
Sector Manager:     Name: Reema Nayar (SM)        Date: 05-Dec-2013




                                    Page 6 of 6
