                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC328

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Lebanon                         Project ID:     P122540
                            Project Name:       LB: PCB Management in the Power Sector Project (P122540)
                            Task Team           Alaa Ahmed Sarhan
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           11-Jun-2014                     Estimated       20-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      MNSEE                           Lending         Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            GEF Focal Area:     Persistent Organic Pollutants

                            Sector(s):        General industry and trade sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Pollution management and environmental health (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          7.54                Total Bank Financing:          0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     5.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                            2.54
                              Total                                                                        7.54
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The global environmental objective (GEO) is to strengthen Lebanon's technical and managerial
                           capacity for minimizing human and environmental exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
                           C. Project Description
                           PCBs in Lebanon are mainly encountered in the electric power sector. Prior to the mid-1990s, they
                           were widely used in power transformers and capacitors at various levels – power stations, sub-
                         stations and distribution transformers. Most of this equipment is owned by Electricité du Liban
                         (EDL), the state-owned power utility, but some are owned by some smaller private distribution
                         utilities and by major power consumers, such as industries or hospitals.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subsequent to ratifying the Stockholm Convention for the management of Persistent Organic
                         Pollutants (POPs), the Government of Lebanon requested the Bank to execute a GEF-financed
                         project that would deal with its three top priorities in POPs management. These included awareness
                         raising, institutional and regulatory strengthening and PCB management. Risks of environmental
                         contamination from PCBs come from three major sources: a) equipment manufactured with PCBs as
                         dialectics; b) equipment containing oil that is contaminated with PCBs; and c) sites contaminated
                         from leaking oil containing PCBs. The Proposed PCB Management Project addresses these priorities
                         and comprises the following three components:

                         Component 1: Institutional and Regulatory Strengthening and Project Management
                         This component is likely to include: draft a POPs Management Decree, with implementing
                         guidelines for PCB management; strengthen the capacity of MOE for managing the disposal of
                         PCBs; and training for MOE and EDL staff.

                         Component 2: Management and Disposal of PCBs and PCB-Contaminated Equipment
                         This component is likely to include: the identification, safeguarding and disposal of high-content
                         PCB out-of-service equipment. [High-content PCB transformers have been identified at three sites
                         and high-content PCB capacitors at nine sites. Under the project, this equipment would be
                         transported to the Bauchrieh site for repacking in UN-approved containers, storage and export to a
                         certified disposal facility]. The expected volume is 49 tons of equipment, containing about 12 tons of
                         PCB and is classified as High Risk.

                         Component 3: Management of PCB-Contaminated Sites
                         It is suggested to also explore the feasibility of remediating one site (either the Baucherieh workshop
                         or the well); but this task will need to be further analyzed during the project appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project has a localized reach as it targets 3 specific sites which contain stockpile of
                         out-of-service transformers/ capacitors and 9 sites which have high-content PCB capacitors.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Lebanon’s EIA system has been analyzed with respect to its equivalence with Bank policies and
                         procedures, following OP 4.00 Use of Country Systems. This analysis showed that the Lebanese
                         system and the Bank’s policies are comparable in many respects. The acceptability assessment –
                         which reflects the application of the EIA system in Lebanese projects – indicated that Lebanon has a
                         modest institutional and legal EIA infrastructure at the national level as well as a weak track record
                         of implementing, monitoring and enforcing environment management plans. There is a lack of
                         requirement for public disclosure. Despite the delays in the approval of the application decree, MOE
                         does have experience in overseeing the EIA procedures for a number of locally- and externally-
                         funded projects. The Lebanon Country Environmental Analysis (CEA) characterizes MOE’s EIA
                         work to date as quite thorough and the quality of EIA reports as adequate but states that MOE has a
                         weak record on the oversight of environmental management plans.

                         The gaps related to public consultation and public disclosure as well strengthening the capacity of
                           MOE staff on ESIA and implementation of EMPs will be addressed in this project. This will enhance
                           the capacity strengthening support already being received under complementary projects funded by
                           the Bank and other donors. The MOE will maintain the staff (with the required technical and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                           skills) whose skills will be further enhanced by technical support and training. Additional technical
                           support will be provided by the Bank Safeguards specialists.

                           The need to trigger OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement will be assessed during project preparation,
                           once the project scope (Component 3) is clearly defined.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)
                           Ruma Tavorath (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The nature of the project is to safely manage
                           BP 4.01                                             polluting PCB-containing equipment and thus
                                                                               project investments will yield significant
                                                                               environmental improvements and long term
                                                                               public health benefits. However there are risks
                                                                               associated with the handling of PCBs, both to
                                                                               humans and the environment, if appropriate and
                                                                               stringent safeguards measures are not
                                                                               implemented. Risks to the environment include
                                                                               long-term and far-reaching contamination of
                                                                               soil, surface and ground water with PCBs (oils,
                                                                               leaking equipment etc). The persistent and toxic
                                                                               nature of PCBs has high risks to human health,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               including being a potential carcinogen and
                                                                               having possible developmental impacts. Poor
                                                                               management of PCB clean-up can involve a
                                                                               high risk to the neighborhood community and to
                                                                               the project site employees. Instituting sound
                                                                               occupational health and safety measures for the
                                                                               workers is critical who will be handling toxic
                                                                               PCB wastes. Due to the diverse nature of the
                                                                               risks associated with the project activities, the
                                                                               project is classified as Category A, for the
                                                                               purposes of OP 4.01, requiring a full
                                                                               environmental and social impact assessment,
                                                                               and extended disclosure, including multiple
                                                                               rounds of consultations.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No              There are no registered or known natural
                                                                               habitats in the project area and no adverse
                                                                               impacts are anticipated.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            There are no registered or known forests near
                                                                                                                                 the project sites and no adverse impacts are
                                                                                                                                 anticipated.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            It is not envisaged to procure or use any
                                                                                                                                 pesticides under the project.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            The project is not expected to impact on
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         physical cultural resources, as there is no
                                                                                                                                 excavation planned in the existing project sites.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            No indigenous people will be impacted by
                                                                                                                                 project activities
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    TBD                           Most of the stockpiles are inside or within the
                                 4.12                                                                                            vicinity of power plants (non-residential areas).
                                                                                                                                 The need to trigger this OP will be determined
                                                                                                                                 once there is more clarification on component 3
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                                                                 policy.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             None of the project sites are near or impact
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             None of the project sites are near or impact
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-Mar-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      A.       Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage
                                      ISDS would be prepared: March 4, 2014
                                      B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
                                      ISDS: N/A
                                      C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.

                                      A comprehensive project preparation study was completed in September 2011 by international
                                      consultants (COWI, Denmark), which sets out in detail the quantities of contaminated equipment
                                      to be safeguarded or destroyed and site specific information. It details methodologies to be
                                      employed under the project for safeguarding and/or disposing of each type of waste and an
                                      institutional analysis, a monitoring plan and cost estimates. Subsequently an Environment and
                                      Social Impact Assessment was undertaken in January 2013, which details status of baseline
                                      environment and safeguard measures to be incorporated with respect to project activities in the
                                      project identified sites. The draft ESIA was reviewed by the Bank team and a revised draft was
                                      consulted with key stakeholders in May 2013.

                                      Due to the time lag in project preparation, the project scope and activities are being reassessed,
                                      and in all likelihood the project scope is going to be reduced. While the content of the ESIA will
                                      remain the same, it is to revised by MOE, with updated implementation schedule and costing and



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             will be re-disclosed. The translated executive summary will also be revised accordingly. The MOE
                             will prepare site-specific plans, based on the detailed guidelines in the ESIA, for the management
                             of PCBs in the power stations. If the project scope includes site remediation, detailed site-specific
Public Disclosure Copy




                             ESMPs will need to be developed and disclosed, after consultation. As part of project appraisal,
                             the Bank team would ensure that MOE and EDL have capacity to implement and monitor the
                             ESMPs.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:       Name: Alaa Ahmed Sarhan

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                           Date: 03-Feb-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (SM)                         Date: 05-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
