                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC5954

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Sri Lanka                        Project ID:      P132698
                            Project Name:      Skills Development Project (P132698)
                            Task Team          Halil Dundar
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          20-Feb-2014                      Estimated        29-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASED                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Vocational training (70%), Tertiary education (30%)
                            Theme(s):          Education for the knowledge economy (70%), Improving labor markets (20%),
                                               Social safety nets (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    650.00                     Total Bank Financing:        100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          434.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 100.00
                              Asian Development Bank                                                      100.00
                              GERMANY German Technical Assistance Corporation
                                                                                                            16.00
                              (GTZ)
                              Total                                                                        650.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project’s development objective is to improve quality and relevance of, and increased access to
                           quality skills training provision.
                         C. Project Description
                         Program Scope and Description. A comprehensive Sri Lanka skills development plan is being
                         finalized by the Ministry of Finance and Planning (MOFP). The plan identifies key challenges in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         skills development sector, policy directions and key implementation activities by implementing
                         agency. It will serve as the foundation for World Bank support. It stresses the importance of
                         engaging employers to play an active role in managing the sector, of leveling the playing field
                         between the public and private sector in training provision, of enhancing the productivity of the
                         informal sector, and of making a wider and more systematic use of monitoring and evaluation
                         (M&E) to improve the quality and efficacy of the training programs.

                         The proposed Project would support the above government program through two components: (i)
                         Program Support; and (ii) Innovation.

                         Component I - Program Support (tentatively about US$90 million). The comprehensive skills
                         development plan to be implemented by MYASD will serve as the foundation for IDA support. The
                         strategic pillars/themes of the program to be supported would be: (i) strengthening governance and
                         management: (ii) enhancing quality and relevance of skills development programs; and (iii)
                         increasing access to quality skills development program.

                         Pillar 1. Strengthening Sector Governance and Management. Under this pillar, the program would
                         aim to improve the governance and management of the sector, through better sector coordination,
                         key improvements in labor market analysis (supply and demand for skills) and monitoring of the
                         performance of training providers. In M&E, efforts would be geared not only to establishing a
                         functioning and sustainable M&E system, but also to improving the capacity of policy makers to use
                         the system and the information provided for decision-making.

                         Another area of possible support would be changes in funding modalities that would provide
                         incentives for quality improvements and support well-performing institutions. Once piloted and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         evaluated, those new modalities could be implemented on a larger scale with proper adjustments as
                         needed.

                         Pillar 2. Improving Quality and Labor Market Relevance. There has already been progress towards
                         the development of the Sri Lanka National Vocational Qualifications (NVQ) Framework to address
                         industry needs and facilitate accreditation of training institutions. However, the NVQ system has not
                         yet been fully implemented, and there is a continuous need to update the system in response to
                         changes in the economy and industry requirements for a more complex set of skills. The program
                         would thus support the simplification, periodic update and development of the NVQ system as well
                         as the establishment of effective pathways between the NVQ and the Sri Lanka Qualifications
                         Framework (SLQF) developed by the Ministry of Higher Education to permit students’ mobility
                         across the education and training system, and open more career options.

                         The program would also support: (i) appropriate changes in teacher/instructor recruitment criteria
                         that would bring more flexibility in the choice of skill-mix of instructors (professional and practical
                         experience vs. academic qualification) and improve the quality of the training imparted; and (ii) the
                         establishment of effective mechanisms to involve employers more directly and encourage their active
                         participation in management of institutions. Particular attention would be given to those sectors that
                         are likely to expand, are export-oriented and will be the engines of growth over the next decade.
                         Pillar 3. Expanding Access to Quality Skills Development Programs. Lack of awareness about
                         available training opportunities and their potential benefits, stigma attached to certain occupations,
                         and the limited supply of training courses are constraints to the expansion of the training sector. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         program would propose to address these issues through: (i) developing and disseminating
                         information to provide career guidance; (ii) funding mechanisms to foster increased provision of
                         training by private and public providers conditional on meeting certain strategic criteria (such as
                         adequate monitoring, high employability rate, participation of employers in management); (iii)
                         removing barriers to training for informal workers and disadvantaged groups; and (iv) expansion of
                         market-driven middle-level technician training programs through the establishment of university
                         colleges. Under this pillar, effort s will also be made to review and revise curricula to ensure the
                         provision of market relevant skills, including soft-skills.

                         Component II – Innovation (tentatively US$10 million). This component would cover specific
                         technical assistance and training needs for program implementation and monitoring and evaluation
                         (including third party validation, surveys, and impact evaluations. Financing could also be provided
                         for new initiatives on a pilot basis (e.g., a competitive grant mechanism to finance public and private
                         training institutions in selected priority sectors), the provision of specialized training carried out by
                         public training institutions, and technical assistance to foster dialogue between public and private
                         sectors. The design of this component and the estimated budget will be finalized during pre-appraisal
                         after needs are identified.

                         Project Financing. The proposed Project would be financed through a US$100 million Specific
                         Investment Credit (SIC) and would have two components: Program Support (tentatively US$90
                         million) and Innovation (tentatively US$10 million) The Program Support component would use a
                         Results Based Financing (RBF) modality to support the implementation of the Government’s skills
                         development plan over a period of five years. Disbursements would be made against selected
                         (eligible) key budget line items of the MYASD’s annual budgets referred to as Eligible Expenditure
                         Programs (EEPs), up to a capped absolute amount. Disbursements would be conditional on pre-
                         specified results, as measured by Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs). Under the Innovation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component, IDA funds will be based on regularly updated procurement and training plans, which
                         would be reviewed by the World Bank.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in all 9 provinces of Sri Lanka.

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         A comprehensive policy and regulatory framework for the conservation of natural resources and
                         environmental management in in existence Sri Lanka. The Central Environmental Authority (CEA)
                         is the key regulatory body that is mandated by the National Environmental Act (NEA) to implement
                         all regulatory provisions outlined in its statutes. All development projects, that fall in to a set of
                         prescribed categories are required to conduct a comprehensive environmental screening and
                         mitigation planning process (EIA or IEE). These processes are largely consistent with the Bank’s
                         safeguard policy on Environmental Assessment. With over three decades of experience the CEA
                         demonstrates the technical expertise in evaluating environmental impacts of development projects.
                         However even with an enabling legal environment and abled CEA, field level enforcement of legal
                         instruments and subsequent monitoring of environmental management activities has been very low.

                         The implementing agency of the project will be the MYASD, through its various institutions/
                           departments such as TVEC, VTA, DTET, UNIVOTEC, NIFNE (Open University), NYSC and
                           NAITA. The main implementing agency, MYSAD and other counterpart implementing agencies
                           have no previous experience working on a Bank funded project, thus will not have experience of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementing of Bank Policies. However, MYASD has extensive experience in working with other
                           donors such as ADB, ILO, GTZ, etc. are not entirely new to safeguards. During preparation a
                           detailed evaluation of the implementing agencies capacity for the implementation of safeguard
                           policies will be conducted and instruments for capacity building will be put in place via the
                           Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared prior to appraisal, based on the
                           findings. The capacity building instruments are envisioned to be included as a part of the Technical
                           Assistance being provided via the project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Mohamed Ghani Razaak (SASDS)
                           Mokshana Nerandika Wijeyeratne (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project will not directly finance any major
                           BP 4.01                                             construction, rehabilitation, renovation or any
                                                                               other physical intervention that will pose major
                                                                               irreversible negative impacts to the environment
                                                                               and there are non-procurable items to be
                                                                               financed under the project. Under the GOSLs
                                                                               Skills Development Plan, which will be
                                                                               financed in parallel by the Asian Development
                                                                               Bank (ADB) and other doner agencies,
                                                                               construction of new skills development facilities
                                                                               and the renovation of existing buildings may be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               identified under the funding envelope. ADB has
                                                                               prepared a fully fledged Environmental and
                                                                               Social Management Framework (ESMF) which
                                                                               will be applicable to the GOSLs program and is
                                                                               acceptable to bank requirements as well.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No              It is expected that construction will be carried
                                                                               out in land owned by the MYASD and not in
                                                                               areas where there will be potential threats to
                                                                               significant natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              No activities in forests or in close proximity to
                                                                               forest areas are expected.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No              Not Applicable as no project interventions are
                                                                               made where significant use of pesticides and
                                                                               other such substances are utilized.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No              Project interventions are not envisioned to be
                           BP 4.11                                             conducted in areas close to sites of cultural
                                                                               importance. Renovation, rehabilitation and
                                                                               improvements will be made to buildings built
                                                                                                                                 over the last few decades and not deemed
                                                                                                                                 socially or culturally important.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            The Project will cover the entire country and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 will not include interventions targeted at
                                                                                                                                 specific communities, or social groups.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            It is expected that construction of all the skill
                                 4.12                                                                                            development facilities will be confined to
                                                                                                                                 existing premises and not involve private land
                                                                                                                                 acquisitions.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            Not applicable as the project does not involve
                                                                                                                                 new construction/rehabilitation of any Dams
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             Not Applicable
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             Not Applicable
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Due to the nature of the project interventions there will be no need for an environmental
                                      assessment.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Halil Dundar
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                                                                                             Date: 19-Feb-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Amit Dar (SM)                                                                                                        Date: 19-Feb-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
