                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC12255

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Feb-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Mar-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Sudan                           Project ID:      P152322
                            Project Name:      Sudan - FCPF REDD Readiness (P152322)
                            Task Team          Asferachew Abate Abebe
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          28-Sep-2018
                            Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GENDR

                            Sector(s):        Forestry (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          3.80                Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    0.00
                              Carbon Fund                                                                 0.00
                              Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                    3.80
                              Total                                                                       3.80
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen Sudan’s capacity to design a socially and
                           environmentally sound national Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation Plus
                           (REDD+) strategy.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Sudan Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP) presents all activities that the Government of
                         Sudan envisages to achieve REDD+ readiness. The total estimated funding required to achieve this
                         readiness over the next three years is US$7.82 million, of which US$3.80 million will be funded by
                         the FCPF. US$0.32 million will be provided by the Government of Sudan. The Government has
Public Disclosure Copy




                         requested support from the UN-REDD Program and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
                         for the remaining balance of approximately US$4.0 million.

                         The FCPF grant will fund a first phase of readiness preparation activities and it will be organized
                         along four components that correspond with the components and sub-components of the Sudan R-PP.

                         Component 1: Support for REDD+ readiness management and institutional arrangements (US
                         $1,250,000). This component will fund six sub-components as follows:

                         Sub-component 1.1: Set up and operation of the National REDD+ Secretariat (US$470,000). This
                         sub-component will fund the day-to-day operations of the National REDD+ Management Unit
                         (REDD+ Unit) and establish the human and technical capacity to support REDD+ readiness
                         preparation activities. The REDD+Unit is housed in the Forest National Corporation and will be
                         responsible for providing secretariat and logistic support for readiness preparation activities.
                         Sub-component 1.2: Set up and operation of the National REDD+ Steering Committee, Technical
                         Advisory Committee and REDD+ Technical Working Groups ($US130,000). This sub-component
                         will fund the establishment of National REDD+ Steering Committee (NRSC), Technical Advisory
                         Committee (TAC), and ad hoc REDD+ Technical Working Groups (RTWGs) as described in the R-
                         PP. These are the structures responsible for leading the execution and strategic planning of the
                         REDD+ process and for providing technical inputs and guidance.
                         Sub-component 1.3: Strengthen sub-national REDD+ institutional structures ($US300,000). This
                         sub-component will support decentralized implementation arrangements at the state and locality
                         levels, including operational support for regional technical specialist. Furthermore, this sub-
                         component will support the strengthening of existing multi-sectoral land use platforms at the state
                         level to facilitate cross-sectoral coordination. The Ministry of Agriculture at State levels are cross-
                         sectoral and would house the platform. As appropriate, additional sectors engaged in land use would
Public Disclosure Copy




                         be added to ensure representation during the implementation of readiness activities. The support will
                         target high-forested area, which include the central and eastern states, as well as the Blue Nile,
                         Kordofan and Darfur regions as feasible.
                         Sub-component 1.4: Capacity building for REDD+ institutional arrangements ($US100,000). This
                         component will enhance capacity and knowledge on REDD+ by funding workshops, training
                         activities and technical assistance for the REDD Unit, FNC, TAC, and local level REDD+ Focal
                         Points and technical specialists to build sufficient technical, policy, communication capacity.
                         Sub-component 1.5: Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism for REDD+ (US$200,000). This
                         sub-component will fund the assessment, strengthening and/or establishment, as appropriate, of a
                         feedback and grievance redress mechanism/s (FGRM) to handle feedback and address complaints
                         during the readiness phase and beyond to implementation of future REDD+ emission reductions
                         programs.
                         Subcomponent 1.6: Program monitoring and evaluation (US$50,000). This sub-component will
                         support monitoring activities such as implementation of the monitoring and evaluation framework for
                         REDD+, independent assessment of readiness at mid-term, final program review, and preparation of
                         annual progress reports.

                         Component 2: Support for national REDD+ Strategy (including Strategic Environmental and Social
                         Assessment) ($US850,000)
                         Sub-component 2.1: In-depth analysis of drivers of deforestation and forest degr adation, including
                         studies on policies, wood-based energy, land tenure and forest governance ($US300,000). This sub-
                         component will fund:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         a) Analytical studies to deepen the analysis of the drivers of deforestation and degradation, including
                         review of legal, policy and political economy considerations discussed in the R-PP, as well as review
                         of agriculture, forestry and other land uses.
                         b) Assessment of forest governance and land tenure, including land use and tenure arrangements.
                         This study will carry out forest governance and land tenure analysis, including traditional customary
                         land ownership and usage. It will provide an overview of the factors influencing decision-making
                         regarding forest and land use. It will also establish a baseline against which forest governance can be
                         assessed and monitored during REDD+ implementation.
                         c) On the basis of the outcomes of the studies undertaken in sub-component 2.1 and 2.2, the Grant
                         will support the review of forestry, rangeland, livestock and water policies (elaborated further in the
                         R-PP), as required. This will include meetings and workshops to discuss potential policy reform,
                         legislative amendments as well as national and state-level land use planning and zoning, as required.


                         Sub-component 2.2: In-depth analysis of strategic options to address deforestation and forest
                         degradation ($US200,000). This sub-component will fund:
                         a)        Analytical work on these options to ensure that they reflect new knowledge on the drivers of
                         deforestation and forest degradation study to be conducted in sub-component 2.1.
                         b) The strategy options identified during readiness will be screened and prioritized based on the
                         economic, environmental and social costs and benefits. Important co-benefits in Sudan include
                         biodiversity conservation, energy efficiency, reforestation and environmental services protection, as
                         well as water, food security and improvement in livelihoods. This study will analyze the costs and
                         benefits of different REDD+ Strategy options. It will also include an ecosystem valuation of forests
                         to get a better understanding of their economic importance.

                         Sub-component 2.3: Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) and development of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) (US$250,000). This component will
                         support the integration of social and environmental concerns into the REDD+ strategy development
                         process and ensure that negative impacts are avoided or minimized.

                         Sub-component 2.4: Study on options for benefit-sharing related to REDD+ ($US50,000). This
                         component will fund an options analysis and present recommendations for the development of
                         efficient, effective and equitable arrangements for sharing benefits related to the implementation of
                         REDD+.

                         Component 3: Support for stakeholder engagement ($US400,000). This component provides a
                         framework for engagement of relevant stakeholders during readiness preparation as well as
                         enhancing capacities at national, state and locality levels. Specifically this component will fund
                         consultations on key issues addressed under the FCPF, including (a) the drivers of deforestation and
                         degradation; (b) the identification of national REDD+ strategy options; (c) land and forest law,
                         policy and governance; (d) benefit sharing; (e) SESA; and (f) MRV. The consultations will be
                         focused on the eastern and central regions, and lessons learned will be used for the other states.
                         Potential activities for consultation and their cost estimates to build capacity were discussed with
                         stakeholders in detail.

                         Sub-component 3.1: Consultation and participation for activities to be implemented under the FCPF
                         grant ($US300,000). The sub-component activities will fund:
                         a) The development of a detailed and robust consultation and participation plan to be implemented
                         during readiness. This plan would build on Sudan’s existing Communications Policy and formal
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Public Participation Policy, FCPF guidelines for effective stakeholder engagement and UNFCCC
                         decisions on full and effective participation. Furthermore as a signatory to ILO169 as well as the
                         United Nation Declaration of the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP), Sudan has adopted free
                         prior and informed consent (FPIC) as the guiding principle for all consultations and participatory
                         process.
                         b) The deepening of the stakeholder mapping analysis that began during the R-PP formulation phase.
                         It will identify the relevant stakeholders engaged in land use as those most likely to gain or lose from
                         REDD+. Furthermore, it will fund targeted stakeholder outreach at national, state and locality levels
                         on activities implemented by the FCPF grant.
                         c)        The Grant will also fund development of suitable communication materials and tools. The
                         Federal level Extension and Mass Media unit within FNC will play a lead role in assisting with the
                         development of the C&P Plan, as well as coordinating and managing information dissemination and
                         collecting stakeholder feedback in a centralized manner. Capacity to perform this function at
                         decentralized levels will be assessed, and strengthened as required.

                         Sub-component 3.2: Setting up and strengthening of civil society platforms ($US100,000). This sub-
                         component will support the strengthening of existing or establishment of new, where appropriate,
                         community based-organizations (CBO)/ non-governmental organizations (NGO)/association
                         platforms at the national level and in each of the states in order to facilitate the consultation and
                         stakeholder engagement process for REDD+ readiness., seed collectors), women, research centers
                         and universities, as appropriate to the national or state context.

                         Component 4: Support for Monitoring, Reporting and Verification ($US1,300,000). This component
                         will have 3 sub-components and supports the following key activities:
                         a)       An initial set of activities, helping Sudan to build the foundation needed for future: i)
                         operationalization of the Sudan Forest Monitoring System, ii) calculation of a national reference
Public Disclosure Copy




                         emission level (REL)/reference level (RL), and iii) generation of robust forest data feeding into the
                         National Greenhouse Gas Inventory and National Communications/Biennial Updates to the United
                         Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) (lead by HCENR MoEFPD).
                         b) Data collection and measurement activities underpinning the Sudan Forest Monitoring System. In
                         line with relevant UNFCCC decisions and IPCC guidelines, Sudan will use a combination of remote
                         sensing and ground based forest carbon inventory approaches for estimating forest-related GHG
                         emissions by sources and removals by sinks, forest carbon stocks and forest area changes.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         REDD+ readiness activities are country wide. However, the activities are limited to analytical
                         studies, capacity building, and consultation process at national and state levels. No physical activities
                         will be implemented on the ground.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Sudan has environmental policies, laws and regulations. Furthermore there are existing legal and
                         regulatory frameworks relating to forest and other sectors that provide good basis for the governance
                         in relation to REDD+. However, the Borrower’s institutional capacity, for implementing national
                         polices and laws as well as the World Bank environmental and social safeguards, is not strong. Also,
                         effective coordination between relevant institutions across sectors and institutional capacity to
                           implement safeguards is weak. In order to address the capacity limitation, a Safeguards Working
                           Group will be established that will work closely with the FNC REDD+ Management Unit, the TAC
                           and the SESA Consultants to mainstream social and environmental issues in the various activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           that will be funded under REDD+ readiness and lead the SESA preparation process. Furthermore, the
                           World Bank Team will work closely with the Safeguard Working Group and the environmental and
                           social specialists in the REDD+ Management Unit.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Haddy Jatou Sey (GCCGT)
                           Tamene Tiruneh (GSPDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment       Yes           The Safeguard Policy for Environment Assessment is
                           OP/BP 4.01                                   triggered in the context of future support for REDD
                                                                        + activities which may involve civil works and
                                                                        capital investment. An Environmental and Social
                                                                        Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared to
                                                                        manage potential E&S impacts of these activities at
                                                                        local level. The Strategic Environmental and Social
                                                                        Assessment (SESA) to be prepared by the project
                                                                        will serve as a key document providing guidance on
                                                                        addressing E&S issues in the REDD+ Strategy, and
                                                                        the preparation of the ESMF. The SESA will also
                                                                        influence the final national REDD+ strategy, by
                                                                        ensuring that social and environmental risks are
                                                                        factored in the preparation of the strategy.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes           The application of this policy seeks to ensure that all
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        options proposed in the National REDD+ Strategy
                                                                        take into account the conservation of biodiversity, as
                                                                        well as the numerous environmental services and
                                                                        products that natural habitats provide to human
                                                                        society. Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to
                                                                        have significant positive impacts on natural habitats,
                                                                        as the country puts in place an effective strategy to
                                                                        reduce loss of natural forests. The SESA will address
                                                                        issues related to natural habitats and potential
                                                                        impacts of the National REDD+ Strategy, which will
                                                                        later be included in the ESMF.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36             Yes           Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have
                                                                        significant positive impacts on forest, in that the
                                                                        main goal of the program is to reduce deforestation
                                                                        and forest degradation, while contributing to the
                                                                        well-being of forest-dependent communities.
                                                                        Potential impact of the National REDD+ Strategy on
                                                                        natural forests will be assessed through the SESA
                                                                        and included in the ESMF. The SESA and associated
                                                              ESMF will reflect the requirements of the Bank’s
                                                              Operational Policy regarding forest management, in
                                                              particular as these relate to the establishment of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              plantations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        Yes   This policy is triggered in the context of agricultural
                                                              intensification and reforestation activities which
                                                              could be part of future REDD+ activities. The ESMF
                                                              will address critical issues related to pest
                                                              management, as necessary, and the strategic issues
                                                              related to pest management will be reflected in the
                                                              SESA. Furthermore, the project will encourage
                                                              Integrated Pest Management in future REDD+
                                                              activities.
                         Physical Cultural Resources    Yes   REDD+ activities are likely to be implemented in
                         OP/BP 4.11                           areas containing sites deemed physical cultural
                                                              resources by rural communities living there (e.g.
                                                              holy/secret sites such as sacred groves, sacred
                                                              forests, etc.). Though it is not anticipated that the
                                                              project will have negative impacts on any such sites,
                                                              the SESA will address issues related to physical
                                                              cultural resources and potential impacts of the
                                                              National REDD+ Strategy, which will later be
                                                              included in the ESMF and a specific dedicated
                                                              framework.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       Yes   This policy is triggered because there may be
                         4.10                                 indigenous people in the areas where future REDD+
                                                              activities will be implemented. There will be a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              process of free, prior, and informed consultation with
                                                              the affected Indigenous Peoples’ particularly during
                                                              sub-project preparation. Moreover, a social
                                                              assessment will be conducted by the client, consulted
                                                              upon and disclosed.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   REDD+ activities will trigger Involuntary
                         BP 4.12                              Resettlement in situations involving involuntary
                                                              restrictions of access to legally designated parks,
                                                              protected areas, or forest management / reforestation
                                                              areas. The policy aims to avoid involuntary
                                                              resettlement to the extent feasible, or to minimize
                                                              and mitigate its adverse social and economic impacts
                                                              in cases where resettlement or other involuntary
                                                              restrictions cannot be avoided. Through the SESA
                                                              process, any issues related to land acquisition or
                                                              involuntary resettlement will be identified, and a
                                                              Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared. In
                                                              terms of restriction to natural resources, a Process
                                                              Framework will be prepared as well.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         This policy is not triggered because Dams will not be
                                                                                                                        financed under the project which only supports
                                                                                                                        analytical work, institutional strengthening and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        capacity building that are critical for Sudan’s
                                                                                                                        progress towards Readiness.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      Not applicable
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      This policy is not triggered because the project will
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                not be implemented in any disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 23-Feb-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      It is envisaged that the SESA would be launched six months after a Grant Agreement is signed. As
                                      described above, the Project will not finance activities to make Sudan ready for potential REDD+
                                      initiatives. It will not have any investment activities on the groundand is thus not expected to have
                                      any direct environmental and social impacts. However, it is considered that the Project might
                                      have indirect impacts in the sense that the findings from analytical work carried out under the
                                      Project may influence the design of the national REDD+ Strategy. A draft Terms of Reference of
                                      the SESA have been prepared by the Forest National Coordination, REDD+ focal institution.

                                      The SESA allows: (i) social and environmental considerations to be integrated into the REDD+
                                      Readiness process, in particular the REDD+ strategy; (ii) stakeholder participation in identifying
                                      and prioritizing key issues, assessment of policy, institutional and capacity gaps to manage these
                                      priorities and recommendations, and disclosure of findings in the REDD Country’s progress
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      reports on Readiness preparation; (iii) an ESMF to be put in place to manage environmental and
                                      social risks and to mitigate potential adverse impacts; and (iv) development of a Resettlement
                                      Policy Framework or Process Framework (if required) to identify specific provisions to address
                                      potential displacement or restriction to and use of natural resources.

                                      It is expected that the SESA process will pay particular attention to reviewing land tenure and
                                      customary land ownership and usage as it relates to conflict and its management and resolution.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Asferachew Abate Abebe
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name:                                                                                                                         Date:
                                 Practice Manager/    Name:                                                                                                                        Date:
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
