                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA6561
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bolivia                            Project ID:    P127837
                            Project Name:      Access and Renewable Energy Project (P127837)
                            Task Team          Lucia Spinelli
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          24-Mar-2014                        Estimated   27-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSEG                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other Renewable Energy (40%), General energy sector (60%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         58.40                 Total Bank Financing:   50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          5.15
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                50.00
                              LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                                         3.25
                              Total                                                                                      58.40
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project development objective is to expand access to electricity in unserved areas of
                           Bolivia under a model of electricity access expansion that supports the deployment of the national
                           decentralized framework.
                            3. Project Description

                                                                       Page 1 of 12
                         The Access and Renewable Energy Project aims to provide access to modern electricity services in
                         rural areas throughout Bolivia, focusing on those with the greatest needs, high rates of poverty and
                         low rates of electrification. Even though the Project would be national on its scope, it would focus on
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the Gobernaciones of Potosí and Chuquisaca, which best fit these criteria and are also capable of
                         assuming debt for the investments in their jurisdictions. Furthermore, the Project would also support
                         capacity building under the new decentralized framework. The Project would be implemented by the
                         PEVD in close coordination with Gobernaciones, municipalities and distribution companies.

                         Project Components

                         The proposed project comprises the following three components, scheduled to be completed over a
                         7-year period. Project implementation would start on December 1st, 2014 and end by December 1st,
                         2021. It is also expected the Project will become effective by no later than November 30, 2014 and
                         close on December 1st, 2020.

                         Component 1: Electricity services for rural areas (US$51.70 million total, of which US$43.30 million
                         is IDA). This component would support investments to provide electricity services to households and
                         social institutions (mainly schools) in rural areas and villages. It would be developed through grid
                         extensions or the installation of photovoltaic systems. It includes the following sub-components:

                         Sub-component 1.1 – Grid extension (US$38.30 million, of which US$30.00 million IDA). This
                         subcomponent aims to provide electric power to the rural population through the extension of
                         electricity grids. It would include two main activities: i) extension of low voltage distribution lines
                         and grid densification; and ii) extension of medium voltage transmission and distribution lines and
                         grid densification. Under this sub-component, the credit would also partially finance household
                         connections.

                         Sub-component 1.2 – Individual Photovoltaic Systems (US$12.70 million of which US$12.67 IDA).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This subcomponent will focus on financing the installation of photovoltaic systems in those areas
                         that are not envisioned to be connected to the grid in the next 5 years. The Project will install
                         individual photovoltaic systems in each household . The subcomponent will target households in
                         communities located at least 5 kilometers away from medium voltage distribution lines, accessible at
                         least by motorcycle, or in areas with low population density. The installed capacity of the
                         photovoltaic systems should be around 50 Wp. Under this subcomponent, the Project would also
                         support distribution companies that will be in charge of the operation, maintenance and replacement
                         of PV systems.

                         Sub-component 1.3 – Solar Photovoltaic Systems in Public Institutions (US$0.70 million, of which
                         US$0.60 IDA). This subcomponent aims to support the provision of electricity in schools or other
                         public institutions in rural and impoverished areas. The subcomponent will target schools that have
                         not been benefitted by electrification projects in the selected areas during the 5 previous years. The
                         capacity of PV systems to be installed in each institution would vary according to specific needs.

                         Component 2: Support to Access, Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Strategies (US$2.00
                         million IDA). This component will support the development of activities to design, implement and
                         strengthen various energy strategies enacted by the Plurinational State of Bolivia. In particular, it
                         will reinforce the existing universal access to modern energy services goals, promote the
                         development of pilot projects based on the use of innovative technologies, and advance renewable


                                                                       Page 2 of 12
                         energy and energy efficiency within the country. The component will finance the development and
                         implementation of a comprehensive operational communication plan to support awareness creation
                         and feedback on the main activities that the Project will be supporting.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Componen t 3: Project Management (US$4.70 million IDA). Under this component, the MHE would
                         manage the overall Project. It will finance staff as well as general supervision tasks, needed
                         infrastructure and equipment, O&M, Project audits and monitoring and evaluation activities. All
                         project implementation tasks performed by the PIU will be funded through this component.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in various departments in the country.

                         •        Solar photovoltaic systems would be installed to households, schools, health care and
                         community centers in rural areas of Bolivia that do not have access to electricity. Eligibility criteria
                         for solar PV system would include: (i) provincial governments (gobernaciones) or municipalities
                         with high poverty and indigenous people rates; (ii) population density equal or above 5 users per
                         kilometer; (iii) communities with no rural electrification plans in the next 5 years; and (iv) where the
                         provision of electricity service to smaller and more dispersed population through grid extension or
                         small hydro is increasingly costly.

                         •      Eligibility criteria for network densification would include: (i) provincial governments
                         (Gobernaciones) or municipalities with high poverty rates; (ii) average connection density by
                         kilometer of constructed network equal or above 5 users; and (iii) potential consumers located
                         beyond 100 meters from the existing low-voltage transmission lines, as stipulated by the Electricity
                         Law.

                         The project would especially target the poorest communities of Bolivia located in the municipalities
                         of the Potosí and Chuquisaca Departments. In Chuquisaca, 95% of the inhabitants of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         municipalities are Quechua speakers. Statistics from 2005 also show that 64% of the population in
                         Chuquisaca is indigenous, while this number reaches 82% in Potosí.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Noreen Beg (LCSEN)
                         Adam John Behrendt (LCSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             Although the project will have a positive impact
                          BP 4.01                                             on the environment overall, by improving the
                                                                              supply of energy in rural areas of Bolivia, thereby
                                                                              reducing the use of fossil fuels for domestic
                                                                              consumption, OP/BP 4.01 is triggered because the
                                                                              physical interventions resulting from the
                                                                              implementation of investments under Component
                                                                              1 (Electricity Services for Rural Areas) could
                                                                              have low to moderate negative impacts on the
                                                                              environment. The Project is classified as Category
                                                                              B- a project with environmental impacts that are



                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                                 easily identified and mitigated-requiring a partial
                                 environmental assessment. Civil works resulting
                                 from the implementation of investments under
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Component 1 (Electricity Services for Rural
                                 Areas) will lead to relatively minor air and water
                                 pollution during the construction phases and, once
                                 the works are completed, limited loss of non-
                                 critical animal and plant habitats. These impacts
                                 will be assessed through a screening process and
                                 appropriate mitigation measures will be proposed.
                                 Battery disposal plans, including consumer
                                 training and monitoring of disposal, will be
                                 incorporated into the solar PV investment
                                 component.

                                 Expected potential negative environmental
                                 impacts will be primarily during the construction
                                 phase of civil works. Cumulative environmental
                                 impacts are not expected to be significant, as the
                                 project is nationwide but relatively limited in
                                 scope (most activities would be developed in two
                                 provinces – Chuquisaca and Potosí – but a few
                                 activities would remain open to other regions).
                                 The impacts and relevant mitigation measures are
                                 described in the project’s Environmental
                                 Management Framework (EMF).

                                 The project is expected to result in positive social
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 outcomes, through its support to improve the
                                 quality of life for rural populations in Bolivia as
                                 the provision of electricity will contribute to
                                 poverty alleviation by improving the education,
                                 health and public security and by providing
                                 opportunities for economic development.

                                 The Borrower has carried out public consultations
                                 on the draft EMF with local and regional
                                 government representatives, representatives of
                                 stakeholders in local communities, and local
                                 NGOs. The EMF will document the results of the
                                 consultations and will take into account and
                                 address stakeholder concerns.

                                 Once the EMF is prepared, it will be added to the
                                 Project Implementation Manual as an annex. As
                                 this is a demand driven operation, the Manual will
                                 focus on monitoring and implementation of



                         Page 4 of 12
                                                                         Environmental Management Plans (EMPs). The
                                                                         Manual will also incorporate eligibility criteria
                                                                         for subprojects (both positive and negative, this
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         is, that determine the possibility to move forward
                                                                         or not with the development of specific
                                                                         subprojects) and further details and guidelines for
                                                                         the preparation of specific EMPs, as specific sites
                                                                         might not be known at the time of appraisal.

                                                                         The EMPs will cover both direct and indirect
                                                                         impact of project implementation.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           This policy is triggered because sub-projects
                                                                         (both the low voltage distribution lines and the
                                                                         solar installations) may be located in or close to
                                                                         natural habitats. While the project will not
                                                                         support or lead to the conversion of natural
                                                                         habitats, and the EMF will explicitly forbid any
                                                                         project activities inducing significant conversion
                                                                         or degradation of critical natural habitats, this
                                                                         policy is triggered to ensure that minor
                                                                         construction works have EMPs that will protect
                                                                         biodiversity and water resources. The most
                                                                         significant impacts will result from the
                                                                         construction of low-voltage distribution lines and
                                                                         construction of related infrastructure, and
                                                                         appropriate mitigation measures will be followed
                                                                         to limit the impact on local fauna, avi-fauna and
                                                                         to protect indigenous plant and tree species.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            Although there will be a need for replacement of
                                                                         trees that will be removed along the Right of
                                                                         Way, this safeguard policy is not triggered
                                                                         because the construction of low voltage
                                                                         distribution lines will not lead to the significant
                                                                         degradation and conversion of critical forest areas
                                                                         and forest ecosystems., nor will they affect the
                                                                         management or utilization of forest resources.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            This safeguard policy is not triggered because the
                                                                         project will not support activities that require the
                                                                         use or procurement of pesticides. Any land
                                                                         clearing for placement of distribution poles will
                                                                         be undertaken manually.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           This safeguard policy is triggered because civil
                         BP 4.11                                         works (construction of low voltage distribution
                                                                         lines and installation of poles for domestic PV
                                                                         systems) may affect resources of physical,
                                                                         cultural, and/or historical importance. Given



                                                                 Page 5 of 12
                                                                       Bolivia’s rich cultural background and the
                                                                       potential for the works to require movement of
                                                                       earth or excavations, chance finds procedures will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       be inserted into construction contracts and have
                                                                       been included in the EMF. The local and national
                                                                       Cultural Patrimony, Archaeology Departments,
                                                                       and/or Museums authorities will be notified when
                                                                       chance finds are made.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10   Yes           This safeguard policy is triggered given that the
                                                                       Project Area is mostly inhabited by indigenous
                                                                       peoples of Quechua, Aymara and Guarani groups
                                                                       (some areas up to 95% indigenous, per 2001
                                                                       census figures-- as disaggregated data is not yet
                                                                       available from the 2012 census). Given the large
                                                                       number of sub-projects across various
                                                                       municipalities, which have yet to be definitively
                                                                       identified, an Indigenous Peoples Planning
                                                                       Framework was prepared for the proposed project
                                                                       The IPPF provides guidance around preparing
                                                                       strategies and activities for engaging and
                                                                       consulting with IP groups and their
                                                                       representatives and will be reflected in specific
                                                                       protocol in the operations manual. Given that the
                                                                       primary project beneficiaries are Indigenous
                                                                       Peoples, concise Indigenous People Plans (IPPs)
                                                                       will suffice. IPPs will be prepared for each
                                                                       municipality, detailing demographic data and
                                                                       capacity requirements, taking into consideration
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       the cultural and development needs of the
                                                                       communities in each municipality. The IPPF will
                                                                       serve as the overarching guiding document,
                                                                       detailing consultation procedures, monitoring
                                                                       procedures, grievance redress mechanisms for 2
                                                                       main indigenous populations identified in the
                                                                       social assessment and IPPF. These measures will
                                                                       be primarily implemented by sub-contractors and
                                                                       overseen by the social staff of the IDTR II
                                                                       project. The client has also carried out a social
                                                                       assessment which was a main input to the IPPF
                                                                       and has carried out consultations on the results
                                                                       and key messages of the social analysis and the
                                                                       IPPF. These consultations included indigenous
                                                                       authorities and representatives of the rural
                                                                       organizations, as well as municipal government
                                                                       representatives and local citizens. A final
                                                                       consultation was held on March 13 in Potosi,
                                                                       following up on earlier consultations in



                                                               Page 6 of 12
                                                                           Chuquisaca.

                                                                           The Bank team has supported the client with
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           technical assistance to carry out the consultations,
                                                                           including providing examples and general
                                                                           guidelines on how these could be conducted.

                                                                           Several additional documents were also prepared
                                                                           to support the IPPF and overall social strategy
                                                                           including a summary of best practices from the
                                                                           previous project; and a communications strategy
                                                                           that takes into account indigenous peoples, as
                                                                           well as a series of practical forms and checklists
                                                                           to be integrated into the Operational Manual.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           Subprojects financed by the Project are likely to
                            4.12                                           require minor land easement and/or acquisition,
                                                                           and or temporary land use restrictions due to
                                                                           access roads or other activities part of the
                                                                           installation processes. The Borrower has prepared
                                                                           a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that
                                                                           outlines how potential activities could affect local
                                                                           communities, farmers, indigenous peoples,
                                                                           pastoralists and others and spells out steps to be
                                                                           taken to arrange land acquisitions and
                                                                           compensation, as well as the institutional roles
                                                                           and responsibilities for the different actors
                                                                           involved. Simple forms have been developed to
                                                                           ensure that analysis of alternatives and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           appropriate compensation and support to affected
                                                                           persons and communities and are incorporated
                                                                           into the subproject design. All together these will
                                                                           be used to compile the Resettlement Plan which
                                                                           will cover the municipalities involved. The RPF
                                                                           has been reviewed by the Bank team and has been
                                                                           disclosed during the 2nd week of March 2014.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No            This safeguard policy is not triggered because the
                                                                           project will not support the construction or
                                                                           rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
                                                                           investments which rely on existing dams.
                            Projects on International        No            This safeguard policy is not triggered because the
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                           project will not support activities which affect
                                                                           international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No            This safeguard policy is not triggered because the
                            7.60                                           project will not support activities in disputed
                                                                           areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management


                                                                   Page 7 of 12
                         A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           The Project will have a largely positive impact on the environment, by improving the supply of
                           electricity, initially in the heavily under-served the rural areas of Potosi and Chuquisaca
                           (percentage of homes without electricity is 43.44% and 30.69% respectively), thereby reducing the
                           use of fossil fuels for domestic consumption. It is also expected to result in positive social
                           outcomes, enhancing welfare for isolated populations in Bolivia’s provinces through the provision
                           of a secure and reliable source of electricity for households and institutions; the opportunity to
                           undertake commercially productive activities; and the secure and timely provision of social
                           services (e.g., security of electricity supply for refrigeration of vaccines).

                          Sub-Component 1.3 consists of the installation of Solar Photovoltaic Systems in Public
                          Institutions. This component plans to support provision of electricity to around 1,700 un-served
                          schools and other public institutions (which can include health centers) in rural areas. These
                          planned household electricity connections and solar PV installations will allow for “greener”
                          expansion of electricity access, by replacing isolated diesel units with expanded grid-based
                          electricity and solar energy. The increase in electricity access is also expected to reduce the use of
                          firewood, and will have important health (through the provision of refrigeration facilities to
                          clinics) and educational benefits (through the provision of electricity to schools and households).

                          Physical interventions resulting from the implementation of investments in rural areas could have
                          low to moderate negative impacts on the environment, depending on their locations. The most
                          significant impacts will result from the construction of low-voltage distribution lines and
                          construction of related infrastructure, and appropriate mitigation measures will be followed to
                          limit the impact on local fauna, avi-fauna and to protect indigenous plant and tree species.
                          Clearing of vegetation and trees will be strictly controlled. Affected areas will be re-vegetated with
Public Disclosure Copy




                          indigenous grasses, shrubs, trees, and flora to limit impact to local flora and fauna.

                          A solar battery disposal plan has been prepared, including consumer training, and there will be
                          periodic monitoring of removal and final safe disposal of solar batteries.

                          Given that some substations may be near residential, commercial, and institutional areas all
                          substations should have adequate fire and blast resistant walls. Capacitor banks, circuit breakers,
                          lightning arrestors, and battery rooms should be adequately protected. Fire safety plans
                          (depending on proximity to residences or public institutions, particularly schools) should be
                          prepared and tested with drills.

                          For social safeguards, no major large scale negative impacts are expected from land use
                          acquisition, livelihood of communities or individuals or indigenous peoples. Indigenous
                          communities and educational facilities will benefit from electricity use, improved communications
                          as a result of cell phone charging abilities, reduced work-load for women and children as a result
                          of pumps, and additional time for studying at night. A gender analysis has been included as part of
                          the preparation, both in the social analysis as well as through the support of a Bank contracted
                          gender and energy expert. This will provide particular focus on benefits to rural, indigenous
                          women from electricity use.




                                                                     Page 8 of 12
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The provision of electrification or solar batteries will lead to a replacement of alkaline batteries
Public Disclosure Copy




                           currently used for lamps and small appliances. A disposal plan has been prepared to ensure that
                           these batteries are adequately disposed of. Electricity use will certainly improve the overall social
                           conditions of the region and contribute to productivity.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Without a program of rural connections to the grid or appropriate off-grid solutions, the
                           Government would not be able to advance its program to bring the benefits of electricity to lower
                           income, rural consumers. Solar PVC will allow access to some of the most distant and isolated
                           communities which would have been left out if only grid extension had been considered.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The location of a majority of sub-projects will not be identified prior to appraisal, and therefore
                           different Environmental and Social instruments have been prepared in response to the triggered
                           safeguards. These include an Environmental Management Framework, Social Analysis, a
                           Resettlement Framework and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) all carried out
                           by the client with support from the Bank A draft of these instruments were consulted through
                           regional consultation process with a variety of stakeholders including indigenous peoples,
                           municipal authorities and private sector. In addition, the EMF was consulted upon at a stakeholder
                           meeting attended by variety of experts in La Paz. Documented evidence of informed and
                           transparent consultations with stakeholders has been included in the relevant documents. These
                           documents were prepared building on lessons learned from the implementation of the framework
                           of social and environmental assessment prepared for the Bolivia Decentralized Infrastructure for
                           Rural Transformation Project (ITDR 1). The various instruments contain guidance on working
                           with indigenous peoples and consultaitons, and on screenin screening criteria for sub-projects.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Sub-project EIAs/EMPs will be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed prior to the
                           commencement of civil works. While the project will not support or lead to the conversion of
                           natural habitats, and the EMF explicitly forbids any project activities inducing significant
                           conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats, EMPs for all civil works will contain
                           guidelines for the protection of biodiversity and water resources. The EMPs will address both
                           direct and indirect project impacts, and the appropriate mitigation measures. The EMF also
                           contains a battery disposal plan which will be implemented by a private sector contractor with
                           experience in battery collection and appropriate disposal.

                           A resettlement framework has been prepared which also provides potential cases of affectations
                           and number of checklists and formats for gathering information necessary to identify and resolve
                           affectations of beneficiaries or non-beneficiaries. These will be incorporated into the operations
                           manual. The IPPF will provide overall guidance to engaging the 2 major indigenous populations in
                           the area to assure consultations and benefits for these groups. Plans will be prepared by the client
                           at municipal levels on how to engage the specific indigenous populations in those areas and
                           checklists and formats have been prepared as part of the IPPF. These will also be incorporated into
                           the operations manual.

                           The Electricity Program for Living with Dignity (PEVD), within the Vice-Ministry of Electricity
                           and Alternative Energy’s Alternative Energy General Directorate, will be the project executing


                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                           agency. It is expected that the PEVD’s project implementing unit (PIU) will include
                           environmental and social specialists. These specialists will be responsible for ensuring compliance
                           with Bank Operational Policies related to environmental and social safeguards, and with
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Government of Bolivia rules and regulations. Prior experience with the Decentralized
                           Infrastructure for Rural Transformation project (ITDR project) exposed the Borrower to the Bank's
                           social and environmental safeguard policies but also evidenced high demand for Project
                           implementation support. The project budget provides funds for capacity building on timely and
                           effective application of social and environmental management and safeguards.

                           The client has prepared all of the relevant assessments and frameworks, which should now be
                           translated into more actionable steps in the operations manual and relevant training and orientation
                           for project implementers. The Bank has also supported the client with technical assistance
                           concerning gender and indigenous women in particular.

                           Consultations were held with a variety of stakeholders including indigenous peoples in both
                           Chuquisaca and Potosi.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The primary stakeholders include rural communities, indigenous peoples, municipalities and
                           departmental governments, private sector service providers, rural producers unions, representatives
                           of women's groups, and school teachers and educational authorities (as some schools will benefit
                           from PVC and electric).

                           The principle of free, prior and informed consultation throughout the project area has been pursued
                           during project preparation and will be continued during implementation. In practice this has
                           meant provision of written and visual materials in form, substance and language appropriate for
                           the audiences. The consultations and information provision about the project have been held at
                           community and municipal and departmental levels, where indigenous leaders, community
Public Disclosure Copy




                           representatives, municipal and departmental authorities, NGOs and others have participated. Final
                           consultations in Potosi to be held week of March 10. The consultations were led by the social and
                           environmental consultants for the client.

                           To ensure effective communications with a large and diverse group of stakeholders, the Project
                           Implementation Unit has put in place a communication and outreach plan, aimed at maintaining
                           the understanding and ownership of the project throughout its cycle. The plan has been crafted
                           considering the characteristics of the target population namely, socioeconomic, cultural and health
                           conditions, access to media in all formats and land ownership. The plan primarily follows the
                           stages of the project – preparation, and implementation and it pays particular attention to
                           reinforcing the continued usage of the technology/ies after it has been initially adopted.

                           Minutes of stakeholder meetings, including measures proposed to address grievances, will be
                           included as an Annex to the environmental and social safeguard instruments.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         21-Mar-2014
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      21-Mar-2014



                                                                     Page 10 of 12
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Bolivia                                                          21-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bolivia                                                          20-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bolivia                                                          20-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?


                                                                   Page 11 of 12
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Lucia Spinelli
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies (SM)                  Date: 24-Mar-2014




                                                                       Page 12 of 12
