                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC6103

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Egypt, Arab Republic of           Project ID:      P146143
                            Project Name:      Emergency Employment Investment Project (P146143)
                            Task Team          Afrah Alawi Al-Ahmadi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          20-Jan-2014                       Estimated        06-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSSP                             Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other social services (99%), Public administration- Other social services (1%)
                            Theme(s):          Social safety nets (60%), Improving labor markets (25%), Other social
                                               protection and risk management (15%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     92.53                      Total Bank Financing:          0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              MNA VPU Free-standing Trust Funds                                             92.53
                              Total                                                                         92.53
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project objectives are to: i) create short-term employment opportunities for the unemployed,
                           unskilled and semi-skilled workers in selected locations in Egypt; ii) contribute to the creation and/
                           or maintenance of community infrastructure and services; iii) improve access to basic infrastructure
                           and community services among target population; and iv) to improve the employability of young
                           men and women through short-term training or other support services to facilitate transitions to wage
                           and self-employment.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed Emergency Employment Investment Project (EEIP) is a grant in the amount of €67.60
                         million (USD92.53 million equivalent) to be financed by the European Union, as stand-alone
Public Disclosure Copy




                         complementary financing to the World Bank-funded Emergency Labor Intensive Investment Project
                         (ELIIP; $200 million). Although not processed as an emergency operation under World Bank
                         procedures, the proposed project does respond to the growing economic crisis in Egypt that has
                         disproportionately impacted poor households and the unemployed. The EEIP supports the creation
                         of short-term employment opportunities through labor-intensive community service and small scale
                         infrastructure projects in selected areas in Egypt; and improves employability of young men and
                         women in urban and rural areas through wage and self-employment programs.

                         The project consists of four components:
                         Component 1: Employment-intensive Small-scale Infrastructure Subprojects (€ 1 million)
                         This component finances labor-intensive small scale infrastructure employment creation programs.
                         Specifically, the project will support labor-intensive small scale local infrastructure public works
                         subprojects such as canal weed reduction/cleaning, river Nile bank protection, rural housing
                         upgrading, pavement of rural roads, school rehabilitations, among others. The sub-projects will be
                         contracted out to private contractors.

                         Component 2: Intensive Community Service Sub-projects and Youth Employment Activities (€ 57.3
                         million)
                         This component will support labor-intensive community service subprojects through the provision of
                         grants to local communities (NGOs/CBOs) for such services as solid waste management/collection
                         and environmental cleaning campaigns in villages, early childhood education, mother and child
                         health awareness home visit programs, employment in illiteracy eradication projects, among others.
                         The component will also promote youth employment in rural and urban areas through pilot projects
                         implemented by NGOs as described in Component 3. A majority of the beneficiaries of this
                         component will be women, and it will be implemented by NGOs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Improving Workers’ Employability through Youth Employment and Entrepreneurship
                         Programs to Facilitate Transitions into Wage Employment or into Self-Employment in Urban and
                         Rural Areas (€ 6 million)
                         The component will finance two types of youth employment support activities one aimed at youth in
                         urban areas and the second for youth in rural areas. A comprehensive package of training (basic,
                         technical, life skills, and on-the-job), job-search assistance, and wage or training subsidies to
                         facilitate the transition into wage-employment will be piloted for urban youth. The component will
                         also finance an integrated set of services (training, financing, advisory, and access to markets and
                         value chains) to facilitate the transition into self-employment for rural youth. These services will be
                         developed based on market research or feasibility studies already available or to be carried out during
                         the preparation of the respective sub-projects.
                         Sub-projects will be implemented by NGOs in urban and rural areas. Beneficiaries will be young
                         men and women in the project’s target provinces who are out of school and out of (full time) work.
                         Young women will be specifically targeted by making female participation an evaluation criterion
                         during the Request for Proposals, and assessing proposed design features to attract female
                         participants (e.g. female-only classes, child care, and parent outreach). Further details are available
                         in Annex 4.

                         Component 4: Project Implementation, Horizontal, and Capacity Building Activities (€ 3.5) million)
                           The implementation support program for the project includes: (i) the provision of project
                           implementation support, including project management, financial management and procurement; (ii)
                           public information, EU visibility, communication and social mobilization strategy and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation support; (iii) technical verification and quality assurance for the design and
                           implementation of the above 3 components; (iv) and, capacity building for SFD and governorate
                           staff, as well as for the implementing NGOs procured as needed

                           For Components 1 and 2, labor intensity of 40 percent for sub-projects will be sought, higher than
                           that currently being achieved in Egypt but for which has already started to be applied successfully
                           through the World Bank financed ELIIP. The distribution of funds between the 3 subcomponents
                           will be kept flexible with the exception for the infrastructure sub-component for which a maximum
                           of 1 million Euros will be allocated.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Project activities will be conducted in selected poor urban and rural areas nationwide.

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The project will be implemented by SFD who has ample capacity and previous experience managing
                           environmental and safeguards issues. The SFD will prepare a safeguards screening summary for each
                           sub-project in a format specified in the Operations Manual. This will summarize: (a) the
                           recommended categorization according to World Bank policies; and, (b) the proposed environmental
                           safeguards documentation requirements for the sub-project. The safeguards screening summary will
                           be part of the sub-project identification package that will be submitted to the Bank by the SFD. The
                           Bank will review the screening of sub-projects on a selective basis to verify that the screening tools
                           and choice of documents are being applied appropriately and consistently.

                           In terms of capacity, the SFD has acquired and enhanced its institutional capacity for implementing
                           safeguards policies throughout the implementation of the previous phases of World Bank projects, e.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           g.: the SFD has been implementing EMPs for (i) the Local Area Development (LAD) Program since
                           2006, and (ii) Enhancing Access to Finance for Micro and Small Enterprise since 2010. However,
                           quite recently, the SFD has decided to improve the integration of environmental assessment to its
                           projects through upgrading the Environmental Policies Program (EPP) to become the Environmental
                           Department (ED) under the Central Sector for Human and Community Development (CSHCD). This
                           has been issued through a Decree from the SFD Secretary General, in September 2013. This upgrade
                           is expected to be an important step for improving the capacity of the SFD in terms of environmental
                           management; however, providing the ED with adequate resources and staffing is vital for its
                           successful operation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)
                           Alaa Ahmed Sarhan (MNSEE)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             An Environmental and Social Screening and
                           BP 4.01                                              Assessment Framework (ESSAF), as well as
                                                                sectoral Environmental Management Plans
                                                                (EMPs) and Environmental Guidelines have
                                                                been developed and cleared by the Bank to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                ensure environmental due diligence for similar
                                                                types of sub-projects funded under the Bank-
                                                                financed ELIIP. It is intended to ensure that, for
                                                                all activities financed by the project, all efforts
                                                                are made to avoid and minimize environmental
                                                                and social impacts. The current ESSAF remains
                                                                relevant in managing new activities proposed by
                                                                the EEIP and will be revised accordingly and re-
                                                                disclosed prior to appraisal. Also, the EMPs and
                                                                Environmental Guidelines developed for ELIIP
                                                                will be revised and re-disclosed prior to
                                                                appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No   The project does not plan to undertake any
                                                                activities affecting natural habitats, and any
                                                                subprojects that could trigger the Natural
                                                                Habitats policy (OP 4.04) will be excluded.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No   Not applicable.

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No   Any activities that could trigger the Pest
                                                                Management policy (OP 4.09) will be excluded.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No   The project does not envision conducting any
                         BP 4.11                                activities impacting physical cultural resources,
                                                                and any subprojects that could trigger this
                                                                policy (OP 4.11) will be excluded.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No   Not applicable.

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No   The project will support labor intensive small
                         4.12                                   scale local infrastructure public works
                                                                subprojects (ie. canal weed reduction/cleaning,
                                                                river Nile bank protection, rural housing
                                                                upgrading, pavement of rural roads, school
                                                                rehabilitations). Any subprojects that could
                                                                trigger the involuntary resettlement policy (OP
                                                                4.12) will be excluded and will be part of the
                                                                negative list in the Operational Manual. In
                                                                other words, sub-projects cannot be financed
                                                                that result in direct economic and social impacts
                                                                through the: (a) involuntary taking of land
                                                                resulting in: (i) relocation or loss of shelter, (ii)
                                                                lost of assets or access to assets, or (iii) loss of
                                                                income sources or means of livelihood, whether
                                                                or not the affected persons must move to
                                                                another location; or (b) involuntary restriction
                                                                of access to legally designated parks and
                                                                                                                                 protected areas resulting in adverse impacts on
                                                                                                                                 the livelihoods of the displaced persons.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            Not applicable.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International                                         No                            The project will support small scale subprojects
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            at the community level, and no activities that
                                                                                                                                 would affect international waterways are
                                                                                                                                 expected to take place.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             Not applicable.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Jan-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The current ESSAF remains relevant in managing new activities proposed by the EEIP and will be
                                      revised accordingly and re-disclosed prior to appraisal. Also, the EMPs and Environmental
                                      Guidelines developed for ELIIP will be revised and re-disclosed prior to appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Afrah Alawi Al-Ahmadi

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Nina Chee (RSA)                                                                                                      Date: 20-Jan-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Yasser Aabdel-Aleem Awny El-Gammal                                                                                   Date: 21-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             (SM)




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
