                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA1030
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Jan-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Jan-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Fiji                               Project ID:    P150028
                            Project Name:      Transport Infrastructure Investment Project (P150028)
                            Task Team          James A. Reichert
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          05-Jan-2015                        Estimated   05-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Trade facilitation
                                              and market access (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     167.50           Total Bank Financing:                  50.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   16.80
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      50.00
                              Asian Development Bank                                                                    100.70
                              Total                                                                                     167.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective is to improve the resilience and safety of land and maritime transport
                           infrastructure for users of project roads, bridges and rural jetties and wharves.
                            3. Project Description

                                                                       Page 1 of 15
                         The Transport Infrastructure Investment Project (TIIP), which will be jointly financed with the Asian
                         Development Bank (ADB), consists of three components.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Improvement of Existing Road and Maritime Sector Assets (est. US$150.00 mil.).
                         This component would fund works to repair, rehabilitate, reconstruct or upgrade, as appropriate,
                         existing roads, bridges and rural jetties and wharves. It would also repair and replace existing and/or
                         install new streetlights on selected roads, bridges and rural jetties and wharves. Where possible and
                         appropriate, road, bridge and/or jetty sub-projects would be geographically packaged to reduce costs,
                         attract competent contractors and maximize local impact. Two Year 1sub-projects have been
                         identified for improvement in the upper Sigatoka Valley.

                         Component 2: Technical Assistance (est. US$16.70 mil.). Technical assistance would consist of
                         support for a project supervision team to be established at the Fiji Roads Authority (FRA) to oversee
                         project implementation, and consultancy services for design and supervision consultants, to update
                         standards and specifications for the country’s roads and bridges, to carry out international road
                         assessment program (iRAP) surveys and independent road safety audits, and to implement the use of
                         geotagging and pilot open contacting.

                         Component 3: Capacity Building (est. US$0.80 mil.). Under a grant from ADB, initiatives to build
                         government capacity across several sectors will be carried out. Areas of focus are expected to
                         include planning, assessing and managing infrastructure projects for staff from various ministries and
                         agencies, including FRA.

                         The project will be co-financed with ADB and a common framework and instruments for
                         environmental and social safeguards has been developed and agreed. The safeguards arrangements
                         will comply with the environmental and social safeguards policies of both institutions and apply to
                         all components of the proposed project. Review and clearance procedures during preparation and
                         implementation and arrangements for safeguard supervision and monitoring during implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be the joint responsibility of both institutions. These responsibilities have been defined in a
                         Memorandum of Understanding that was signed on December 12, 2014 and will go into effect after
                         both projects have been approved by their respective Boards of Directors.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Fiji is an island country located in the South Pacific Ocean about two-thirds of the way from Hawaii
                         to New Zealand. It has a territory of 47,329 square km spread over 332 islands, a third of which are
                         inhabited. With a population of about 875,000, nearly 90 percent live on the three main islands of
                         Viti Levu (10,429 sq. km), Vanua Levu (5,556 sq. km), and Taveuni (470 sq. km). Main urban
                         centers on Viti Levu include Suva, the largest city and capital, Nadi, an important center of tourism
                         and location of Fiji’s principal international airport, and Lautoka, Fiji’s second largest city. Labasa is
                         the largest town on Vanua Levu and is the location of Fiji Sugar Corporation’s only Vanua Levu
                         sugar mill (Viti Levu has three mills).

                         The Fijian Islands are characterized by diverse ecosystems that include significant areas of natural
                         forest. Wide ranges of coastal and marine ecosystems exist, ranging from extensive areas of
                         mangroves to various coral formations.

                         Fiji’s total land mass is 1.8 million hectares, and almost all forest cover is on communally-owned
                         native land, with 13,960 hectares on private freehold, and 5,600 hectares on government lease land.


                                                                       Page 2 of 15
                         Freshwater wetlands occupy 0.3 percent of Fiji’s land area.

                         Approximately 70 percent of the main island of Viti Levu is drained by three large river systems, one
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of which has the largest catchment area covering one-third of the island. There are a total of ten
                         rivers with distances ranging from 21 miles to 73 miles (the longest).

                         Fiji has one of the most developed economies in the Pacific due to an abundance of forest, mineral
                         and fish resources. The main sources of GDP are its tourist industry and sugar exports.

                         The project will rehabilitate and upgrade selected roads, bridges and jetties at locations to be
                         identified in coordination with the Government. Improving road sector assets will support the
                         development of Fiji’s key economic sectors, including tourism, the sugar industry, and agriculture,
                         which employs 70 percent of the country’s labor force, by providing improved, sustained and safe
                         access to tourist areas, markets and agricultural inputs. It will also contribute to the functioning of
                         the country’s large subsistence sector and help link villages and communities to essential services,
                         such as health care facilities and schools in Fiji.

                         Fiji’s main environmental challenges include the degradation of land resources, climate change,
                         increasing risk of flooding and inundation of coastal settlements, unsustainable exploitation of
                         marine resources, waste management problems, air and water pollution.

                         The majority of the intended beneficiary communities for the rehabilitated road sector assets will
                         likely be Indigenous People (IP). Fijians (Fijians and Rotumans), the indigenous people of the Fijian
                         Islands, known as iTaukei represent 57 percent of the population (2007 census). Indo-Fijians, whose
                         ancestors migrated to the Fijian Islands in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, make up 38 percent
                         of the population. The remaining 5 percent consist of other minority communities, including people
                         from various Pacific Island countries, Australia, New Zealand, the People’s Republic of China, and
                         Europe.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         iTaukei culture places considerable emphasis on communal values, respect for the authority of
                         chiefs, who are predominantly male, and the precedence of men before women. Gender dynamics are
                         influenced by these traditional values that allow women few, if any, rights to inherit land or formally
                         own property, or to take part in public decision-making.

                         However, there has been progress in improving women’s rights across Fijian society as a result of the
                         Government’s many international and regional gender equality commitments. Education and
                         employment for women have become increasingly valued, especially in socially acceptable
                         occupations, such as professional and clerical work. In February 2014, the Government approved the
                         National Gender Policy, which seeks to promote gender equity and equality by removing all forms of
                         gender discrimination and inequalities to attain sustainable development.

                         Land in Fiji is managed through three complementary systems: (i) native land; (ii) freehold land; and
                         (iii) crown land. Native land, which is owned by iTaukei people, accounts for about 84 percent of all
                         land, with freehold and crown land accounting for around 8 percent each. Native and crown land
                         cannot be bought or sold, but each is available on a leasehold basis, with leases often lasting up to 99
                         years, while freehold land can be bought and sold on the open market.

                         While minor widening or realignment of road sector assets might take place to accommodate
                         drainage systems and/or sidewalks and to ensure safer conditions, the sub-projects are not expected

                                                                       Page 3 of 15
                         to involve any significant land acquisition or resettlement. Working within the existing alignment
                         and road reserve means very minimal impact to mangroves, forests and natural habitats.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The sub-projects will be designed in a way that is culturally appropriate and based on public
                         consultations with communities from the area(s) where improvements will occur, and to ensure broad
                         community support and that there are no issues or disputes with families affected by current
                         alignments or rights-of-way (RoW).
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Gerardo F. Parco (GENDR)
                         Julie Babinard (GTIDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment Yes                Both Component 1 (Improvement of Existing Road and
                         OP/BP 4.01                                  Maritime Sector Assets) and Component 2 (Technical
                                                                     Assistance) trigger OP 4.01. Component 1 will
                                                                     rehabilitate selected roads, bridges and rural jetties and
                                                                     wharves. Prioritization of these subprojects will be done
                                                                     by the Government of Fiji in consultation with the
                                                                     World Bank (WB) and ADB. The assets on the long
                                                                     list would typically have proper reserves/rights of way,
                                                                     and repairs and rehabilitation works are expected to be
                                                                     carried out within existing alignments and reserves. In
                                                                     an effort to gauge conditions on the ground, the WB
                                                                     Team’s environmental and social safeguards specialists
                                                                     visited several hundred kilometers of roads, and dozens
                                                                     of possible bridge and jetty locations on the islands of
                                                                     Viti Letu, Vanua Letu, and Taveuni.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Detailed assessments of two sub-projects were
                                                                     completed during project preparation and an
                                                                     Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and a Land
                                                                     Acquisition and Resettlement Plan (LARP) were
                                                                     prepared for a river crossing and a bridge. With the
                                                                     exception of these two sub-projects, the majority of the
                                                                     sub-projects have yet to be identified and prepared.
                                                                     Notwithstanding, the project is not expected to have
                                                                     significant environmental impacts, including on natural
                                                                     habitats or forests. This is because road and bridge
                                                                     works will be largely limited to existing road reserves,
                                                                     while rural jetties and wharves to be rehabilitated exist
                                                                     and are clear of mangroves and not located within coral
                                                                     reef areas. No physical cultural resources (PCR) were
                                                                     observed near the roads, bridges or rural jetties and
                                                                     wharves observed, and no PCR were found during the
                                                                     detailed assessments for the two Year 1 sub-projects.
                                                                     Nevertheless, further screening will be completed in
                                                                     accordance with the Environmental and Social


                                                                     Page 4 of 15
                         Management Framework (ESMF) during sub-project
                         identification and preparation to determine likely
                         impacts to natural habitats, forests and PCR. Chance-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         find provisions are included in the ESMF for PCR.
                         Sites of quarries and material sources were also visited.
                         Sand and gravel sources in Fiji are sufficient and FRA
                         has a number of known and operating quarry sources
                         around the country. Quarry operations form part of the
                         environmental assessment, have been incorporated into
                         the ESMF (for the project), and will be part of the
                         Contractor’s Environmental Management Plan (for the
                         Year 1 sub-projects, and future sub-projects as relevant).
                         Other impacts of the proposed activities are the typical
                         construction related impacts, including dust, noise, and
                         traffic due to temporary road closures/diversions which
                         are predictable and manageable with appropriate
                         controls.

                         Potential impacts of rehabilitation works on rural jetties
                         and wharves will also be limited. The rural jetties and
                         wharves are generally not close to major reefs or
                         sensitive marine habitats. These are also clear of
                         mangroves. Jetty and wharf works will relate primarily
                         to serviceability, including, but not limited to, structural
                         integrity, vulnerability to adverse weather events, and/or
                         user safety issues. Activities may consist of repairing or
                         replacing platforms, pilings, and structural elements,
                         including reinforced concrete, steel or timber sections.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Improved facilities, such as water and sanitation
                         amenities for those waiting for ships and reception
                         facilities to treat waste from ships, may also be
                         provided. No change in the type or size of vessels using
                         any facilities is expected and as such, potentially high
                         impact activities, including dredging, will not be
                         required to fulfill the Project Development Objective in
                         relation to jetties and wharves. Designs to upgrade rural
                         jetties and wharves will incorporate adequate reception
                         facilities to treat waste from ships (bilge water, toilet
                         wastes).

                         Component 2 consists of technical assistance (TA) and
                         consultancy services to help implement the project,
                         carry out the prioritization processes for selection of
                         sub-projects under Component 1 and design and
                         supervision of the selected works, conduct road safety
                         audits, and upgrade design and construction standards
                         and specifications to be more climate resilient. The TA



                         Page 5 of 15
                         will lead to the completion of technical or engineering
                         designs, or other outputs in preparation for the
                         construction of physical infrastructure with potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                         physical impacts. The TA activities may have
                         environmental and social concerns which are mostly
                         associated with specific subsequent physical
                         investments. In accordance with WB requirements, it
                         was agreed with FRA that there is a need to address
                         environmental and social issues associated with the
                         results of the TA through the application of the ESMF
                         designed for the project. Good environmental design
                         will also be incorporated into the detailed plans, and
                         include proper drainage, improved access for persons
                         with disabilities, etc., to ensure safeguard compliance.
                         Terms of Reference for the consultants will include the
                         need to ensure compliance with the ESMF requirements.

                         The project is an environmental Category B project for
                         reasons cited in preceding paragraphs.

                         This project is co-financed with ADB. All safeguard
                         instruments, including the ESMF, Environmental &
                         Social Management Plans (ESMP), LARF, and LARP
                         have been drafted and include the p reparation of
                         required World Bank environmental and social
                         safeguards instruments. More detailed instrument
                         requirements are described for each policy below.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The overarching safeguard instrument is an ESMF,
                         which has been prepared in order to establish key
                         environmental and social principles and standards for
                         the sub-projects. It also includes a risk screening tool, a
                         description of the legal framework, as well as
                         institutional arrangements for implementation. The
                         ESMF follows the general process for an environmental
                         assessment and review framework (EARF) as set out in
                         ADB Safeguard Policy Statement 2009, as well as those
                         elements required by WB’s OP 4.01 in respect of
                         ESMF. The result is a blended document suitable for
                         meeting the policy requirements of both ADB and WB.
                         An ESMP has also been prepared for what is expected
                         to be Year 1 sub-projects, which constitutes ADB’s
                         sample project. Separate ESMPs will be prepared for
                         subsequent sub-projects.

                         During project design, the WB requirement for social
                         assessments was met in parallel with ADB’s



                         Page 6 of 15
                                                        requirement for poverty and social assessments (PSA).
                                                        During implementation, sub-projects will be screened
                                                        using the screening process established by the ESMF,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        including consideration of social issues. Environmental
                                                        assessments prepared for sub-projects will include
                                                        consideration of social issues relevant to each sub-
                                                        project.

                                                        The Government will be responsible for preparing the
                                                        required safeguards documents and ensuring proper
                                                        consultation, while both WB and ADB will supervise
                                                        and guide the implementation process. During sub-
                                                        project identification and project implementation ADB
                                                        and WB will field joint missions to ensure safeguard
                                                        implementation is being carried out in accordance with
                                                        the approved LARP and Construction ESMPs.

                                                        Material sources and quarries will be determined once
                                                        sub-projects are identified. These material sources and
                                                        quarries will be included as part of the scope of ESMPs.

                                                        Free, prior and informed consultations with project
                                                        communities and key stakeholders on project design and
                                                        related arrangements will be organized during
                                                        preparation of future sub-projects to confirm broad
                                                        community support, and during implementation, as
                                                        required, in compliance with WB safeguard policies.
                                                        All required environmental and social safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        documents (ESMF, ESMP, LARF, LARP) were
                                                        disclosed on FRA’s website on January 13, 2015. A
                                                        formal grievance mechanism, as well as a monitoring
                                                        framework, has also been established and included in all
                                                        documentation.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   TIt is possible that future sub-projects will affect natural
                         4.04                           habitats. Accordingly, this has been triggered so that
                                                        future sub-project preparation requires the assessment of
                                                        natural habitats and the effective incorporation of
                                                        mitigation measures into future safeguard documents.
                                                        The ESMF screens proposed sub-projects for impacts on
                                                        Natural Habitats, which will be assessed as part of the
                                                        EIA process. The ESMP will have mitigation measures
                                                        necessary to protect and conserve Natural Habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    The project is not expected to impact natural forests
                                                        (mangroves and terrestrial forests). This is because road
                                                        and bridge works will be largely limited to existing road
                                                        reserves, while rural jetties and wharves to be
                                                        rehabilitated exist and are clear of mangroves. Given the


                                                        Page 7 of 15
                                                           nature of the project (limited additional land-take and
                                                           location etc.), the OP is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09    No     The project will not procure pesticides or pesticide
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           application equipment. The project will not lead to a
                                                           potential increase in pesticide usage.
                         Physical Cultural Resources Yes   Construction works and road realignments can cause an
                         OP/BP 4.11                        impact on cultural or historic sites of significance,
                                                           particularly where earthworks are required. The
                                                           Museum of Fiji has no records of sites of cultural or
                                                           historic significance within the area where earthworks
                                                           and vegetation clearance is to occur for road
                                                           realignment and construction of new structures for the
                                                           Year 1 sub-projects, it is possible that unidentified sites
                                                           may be uncovered during construction. It is also
                                                           possible that, given the broad geographical spread of the
                                                           project, PCR may be identified during preparation or
                                                           implementation of future sub-projects. Accordingly,
                                                           chance-find provisions have been incorporated into the
                                                           ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP Yes      The proposed project will trigger the World Bank’s
                         4.10                              Operational Policy (OP) 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples
                                                           (IP). Except for Year 1 sub-projects, where activities
                                                           will take place in the upper Sigatoka Valley, the location
                                                           of all sub-project areas is unknown. However, the social
                                                           assessment carried out during project preparation
                                                           identified that project beneficiaries are expected to be
                                                           indigenous iTaukei, who own nearly 90 percent of all
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           the land in Fiji.

                                                           A stand-alone Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will not be
                                                           prepared for the project as the majority of communities
                                                           that will benefit by from the sub-projects are expected to
                                                           be communities of iTaukei living on traditionally
                                                           tenured land. Instead, issues relevant for preserving the
                                                           interests and livelihoods of the indigenous population,
                                                           as well as for maintaining its cultural and
                                                           socioeconomic traditions, will be integrated within the
                                                           project design and implementation phases.

                                                           The proposed project will trigger the World Bank’s
                                                           Operational Policy (OP) 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples
                                                           (IP). Except for Year 1 sub-projects, where activities
                                                           will take place in the upper Sigatoka Valley, the location
                                                           of all sub-project areas is unknown. However, the social
                                                           assessment carried out during project preparation
                                                           identified that project beneficiaries are expected to be
                                                           indigenous iTaukei, who own nearly 90 percent of all


                                                           Page 8 of 15
                                                          the land in Fiji.

                                                          A stand-alone Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will not be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                          prepared for the project as the majority of communities
                                                          that will benefit by from the sub-projects are expected to
                                                          be communities of iTaukei living on traditionally
                                                          tenured land. Instead, issues relevant for preserving the
                                                          interests and livelihoods of the indigenous population,
                                                          as well as for maintaining its cultural and
                                                          socioeconomic traditions, will be integrated within the
                                                          project design and implementation phases.

                                                          To ensure compliance with OP 4.10, guidance provided
                                                          in the Environmental and Social Safeguard Instruments
                                                          for the Pacific including elements of an IPP will be
                                                          incorporated into sub-project design. This guidance is
                                                          included in the project ESMF. As a result, where
                                                          appropriate, elements of an IPP will be integrated into
                                                          the social assessment and LARP if a sub-project creates
                                                          resettlement impacts, or the EIA and/or ESMP if no
                                                          resettlement impacts are created.

                                                          The Government will organize free, prior and informed
                                                          consultations with the affected communities for each
                                                          sub-project and ensure that there is broad community
                                                          support for the proposed sub-project(s). WB
                                                          requirements for the social assessment have been met in
                                                          parallel with ADB’s requirement for the PSA.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Involuntary Resettlement   Yes   While land acquisition or resettlement is expected to be
                         OP/BP 4.12                       minor, a LARF has been prepared to serve as the
                                                          umbrella social safeguard document for mitigating any
                                                          potential impact linked to land acquisition and
                                                          resettlement, following ADB and WB requirements.
                                                          Duringsub-project preparation that involves land
                                                          acquisition or resettlement, Government will be
                                                          responsible for preparing LARPs to help guide the
                                                          implementation process and serve as documentation for
                                                          compensation.

                                                          A LARP was prepared for the WB’s Year 1 sub-project/
                                                          ADB’s sample sector project. For the Year 1 sub-
                                                          projects, consultations took place in four sites along the
                                                          Sigatoka Valley Road with community members and
                                                          representatives of the villages and provincial councils to
                                                          ensure that people were informed about the project and
                                                          had the opportunity to raise concerns. These
                                                          communities strongly supported the sub-projects as the



                                                          Page 9 of 15
                                                                       improved bridge and crossing will increase the safety of
                                                                       road users and pedestrians, while ensuring access and
                                                                       better quality crossings.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       The frameworks prepared for the project and the ESMP
                                                                       and LARP prepared for the for WB Year 1 sub-project/
                                                                       ADB’s sample project were prepared in consultation
                                                                       with key stakeholders and potentially affected people.
                                                                       The details of these consultations are documented in the
                                                                       relevant documents and were disclosed on FRA’s
                                                                       website and the Bank’s InfoShop on January 13, 2015,
                                                                       and will be uploaded to ADB’s website.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No               The project will not finance construction of dams or
                                                                       support or depend on the operation of any existing dam.
                            Projects on International    No            Not applicable.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas   No            Not applicable.
                            OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              No large scale, significant or irreversible impacts will be created by the project.

                             FRA, ADB and WB have developed a harmonized approach for managing environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             social safeguards requirements to ensure compliance with ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement
                             2009 (SPS) and the World Bank’s Safeguard Policies. The risk of disagreement between the
                             donors on the quality of outputs will be mitigated by continued close coordination and
                             consultation between ADB and WB throughout implementation. Donors have agreed to field joint
                             missions to supervise implementation and will sign an MoU defining steps to resolve any
                             differences that might arise.

                             In addition to compliance with ADB and WB requirements, social and environmental assessments
                             and clearances of sub-projects under TIIP will comply with Fijian laws (The Land Sales Act 1974,
                             The State Acquisition of Land Act 1998, the Land Use Decree 2010, The Environment Act 2005
                             and other relevant national legislation), ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement 2009 (SPS), and the
                             World Bank’s Operation Policy 4.01 (OP 4.01). Both ADB and WB will clear all safeguard
                             documents at appropriate milestones (contract award and commencement of works, etc.).

                             The main environmental issues are expected to be impacts on physical and biological resources
                             close to road, bridge, and rural jetty/wharf infrastructure, which will be rehabilitated under TIIP.
                             Repairs and rehabilitation works are expected to be carried out within existing alignments and
                             rights-of-way. There is the possibility for unintended impacts, such as improper disposal of excess
                             material or siltation of streams and rivers along alignments or within sub-project areas. Typical
                             construction related impacts are also expected, such as dust, noise, and impacts from temporary


                                                                      Page 10 of 15
                         camps. A possible major impact comes from the operation of material quarries and burrow pits.

                         TIIP triggers Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) and Physical
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Cultural Resources (OP 4.11). An ESMF has been prepared to screen all sub-projects for
                         safeguards impacts. The ESMF will guide the FRA in determining the proper safeguards
                         instruments needed to prepare subsequent sub-projects based on the results of the screening. To
                         address issues related to potential impacts on natural habitats, the ESMF will screen and assess
                         possible impacts through an EIA. Impacts to Physical Cultural Resources will also be addressed
                         through the ESMF and EIA. Since roads will be rehabilitated under TIIP, excavation works, and
                         the possibility for chance finds, are possible. Accordingly a chance- find procedure has been
                         included in the ESMF and will be mandatory for all works contracts.

                         For the Year 1 sub-projects (Narata Bridge and Matewale Crossing in the upper Sigatoka Valley),
                         an environmental impact assessment (Initial Environmental Examination, or IEE) was prepared
                         and disclosed. The Environmental and Social Management Plan from this IEE will be included as
                         part of the contractual obligations of the winning contractor(s).

                         The project also triggers OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, due to the potential for small
                         amounts of land acquisition or minor land impacts during implementation. A LARF was prepared
                         to address any land changes or impacts to livelihoods that might occur as a result of involuntary
                         acquisition of assets and/or change in land use, including provision for compensation and
                         rehabilitation assistance which may occur throughout the life of the project. LARPs were prepared
                         for the two Year 1 sub-projects. For subsequent sub-project preparation involving land acquisition
                         or resettlement, Government will be responsible for preparing land acquisition and resettlement
                         plans (LARP) to help guide the implementation process and serve as documentation for
                         compensation.

                         The project triggers OP4.10 on Indigenous People (IP), as the majority of the beneficiaries in the
                         project areas are expected to be iTaukei, or indigenous Fijians. The social assessment completed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         during preparation reported that the iTaukei will constitute the overwhelming majority of project
                         beneficiaries and live on native iTaukei land that is administered by mataqalis (clans). This land
                         cannot be sold and remains forever as property of the landowning unit, unless sold to the State and
                         used solely for public purposes. Because the overwhelming majority of beneficiaries are expected
                         to be indigenous people, project implementation will not require a separate Indigenous Plan or an
                         Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework. Instead, the elements of an IP plan will be integrated
                         into the design of sub-projects in accordance with the guidelines included in the Environmental
                         and Social Instruments for the Pacific. A well-definedconsultation process has been identified and
                         agreed involving free, prior and informed consultations. Such a process has already taken place
                         for the Year 1 sub-projects.

                         Public consultations for the project’s safeguards instruments have been conducted and disclosed.
                         An appropriate grievance redress mechanism (GRM) forms part of the ESMF. This has been
                         disclosed in the communities for Year 1 sub-projects and will also be adequately publicized in
                         local communities adjacent to all future construction activities of the project once these sub-
                         projects have been identified and included in the project. The FRA has instituted safeguards
                         monitoring procedures and will assign a Safeguards Specialist as part of the PST. During sub-
                         project identification and project implementation ADB and WB will work jointly to ensure
                         safeguard implementation is being carried out in accordance with the approved Resettlement
                         Action Plan and Construction ESMPs.

                                                                  Page 11 of 15
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The generally small scale of the projects complimented by the environmental and social screening
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and impact management/mitigation requirements established by the ESMF and LARF, and the
                           sub-project screening criteria (which includes that sub-projects can only be Category B or C) will
                           ensure that the project will not create any potential indirect and/or long term impacts.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Project alternatives will be examined during the sub-project screening process where
                           environmental and social impacts will be considered. If similar development outcomes can be
                           achieved from a project with lower impacts (assuming other criteria are met), then preference in
                           the sub-project selection process will be given to this project. For year 1 sub-project activities,
                           design alternatives have been considered as to maximize project benefits while minimizing
                           impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Borrower has agreed to fully implement the safeguard instruments. Although the FRA and
                           associated agencies have good capacity to fulfill their respective mandates, their very limited
                           exposure to projects funded by either the ADB or the WB has led to the inclusion of capacity
                           development activities under the Project. ADB and WB have agreed to field joint missions to
                           supervise implementation. The objective is to provide a clear and common approach to the FRA to
                           ensure compliance, manage risks, and build capacity.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Beneficiary communities and local stakeholders were provided with relevant information about the
                           project, its land acquisition requirements, and policies on compensation and entitlements during
                           preparation of the LARF and LARP. For each sub-project, the draft LARP was disclosed to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project beneficiaries and stakeholders, and an information booklet will be available in English and
                           Fijian that summarizes entitlements and other relevant information. The draft LARP has been
                           uploaded to FRA’s website. FRA, the Provincial Council and the TLTB iTaukei Land Trust Board
                           (TLTB) will continue to consult and engage with landowners and tenants prior to and throughout
                           project implementation. More focused consultations with beneficiaries will take place after
                           detailed designs are available and prior to the commencement of any works to enable compilation
                           of a full census and inventory of assets. The cut-off date for entitlement eligibility will be the date
                           the census is completed, after which the entitlement matrix will be updated and included in the
                           final LARP. FRA, in coordination with community leaders and representatives from the
                           Department of Lands and TLTB, will inform affected parties in advance of Government intent to
                           acquire land, and will respond to all compensation related inquiries. All consultations with the
                           affected communities will be documented and follow the requirements established in the safeguard
                           documentation. A GRM has been established for the project and will apply for each sub-projects.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                           13-Jan-2015
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                        13-Jan-2015




                                                                      Page 12 of 15
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Fiji                                                            13-Jan-2015
                           Comments: The Initial Environmental Examination and (IEE) Environmental and Social
                                        Management Plan (ESMP) for Sigatoka Valley Road – Bridge Rehabilitation (Year 1
                                        sub-projects) were disclosed on FRA's website in October 2014 under ADB's project.

                                         Note that the IEE/ESMP was revised after appraisal and redisclosed on FRA's
                                         website.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       13-Jan-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    13-Jan-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Fiji                                                              13-Jan-2015
                           Comments: The Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework (LARF) was disclosed on FRA's
                                         website in October 2014 under ADB's project.

                                         Note that the LARF was revised after appraisal and redisclosed on FRA's website.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       30-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    24-Nov-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         Although this policy is triggered, a stand-alone Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will not be prepared
                         for the project as the majority of communities that will benefit by from the sub-projects are expected
                         to be communities of iTaukei living on traditionally tenured land. To ensure compliance with OP
                         4.10, elements of an IPP will be incorporated into sub-project design.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [      ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice     Yes [      ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [      ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats


                                                                     Page 13 of 15
                             Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of critical natural habitats?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: James A. Reichert
                            Approved By



                                                                       Page 14 of 15
                         Regional Safeguards   Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)     Date: 13-Jan-2015
                         Advisor:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Practice Manager/     Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)      Date: 13-Jan-2015
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Page 15 of 15
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
