                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA7213
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Oct-2013, 20-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Colombia                         Project ID:    P145782
                            Project Name:     Third Student Loan Support Project SOP Phase II (P145782)
                            Task Team         Janet K. Entwistle
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         08-Oct-2013                      Estimated   03-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    LCSHE                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Tertiary education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (90%), Improving labor markets (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       1915.00               Total Bank Financing:    200.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                    Amount
                              Borrower                                                                            1715.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                200.00
                              Total                                                                               1915.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the Project is to increase student enrollment, graduation and equity in higher
                           education, by: (a) increasing the number of ACCES Student Loans and the ACCES Program’s focus
                           on students from disadvantaged socioeconomic backgrounds and in quality higher education
                           institutions and programs; and (b) enhancing ICETEX’s institutional capacity.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                     Page 1 of 9
                         A.      Project Components

                         The Project would achieve its development objective through implementation of two components.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1. Student Loans. (Total: US$ 1,903 million; Bank: US$200 million; Government: US
                         $1,703 million estimated). The objective of this component is to increase student enrollment and
                         graduation and improve equity in higher education by increasing the number of new and renewed
                         ACCES student loans provided by ICETEX, and increasingly focusing them on students from
                         socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds and quality HEIs and programs. This would also
                         improve the probability of loan repayment, and strengthen ICETEX’s financial soundness.

                         It would finance provision of ACCES Student Loans to eligible students to finance their tuition and
                         subsistence in Eligible HEI to pursue a Pregrado Degree. It would finance loans through ICETEX’s
                         ACCES program for new students pursuing higher education based on the revised allocation method,
                         to be introduced prior to the second semester of the 2014 academic year. Loans would be allocated
                         using the existing method in the first semester of the 2014 academic year. It would also finance loan
                         renewals for students that are continuing their studies. ICETEX would assume the credit risk of the
                         students.

                         Component 2: Institutional Strengthening. (Total: US$12 million; Bank: US$0 million; Government:
                         US$12 million estimated). The objective of this component would be to strengthen ICETEX’s
                         management practices and monitoring of its contracts with HEIs, explore further diversification of
                         financing sources and carry out an impact evaluation in order to enhance ICETEX’s ability to
                         increase student enrollment and graduation and improve equity in higher education. It would have 5
                         subcomponents.

                         Subcomponent 2.1: Strengthening ICETEX’s loan administration and portfolio management
                         (including loan collection practices) capacity through, inter alia, the development of differentiated
Public Disclosure Copy




                         collection strategies based on portfolio risks, and the upgrading of information systems (hardware
                         and software).

                         Subcomponent 2.2: Strengthening ICETEX’s capacity to: (i) monitor HEI Contracts through, inter
                         alia, the use of scorecards and the carrying out of HEI Contracts implementation supervision
                         activities; and (ii) manage the Sustainability Fund.

                         Subcomponent 2.3: Provision of support for ICETEX’s diversification of financial resources through,
                         inter alia, the carrying out of: (i) studies including on alternatives to expand its funding sources and
                         to develop an endowment fund, and on partnerships with the private sector; and (ii) fundraising
                         activities.

                         Sub-component 2.4: The carrying out of: (i) impact evaluations of ICETEX’s student loans,
                         including ACCES Student Loans, on enrollment, graduation, equity and social mobility; and (ii)
                         tracer studies to track employment of HEI graduates that completed their studies and received student
                         loans provided by the Borrower, including ACCES Student Loans.

                         Sub-component 2.5: Provision of support for ICETEX’s overall Project coordination,
                         implementation, and monitoring including, inter alia, the carrying out of audits.




                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         B.     Project Financing
                         Lending Instrument
Public Disclosure Copy




                         At the request of ICETEX, the proposed lending instrument is Investment Project Financing to
                         ensure ICETEX has sufficient cash, at a favorable interest rate, 22.5 year maturity, 6 years grace, and
                         with repayments in local currency linked to each disbursement, to finance student loans offered
                         through the ACCES program.
                         Project Cost and Financing

                         Total Project financing requirements are estimated at US$1,915 million. The Project would be
                         financed as follows: US$200 million through a loan from the Bank, the remaining US$1,715 million
                         by ICETEX.

                         Table 1: Project Cost and Financing

                         Component 1: Student Loans - US$1,903 million, where US$200 million is IBRD

                         Component 2: Institutional Strengthening of ICETEX - US$12 million.

                         C.      Series of Project Objective and Phases

                         The Project is Phase II of an ongoing single borrower lending program. The Second Student Loan
                         Support Project APL Phase I, of US$537.3 million, with US$300 million financed by the Bank, was
                         approved by the Board on March 4, 2008 and closed satisfactorily on June 30, 2013. The activities to
                         be financed in Phase II are a natural continuation of those financed in Phase I, thus building on
                         accumulated experience. The Project is expected to close on June 30, 2019. The Program objective of
                         the Series of Projects (SOP) is the same as the PDO of this Project, both of which have been revised
                         based on good practice in formulating a PDO.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D.      Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design

                         The Project has been designed taking into consideration and incorporating lessons learned from the
                         Second Student Loan Support Project Phase I (P105164), other similar Bank operations in the region
                         and from other national experiences in the fields of higher education and quality assurance.

                         PDO and indicators. The PDO should be expressed in a way that the objectives are expressed
                         upfront, followed by Project results which are expected to contribute to their achievement. Including
                         PDO indicators in the PDO as a means of achieving Project objectives should be avoided to prevent
                         confusion and clarify aims. PDO indicators should measure progress toward achievement of
                         objectives for the target population, and should be defined in the Results Matrix. When appropriate,
                         it is better to use indicators in absolute numbers rather than rates or percentages which are more
                         difficult to monitor if they depend on census data which is beyond the scope of the Project (i.e.
                         number of students enrolled in tertiary education rather than enrollment rate or number of graduates
                         rather than graduation rates). Under the Project, the three objectives of enrollment, graduation and
                         equity have been clearly spelled out in the PDO and Project indicators in absolute numbers have been
                         chosen carefully to measure each objective. The PDO includes the means through which the Project
                         would contribute to meeting these objectives. A detailed definition of each indicator is in the Results
                         Matrix and is also included in the Operations Manual.



                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                         Implementation Arrangements. A transfer of responsibility in 2011 for implementing the Second
                         Student Loan Support Project Phase I from a PIU (Project Implementation Unit) to ICETEX
                         improved efficiency and continuity. The absorption of all PIU staff into ICETEX’s operational and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         financial units increased ICETEX’s commitment to that project and its sustainability. The
                         institutional arrangements for this Project would be the same; it would continue to be implemented
                         through ICETEX’s existing units rather than through a separate PIU.

                         Financial Terms. The financial terms of the Bank loan under the Second Student Loan Support
                         Project Phase 1 that were developed in close collaboration between the Bank and ICETEX were
                         important to reduce ICETEX’s financial risk: (i) an extended repayment period of 22.5 years plus a 6
                         year grace period reduced cash flow risk, (ii) loan maturity tied to the timing of Bank disbursements
                         rather than commitments helped ICETEX further manage its cash flow risk; and (iii) conversion to
                         COP (Colombian Pesos) at the time of disbursement minimized exchange rate risk. These financing
                         arrangements are being maintained under the Project.

                         Funds Diversification. Leveraging ICETEX resources with funds from other sources, including
                         municipalities, universities, and/or departments, through alianzas and through the Sustainability Fund
                         has been more successful than raising financing from the private market. Despite ICETEX’s repeated
                         efforts and its good credit rating, the expansion of the funding base through private capital markets
                         has not been as successful. ICETEX has securitized parts of its portfolio through TAEs in the past
                         but government regulation and market conditions have so far prevented bond issuances from being
                         large enough to raise funds inexpensively and efficiently. The Project focuses on ICETEX’s strategy
                         to increase the number of alianzas and the size of the Sustainability Fund, and explore further other
                         funding sources such as public private partnerships, or donations from previous ICETEX recipients
                         through the Friends and Beneficiaries of ICETEX Fund (ABI, Fondo Amigos Beneficiarios de
                         ICETEX).

                         Portfolio Risk. The strengthening of the risk administration system of the implementing agency has
                         been critical to ICETEX achieving internationally recognized credit ratings. Since 2008, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         continuous improvement of ICETEX’s risk management system allowed it to achieve a series of high
                         quality credit accreditations and ratings (ISO [International Organization for Standardization] 9001
                         in 2008, NTCGP [Norma Técnica Calidad Gestión Pública] 1000 in 2009 and Triple-A credit rating
                         from Fitch Colombia in 2011). Nonetheless, as access of students from socioeconomically
                         disadvantaged backgrounds to ICETEX student loans increases, portfolio risk is also increasing.
                         ICETEX’s management of portfolio risk thus should be further strengthened through additional
                         measures to lower the risk of nonrepayment. The student allocation model, under development for
                         introduction in May 2014, would contribute to ICETEX’s risk reduction strategy by introducing for
                         the first time the risk of nonrepayment as one factor in credit allocation, in accordance with
                         international best practices in financial institutions.

                         Improving HEI Quality. Collaboration between the MEN’s Vice Ministry for Higher Education and
                         ICETEX is critical to increasing the number of accredited HEIs. The CAN, under MEN’s Vice-
                         ministry of Higher Education, sets accreditation standards and works directly with HEIs to develop
                         and implement improvement plans critical to accreditation. ICETEX’s contracts with HEIs provide
                         an opportunity for ICETEX to also influence HEI quality that could lead to accreditation, if
                         coordinated with MEN’s Vice-ministry for Higher Education. Under the Project, ICETEX would
                         develop and systematically monitor through scorecards, with input from the Vice-ministry of Higher
                         Education (VES, Viceministerio de Educación Superior), key variables critical to put HEIs on a path
                         to accreditation, such as the dropout rate, and the number of accredited programs in a given HEI.

                                                                      Page 4 of 9
                         The student loan allocation formula would continue to be ICETEX’s primary tool for directing
                         student loans to students in accredited institutions, those providing an incentive to HEIs to embark on
                         a path to accreditation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Colombia is a large and diverse country, home to many ethnic and indigenous groups. According to
                         the latest report by DANE (National Statistics Department), there were 87 indigenous groups in
                         Colombia as of 2005, comprising 3.3% of the total Colombian population. Afro-Colombians make
                         up around 10.3% of the population. The average age for the indigenous and Afro-Colombian
                         population is lower than the national average; the distribution is especially skewed towards the
                         bottom of the pyramid, thus making the indigenous and Afro-Colombian school and college-aged
                         cohorts larger relative to the rest of the age groups. The school attendance levels for these two groups
                         are much lower than the national average: In 2005, whereas nationwide school attendance for 2-17
                         year olds was 77.8%, the figure was 58.8% and 77.1% for indigenous peoples and Afro-Colombians
                         respectively. Attendance is equally low for 18-24 year olds, with only 16.9% of the indigenous
                         population and 27.1% of Afro-Colombians currently attending school or higher education
                         institutions, compared to 27.1% nationwide.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto (LCSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No                This policy is not triggered as the nature and
                          BP 4.01                                              scope of the Project activities are not expected to
                                                                               generate adverse environmental impacts.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No                This policy is not triggered since no impact is
                                                                               expected on natural habitats.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No                This policy is not triggered given that the
                                                                               Project will not finance activities that affect
                                                                               forests.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No                This policy is not triggered because the Project
                                                                               will not finance the purchase or use of pesticides.
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No                The policy is not triggered because there are no
                          BP 4.11                                              Project activities that will impact the quality or
                                                                               management of physical cultural resources as
                                                                               defined under the policy.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes               The policy is triggered because indigenous
                                                                               peoples (and Afro-Colombians, Roma and
                                                                               victims of violence) are present in the Project
                                                                               area and could benefit from improved targeting
                                                                               systems for higher education financing.

                                                                               A social assessment analyzed the performance of
                                                                               the existing IPP and the program in reaching
                                                                               indigenous peoples, Afro-Colombians, Roma
                                                                               and victims of violence and identified measures



                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                                                                             to improve access and graduation for these
                                                                             groups.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             Based on the social assessment, an IPP was
                                                                             prepared (La Educación Superior en Colombia en
                                                                             Población de Grupos Étnicos y Víctimas y Plan
                                                                             de Acciones Afirmativas), which focused on
                                                                             further strengthening ICETEX’s capacity to
                                                                             successfully tailor to the needs of indigenous,
                                                                             Afro-Colombian and Roma students as well as
                                                                             victims of violence.

                                                                             The IPP was consulted with relevant national
                                                                             indigenous, Afro-Colombian, Roma, and victims’
                                                                             organizations and was revised to incorporate their
                                                                             feedback and recommendations accordingly and
                                                                             in line with the Project’s scope. The draft IPP,
                                                                             satisfactory to the Bank, was disclosed on
                                                                             ICETEX’s website and the Bank’s website on
                                                                             October 7, 2013 prior to appraisal. Once the
                                                                             feedback and recommendations from the
                                                                             consultations were incorporated, a final IPP (La
                                                                             Educación Superior en Colombia en Población de
                                                                             Grupos Étnicos y Víctimas y Plan de Acciones
                                                                             Afirmativas) was disclosed on ICETEX’s
                                                                             website and the Bank’s website on December 20,
                                                                             2013.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No               This policy is not triggered because the Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4.12                                             activities will not require the involuntary taking
                                                                             of land that would result in the impacts covered
                                                                             under OP 4.12.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No               The policy is not triggered because the Project
                                                                             will not support the construction or rehabilitation
                                                                             of dams nor will it support investments which
                                                                             rely on the operation of existing dams.
                            Projects on International        No               The policy is not triggered since the Project will
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                             not affect any international waterways as defined
                                                                             under the policy.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No               The policy is not triggered because the Project
                            7.60                                             will not affect disputed areas as defined under the
                                                                             policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                           The Project aims to break down barriers to access to tertiary education, including to ethnic groups.
                           Whereas the probability of negative impacts is considered low, the following issues should be kept
                           in mind during implementation : (i) the risk of creation of false expectations or misinformation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           among these minorities of the scope and timing of benefits that they will receive from the Project,
                           and in particular from the Indigenous Peoples Plan, (ii) the risk that activities adopted by the
                           Universities within the IPP are considered marginal, and fail to address the systematic barriers to
                           access, retention, and pertinence of higher education for Indigenous peoples.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           From a social safeguards perspective the only potential long term indirect impact related to the
                           Project would be if the increased access and opportunities for indigenous peoples, Afro-
                           Colombians, Roma and victims of violence to study in Universities were to result in a human
                           resource drain from Indigenous territories and a cumulative and gradual loss of cultural identity.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not relevant.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           ICETEX prepared a Social Assessment and an IPP (La Educación Superior en Colombia en
                           Población de Grupos Étnicos y Víctimas y Plan de Acciones Afirmativas). The Social Assessment
                           provides an overview of the indigenous, Afro-Colombian, Roma and victim populations,including
                           the main challenges each group faces. The Plan draws on the lessons learned from the Second
                           Student Loan Support Project APL Phase I and from the best practices to increase access, retention
                           and graduation of indigenous, Afro-Colombian, Roma and victim populations of five universities.
                           ICETEX would promote that HEIs design and implement a specific strategic affirmative action
                           plan for indigenous peoples, Afro-Colombians, Roma and victims of violence, with a special
                           emphasis on reducing dropout rates for these populations. ICETEX would also promote the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           creation of a Retention Committee for each HEI that focuses on the specific needs and problems of
                           its indigenous, Afro-Colombian, Roma and victim population, and that is in charge of designing
                           strategies to improve access for these minorities. To share knowledge, ICETEX would also review
                           and compile lessons learned to draft a guiding document with best practices to disseminate among
                           HEIs.

                          ICETEX has a strong track record of success and has shown ample capacity to design and
                          implement differentiated strategies for minorities. ICETEX has funds specifically for student loans
                          for ethnic groups and victims: The Fondo Álvaro Ulcué Chocué, established in 1990, is financed
                          by the Government and funds student loans for the indigenous population, whereas the Fondo de
                          Comunidades Negras focuses on Afro-Colombians. Additionally, the Fondo de Reparación para el
                          Acceso, Permanencia y Graduación en Educación Superior para la Población Víctima del
                          Conflicto Armado targets victims of violence. Demand for loans from these funds has increased in
                          recent years, but the supply of loans depends on Government funding, which may fluctuate from
                          year to year; although the regularity of Government transfers has improved since 2010, ICETEX
                          has chosen to focus on increasing access for minorities through the ACCES credit line, as a way to
                          decrease variance in loan allocation and allow for loan growth to follow the increase in demand.
                          Through ACCES, the percentage of student loans allocated to Afro-Colombians have jumped by
                          143% from 2009 to 2012, and loans given to indigenous peoples have increased by 102%.



                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           In regards to consultation, the social assessment and IPP (La Educación Superior en Colombia en
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Población de Grupos Étnicos y Víctimas y Plan de Acciones Afirmativas) have been finalized
                           based on inputs from a workshop with 15 indigenous, Afro-Colombian and Roma national and
                           local organizations, 4 Afro-Colombian and indigenous members of the legislature, university
                           officials from 3 universities, indigenous students from 3 universities, and government
                           representatives from 6 institutions. A total of 35 stakeholders participated. The following
                           organizations were represented: i) Indigenous: Organización Nacional Indígena de Colombia,
                           Organización de los Pueblos Indígenas de la Amazonía Colombiana, Autoridades Indígenas de
                           Colombia, Confederación Indígena Tayrona, Cabildo Nasa, Yanacona, Pijao; ii) Afro-Colombian:
                           Cimarrón, CNOA, Afrodés, Amuafroc, Asociación de Mujeres Indígenas y Campesinas del
                           Chocó, Asociación Multiétnica para la Mujer Colombiana and Somos Afro; iii) Roma: ProRom;
                           iv) Indigenous and Afro-Colombian members of the Senate, Chamber of Deputies and Afro-
                           Colombian Congressional Caucus; v) Universities: U. Nacional Abierta y a Distancia, U.
                           Externado, and U.T. del Chocó; Indigenous and Afro-Colombian student representatives from the
                           following universities: U. Distrital, U. Pedagógica, U. de los Andes; vi) Government institutions:
                           Ministry of the Interior, Vice-Ministry of Higher Education, Presidential Program for Strategies
                           Targeting Afro-Colombian, Black, Palenquera and Raizal Populations, Presidential Program for
                           Strategies Targeting Indigenous Peoples, Department of Quibdó and Department of Chocó.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       18-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    20-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Colombia                                                          20-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: The draft IPP, satisfactory to the Bank, was disclosed on ICETEX’s website and the
                                         Bank’s website on October 7, 2013 prior to appraisal. Once the feedback and
                                         recommendations from the consultations were incorporated, a final IPP (La
                                         Educación Superior en Colombia en Población de Grupos Étnicos y Víctimas y Plan
                                         de Acciones Afirmativas) was disclosed on ICETEX’s website and the Bank’s
                                         website on December 20, 2013.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [          ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?


                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Janet K. Entwistle
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Sector Manager:        Name: Barbara Bruns (SM)                           Date: 20-Dec-2013




                                                                       Page 9 of 9
