                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA8199
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nigeria                            Project ID:    P123112
                            Project Name:      Transforming Irrigation Management in Nigeria (P123112)
                            Task Team          Juan David Casanova Anoll
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          17-Mar-2014                        Estimated   19-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTA1                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Irrigation and drainage (60%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
                                              (10%), General water, sanitation and flood protectio n sector (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Other public sector governance (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%),
                                              Water resource management (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     605.00           Total Bank Financing:                  465.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         119.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                465.00
                              LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                                         21.00
                              Total                                                                                      605.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To improve access to irrigation and drainage services and to strengthen institutional arrangements for
                           integrated water resources management, with the overall aim to support agricultural productivity


                                                                       Page 1 of 12
                         improvement in selected large-scale public schemes in Northern Nigeria.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         There are four project components as follows:

                         Component 1: Water Resources Management and Dam Operation Improvement
                         This Component is part of the piloting support for the transformative water resources sector
                         institutional reforms covering policies, enabling legislation, regulatory instruments, organizational
                         restructuring and dam safety assessment procedures currently being formulated for enactment by the
                         FGN. It includes two subcomponents:
                         Subcomponent 1.1: Support to Integrated Water Resources Management. This Subcomponent will
                         support the piloting of anticipated provisions for separation of government regulatory and operational
                         powers and responsibilities for integrated water resources management (IWRM) of river basin-wide
                         water allocation, river flow control, and channel maintenance needed for sustainable bulk water
                         supply & drainage for large public irrigation scheme planning, development, and operational
                         management.
                         Subcomponent 1.2: Dam Operations Improvement and Safety. This subcomponent covers selected
                         dams and reservoirs including: Bakolori, Zobe, Goronyo, Tiga, Challawa Gorge, Ruwan Kanya
                         operational reservoir, Hadeija Barrage and Dadin Kowa. It comprises of rehabilitation and
                         improvement of selected dams as well as dam safety training to the staff of the FMWR.

                         Component 2: Irrigation Development and Management.
                         To effectively make use of the sunk costs invested in the existing schemes and the capacities built
                         over the years, the Project will focus on improving five irrigation schemes (Bakolori, Middle Rima
                         Valley, Kano River, Hadejia Valley and Dadin Kowa). To contribute to the efforts of addressing the
                         root causes of the challenges faced by the irrigation sub-sector, the Project will pilot new approaches
                         based on accountability, financial sustainability, and empowerment of water user associations.
                         Subcomponent 2.1: Irrigation Infrastructure Investments. This Subcomponent will support
                         rehabilitation of 27,000 ha to improve the performance of a total of 50,000 ha irrigation area in five
Public Disclosure Copy




                         schemes downstream of the existing storage reservoirs. In addition it includes a major investment in
                         the form of studies and design of irrigation and drainage infrastructure and conducting the associated
                         engineering supervision of civil works, as well as ESIAs, ESMPs and RAPs. The environmental and
                         social impacts of the schemes were assessed in the context of basin-wide Integrated Water Resources
                         Management (IWRM) before a final decision was made on the extent of improvements/rehabilitation
                         and expansion investments.
                         Subcomponent 2.2: Improving Irrigation Management. This Subcomponent will address the daunting
                         challenge of ensuring the long-term viability of the irrigation and drainage services delivered on
                         public irrigation schemes developed by the Federal Government over the past 30 years. The
                         approach will be to implement a progressive management transfer to users’ regulated bodies in the
                         form of Water Users Associations (WUAs) and to autonomous professional operators, either public
                         or private. The approach will be first piloted in the Bakolori Irrigation Project, which is the ‘first
                         mover’, starting with the areas to be rehabilitated.

                         Component 3: Enhancing Agricultural Productivity and Support to Value Chains Development.
                         This Component will provide resources to enhance farmers’ productivity in the rehabilitated
                         schemes, and improve their participation in the value chains development. Activities under the
                         component will be aligned and coordinated with the Local and State authorities as well as with
                         FMARD’s programs under the Agricultural Transformation Agenda (ATA) and will include: (i)
                         structuring of and capacity building to farmer organizations for improved access to markets, inputs,


                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                         and services; (iii) facilitation of value chains development opportunities to increase and improve
                         supply of services along the value chains through a matching grants mechanism; and (iii)
                         introduction and promotion of innovation through a collaborative R&D program. The component
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will put a specific focus on value chain management and capacity building for improved job
                         opportunities through promotion of small and medium-size local entrepreneurs, and inclusion of
                         youth and women in project activities, clustered around two sub-components.
                         Subcomponent 3.1: Support to agricultural productivity and market linkages. This subcomponent
                         aims at building farmers technical and managerial capacity to improve their ability to access markets
                         opportunities and adequate production support services, mechanization services, agro-processing
                         support, and financial management access to markets.
                         Subcomponent 3.2: Support to innovation and R&D. Technical assistance would be provided for
                         farmer water schools, applied research such as improving irrigated agronomy, introduction of
                         innovation such new crops or production techniques as part of emerging commercial partnerships,
                         etc. Innovations from the Project will also be identified and supported for technology transfer within
                         and outside the country . Proposals will be invited from interested agencies, including research
                         centers such as the International Water Management Institute (IWMI) and universities, and from the
                         private sector, to carry out such studies, and partnerships with international research institutions will
                         be sought to bring cutting-edge knowledge in relevant areas to the country.

                         Component 4: Institutional Development and Project Management.
                         This component will provide support to the building of capacity in the irrigation and water resources
                         sector management in general and to the key project actors in particular. In doing so, the project will
                         build further momentum around the change process, support consensus building and facilitate change
                         management among the different actors at the national, RBDA and local level. The project will also
                         work towards the creation of inclusive and accountable management of the sector and, finally, the
                         evidence-based monitoring of the roll out of these pilots so that appropriate adaptions can be made
                         and lessons for scale up generated. It will also support project management and M&E. In
                         recognition of the different needs and challenges of the selected schemes, support will be tailored to
                         the realities of each scheme. In addition, it will enhance the efficiency of personnel through the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provision of advanced IT-based tools, performance-based systems for staff evaluation, modern
                         survey and design techniques as well the overall management of the PMU and the Irrigation
                         Department through administrative and managerial skills enhancements and tools (e.g. management
                         information systems).
                         Subcomponent 4.1: Institutional Development and Governance. This subcomponent includes five
                         activities: Activity 1: Capacity building and training of FMWR staff; Activity 2: Support to RBDAs;
                         Activity 3: Consensus building and supporting the change process; Activity 4: Generation, feedback,
                         and dissemination of data, and Activity 5: Strengthening oversight and accountability in the sector.
                         Subcomponent 4.2: Project Management and M&E. This subcomponent will have two main
                         activities: Activity 1: Project Management and Coordination with the setting up of: (i) a Project
                         Management Unit (PMU) to properly manage the Project; (ii) an Steering Committee (SC) to oversee
                         and review the budget as well as guide and evaluate the performance of the PMU; and (iii) a Change
                         Management Committee (CMC) to analyze, advise and make proposal regarding the change
                         management process for large-scale public irrigation schemes in Nigeria. Activity 2, Monitoring and
                         Evaluation (M&E), will focus on three main tasks: (i) development of an Information System to
                         monitor and evaluate the project, (ii) complementary studies and analytical work; and (iii)
                         development of an Electronic Records and Document Management Systems (ERDMS) for all the
                         reports, maps, drawing and information in the department of irrigation, dams and reservoirs, statistics
                         and policy, as well as other units of the FMWR.



                                                                       Page 3 of 12
                         Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The borrower has several years of experience in applying and implementing World Bank projects.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         There are considerable legal and institutional frameworks in the country to ensure compliance with
                         World Bank safeguards policies triggered by the proposed project. In Nigeria, the Federal Ministry of
                         Environment (FMEnv) is responsible for setting policy guidelines on environmental issues and
                         ensuring compliance with national environmental standards. It has different departments with field
                         offices in every region of the country. The River Basin Development Authorities (RBDAs) have
                         units with experience in managing land acquisition and reallocation for irrigation development. The
                         project Management Unit has recruited an environmental and a social development specialist that
                         will be responsible and accountable for all safeguard issues. He or she will be supported by
                         consultants. Further, safeguard specialists in the World Bank team will provide additional guidance
                         to the TTL and PCU. The project will include a specific subcomponent to improve dam operations
                         and safety.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The TRIMING project is a seven year program located in the northern Nigeria. The project will
                         focus on gravity irrigation schemes larger than 2,000 hectares that require rehabilitation and which
                         will allow piloting improved scheme O&M performance.

                         The project intends to work in three basins (hydrological areas), four sub-basins, and five irrigation
                         schemes.
                         Basins: Niger North, Lake Chad and Upper Benue
                         Sub-basins: Sokoto Rima, Hadejia Jamaare and Gongola.
                         Irrigation Schemes: Bakolori, Middle Rima Valley, Kano River, Hadejia Valley and Dadin Kowa.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Knut Opsal (AFTCS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Hocine Chalal (AFTN1)
                         Jonathan Mills Lindsay (LEGEN)
                         Joseph Ese Akpokodje (AFTN1)
                         Michael Gboyega Ilesanmi (AFTCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project involves the rehabilitation of existing
                          BP 4.01                                             dams and associated irrigation schemes as well as
                                                                              ancillary facilities. Due to the anticipated
                                                                              potential environmental and social impacts that
                                                                              may result from the implementation of the above
                                                                              project activities, OP/BP 4.01 is triggered. The
                                                                              borrower has prepared an Environmental and
                                                                              Social Management Framework (ESMF) and an
                                                                              Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                                                                              (ESIA) for the Bakalori Irrigation Scheme that
                                                                              have been reviewed and approved by the Bank. In
                                                                              addition, the approved ESMF and ESIA for the



                                                                      Page 4 of 12
                                                                         Bakalori Scheme have been consulted upon and
                                                                         publicly disclosed countrywide in Nigeria and at
                                                                         the World Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           The rehabilitation and operation of dams and the
                                                                         irrigation schemes could affect downstream
                                                                         rivers, floodplains, wetlands and other fragile
                                                                         ecological systems, thereby triggering OP4.04.
                                                                         The project may also include interventions in
                                                                         upstream catchments. The ESMF does, and
                                                                         subsequent site specific ESIAs will, contain
                                                                         sections detailing how natural habitat issues
                                                                         would be handled by the project, including those
                                                                         potentially affecting the Hedejia-Nguru Wetlands
                                                                         and Lake Chad, which are both RAMSAR sites.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            The project will not finance the development of
                                                                         forests and therefore will not envision any
                                                                         significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                         forest areas. The area in which this project would
                                                                         be implemented will not have impacts on the
                                                                         health and quality of forests or the rights and
                                                                         welfare of people and their level of dependence
                                                                         upon or interaction with forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           Improvement in irrigation operations and
                                                                         maintenance, expansion of irrigated areas, and
                                                                         improvements in agricultural service delivery
                                                                         may lead to the proliferation of pest and increased
                                                                         use of pesticides, herbicides and other farm
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         inputs. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) has been
                                                                         prepared and publicly disclosed countrywide in
                                                                         Nigeria and at the World Bank InfoShop 120 days
                                                                         before Board date.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The project will carry out earthworks that may
                         BP 4.11                                         impact on some physical cultural resources along
                                                                         the river drainages system. To mitigate this risk,
                                                                         specific procedures (such as chance find
                                                                         procedures) are included in the ESMF and will be
                                                                         included in subsequent ESIAs as required.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            There are no indigenous peoples in the project
                                                                         area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           World Bank’s safeguard policy OP/BP 4.12 -
                         4.12                                            involuntary resettlement is triggered because the
                                                                         government’s procedure for development of new
                                                                         irrigated areas involves the government acquiring
                                                                         the land, developing canals, roads, and other
                                                                         infrastructure and then reallocating most or all of
                                                                         the remaining land to farmers. In some cases,



                                                                 Page 5 of 12
                                                                   rehabilitation works may also require land
                                                                   acquisition or might require use of government-
                                                                   owned lands that are now being used
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   (encroached) for farming or other activities. The
                                                                   project may also work in areas where land
                                                                   concessions are issued by government to private
                                                                   investors. Most of the irrigation improvement will
                                                                   be done on rehabilitation of existing scheme,
                                                                   however the extent of particular extension in the
                                                                   irrigation schemes where the project would be
                                                                   intervening are not known in sufficient details
                                                                   during project preparation. Therefore, the
                                                                   borrower has prepared Resettlement Policy
                                                                   Framework (RPF) that sets out the policies,
                                                                   principles, institutional arrangements, schedules
                                                                   and indicative budgets that will take care of
                                                                   anticipated resettlements. These arrangements are
                                                                   also to ensure that there is a systematic process
                                                                   (as against an hoc one) for the different stages of
                                                                   the implementation of a framework that assures
                                                                   participation of affected persons, involvement of
                                                                   relevant institutions and stakeholders, adherence
                                                                   to both World Bank and Government procedures
                                                                   and requirements, and outline compensation for
                                                                   affected persons. As part of due diligence the RPF
                                                                   contains a dedicated section detailing how legacy
                                                                   issues will be handled by the project if and where
                                                                   they occur. The RPF was disclosed in-country in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   Nigeria and in the World Bank’s InfoShop on
                                                                   February 19, 2014. For specific dams and
                                                                   irrigation schemes that eventually will be selected
                                                                   for rehabilitation; RAPs or ARAPs would be
                                                                   prepared, consulted upon and disclosed prior to
                                                                   the commencement of civil works as required.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   Yes           The proposed activities involve rehabilitation of
                                                                   existing large dams. The proponent will carry out
                                                                   a detailed environmental and social and safety
                                                                   audits of these dams prior to the commencement
                                                                   of civil works. The outcome of the audit would
                                                                   underpin the preparation of dam specific
                                                                   environment and social management plans, early
                                                                   warning and response systems and composition of
                                                                   dam safety panel to be put in place by the
                                                                   proponent.
                         Projects on International   Yes           The dams depend on rivers and their tributaries
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      with sources and courses (e.g River Niger,
                                                                   Sokoto, Rima, Hadeja etc) outside Nigeria. Thus


                                                           Page 6 of 12
                                                                                OP/BP 7.50 is triggered. Since Nigeria is a
                                                                                member of the Niger Basin Authority and Lake
                                                                                Chad Basin Commission, riparian notifications
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                were sent to Niger Basin Authority and Lake
                                                                                Chad Basin Commission.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is categorized A because of the potential adverse environmental and social may arise
                              due to certain planned activities, like disposal of silt during rehabilitation of irrigation
                              infrastructure, construction and installation of irrigation control structures, small bridges over
                              canals, increased used of agro-chemicals for increasing crop productivity etc. Adverse impacts
                              could also arise due to poor construction quality and unsafe construction practices.
                              Finally, the cumulative impacts of the proposed intervention along the rivers and basins of interest
                              can lead to the change in the hydrodynamic regimes of the rivers of interest and with implications
                              on the proliferation of invasive vegetation.
                              Seven safeguard policies are triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Involuntary
                              Resettlement (OP 4.12), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Physical and Cultural Resources (OP/BP
                              4.11), Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) and Projects in International
                              Waterways (OP/BP 7.50).
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The cumulative impacts of the proposed intervention along the rivers and basins of interest need to
                              be assessed thoroughly. For instance the hydrodynamic regimes of the rivers of interest and their
                              implications on the proliferation of invasive vegetation should be assessed and mitigated.

                             The project will finance particular activities to manage and reduce the invasion of weeds partly
                             caused by the construction of the dams many years ago in order to try to restore the natural
                             vegetation. The project also invests in building the technical capacity in the local institutions for
                             enhanced water resources planning and management, undertake rehabilitation and modernization
                             of critical irrigation and drainage infrastructure in identified priority areas, and extend the
                             agricultural intensification and on-farm water management activities.

                              No long term or cumulative adverse impacts were identified in the ESMF and the RPF. However,
                              the combination of multiple impacts from existing projects, the proposed project, and/or
                              anticipated future projects may result in significant adverse and/or beneficial impacts that would
                              not be expected in case of a standalone project. The ESMF’s baseline study identifies relevant
                              existing environmental and social conditions in Nigeria. In the case of the Hadejia Jamaare basin,
                              the cumulative impact assessment of Kano River and Hadejia Valley irrigation schemes will be
                              assessed.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.


                                                                        Page 7 of 12
                           In the ESMF sections on “Analysis of Alternatives”, the following alternatives were considered:
                           (i) The “no project” alternative will mean that the current state of disuse and sub-optimal capacity
                           utilization that exists in several of the planned intervention will remain and worsen the present
Public Disclosure Copy




                           situation in the proposed government infrastructure; and (ii) The “delayed project” alternative will
                           substantially escalate the cost of the project given the inflation rate in Nigeria.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Four instruments have been prepared: (i) An Environmental Management Framework (ESMF); (ii)
                           a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF); (iii) a Pest Management Plan (PMP); (iv) an
                           Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for the Bakolori Irrigation Scheme as the
                           first-mover.

                          (a) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): Safeguards policy OP 4.01 is triggered, in
                          component 2 and the potential civil work activities include rehabilitation of existing irrigation
                          schemes and expansion including farm structures such as roads, drains, etc. Since the exact
                          locations and impacts of the sub-projects have not been identified; an ESMF is prepared. The
                          ESMF ensures that the principles and procedures for the development of in-country capacity and
                          compliance with local regulations are established and it serves as the basis for environmental
                          assessment of all sub-projects to be carried out under the IUFMP. The ESMF also provides
                          guidance for preparation of ESIAs, ESMPs, and environmental audits. It includes a screening
                          process that is consistent with both World Bank operational policies and Nigeria Environmental
                          regulations, and a chapter on project processing that describes the responsibilities.

                          Most of the sub-projects in the TRIMING are not expected to result in major losses or acquisition
                          of land or in restrictions to sources of livelihoods. However, given the possibility that some of the
                          sub-projects may involve land acquisition and involuntary resettlement, an RPF has also been
                          prepared.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          (b) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): This policy is trigged because most of the sub-projects
                          could involve minimal or moderate land acquisition and or restriction of access to usual means of
                          livelihood as most of the sub-projects will largely be rehabilitation of existing infrastructure.
                          However, some of the projects may involve significant land acquisition and displacement of
                          affected people. As part of the safeguards due diligence, an RPF was prepared. The RPF outlines
                          the resettlement process in terms of procedures for preparing and approving Resettlement Action
                          Plans (RAPs); likely categories of affected people, eligibility criteria and categories,
                          compensations rates, methods of valuing affected assets, community participation and information
                          dissemination, Grievance Redress Mechanism and effective monitoring.

                          (c) Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) is triggered because some project activities may take place near
                          to critical natural habitats such as the Hadejia –Nguru Wetlands, a designated RAMSAR site. This
                          is an environmentally sensitive area and mitigation measure necessary to minimize any adverse
                          environmental and social impacts in this wetlands will be incorporated in the ESIA for the Kano
                          River Irrigation Project (KRIP) and the Hadejia Valley Irrigation Project (HVIP) that might lead
                          into the Hadejia - Jama’are Komadugu Basin (HJKYB) in which the Hadejia –Nguru Wetlands is
                          located.

                          (d) Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09) This policy is triggered because some livelihood enhancement
                          activities involve agriculture and may involve the use of pesticides and subsequent environmental


                                                                     Page 8 of 12
                          and health risks. Some of these activities may be directly financed by the project, while others may
                          be supported by farmers themselves. Thus, the procurement of any pesticide in a World Bank-
                          funded project is contingent on an assessment of the nature and degree of associated risks, taking
Public Disclosure Copy




                          into account the proposed use and intended users and in line with World Bank, WHO and FAO
                          standards. As part of the due diligence a PMP has been prepared and disclosed.

                          (e) Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) is triggered because some activities in components 2
                          may include civil works that could expose chance finds. These chance find sites may include
                          sacred shrines and burial sites. The environmental and Social Screening Checklist and the Generic
                          Environmental and Social Mitigation Measures Checklist that are annexed to the ESMF will
                          address the Physical Cultural Resource (PCR), and the ESMF includes provisions for addressing
                          such cultural heritage chance finds.

                          (f)International Waterways (World Bank OP 7.50) is triggered given that the location of some
                          project areas in the Lake Chad River Basin and the Niger River Basin. The FMWR sent an official
                          riparian notification to the Lake Chad Basin Commission and Niger Basin Authority, notifying
                          them of the project, in accordance with OP 7.50, with a April 30, 2014 deadline for receiving
                          responses.

                          (g) Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) is triggered because component 1 includes the rehabilitation of
                          dam and to improve dam safety. The project will not be directly be involved in the construction of
                          new dams and would not be supporting the construction of large dams. Project focuses on
                          rehabilitating and operational improvement of selected dams. The ESMF and RPF checklists
                          would also be used to screen such sub-projects for their potential environmental and social
                          impacts. Dam safety reports are presently been prepared and environmental and social audits of
                          the associated facilities would be carried out as required.

                          Consultation Process: Stakeholders consultation were carried out during project preparation,
                          however, additional consultations and a more detailed social assessment will be carrie d out as
Public Disclosure Copy




                          needed in the course of the selection of specific project sites.

                           These safeguards instruments (ESMF, RPF, PMP and ESIA) have been prepared by the Borrower
                           according to National and World Bank policies and were disclosed in-country in Nigeria and in
                           theWorld Bank’s InfoShop on February 17th 2014.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders are the Federal Ministry of Water Resources; River Basin Development
                           Authorities (RBDAs), State Ministry of Water Resources, LGAs in which the schemes are located,
                           local communities, Water Users Associations (WUAs), NGOs, and other relevant institutions.

                          Public consultation with regards to EA was held with local stakeholders in accordance with Bank
                          guidelines for EAs. . The key concern raised during the consultation include Land ownership; Pest
                          management such as infestation of the farms by Quelea birds; Poor drainage; Siltation of Canals;
                          Crop types to be farmed in the various schemes; role of Water Users Associations -WUAs-;
                          interactions between farmers and cattle rearers and socio-economic issues; Marginalization of
                          vulnerable groups – women and disabled; Public Health concerns - especially HIV/AIDs,
                          schistosomiasis, dysentery/diarrhea, water-borne diseases & Choleras, STIs, Malaria, etc).



                                                                    Page 9 of 12
                           The draft final ESIA Bakalori Irrigation Scheme was disclosed publicly in country on February
                           19th, 2014 and at the Bank’s Infoshop on February 19th, 2014.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Public consultation will be an on-going activity taking place throughout the entire project process.
                           Public participation and consultation would take place through meetings, radio programs, requests
                           for written proposals/comments, filling in of questionnaires, explanations of project to the locals,
                           making public documents available at the state and local levels. At the local level, suitable
                           locations will include the residents residing with the various irrigation schemes. These measures
                           would take into account the low literacy levels prevalent in these rural communities by allowing
                           enough time for responses and feedback.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Feb-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      25-Apr-2014
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nigeria                                                          19-Feb-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Feb-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nigeria                                                          19-Feb-2014
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Feb-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nigeria                                                          19-Feb-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?


                                                                     Page 10 of 12
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information



                                                                    Page 11 of 12
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Juan David Casanova Anoll
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 28-Apr-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Martien Van Nieuwkoop (SM)                     Date: 30-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
