                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA3870
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Malawi                             Project ID:    P131660
                            Project Name:      Skills Development Project (P131660)
                            Task Team          Deepa Sankar
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          10-Dec-2013                        Estimated   24-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTEE                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Tertiary education (80%), Vocational training (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (60%), Education for the knowledge economy (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          50.00              Total Bank Financing:        50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 50.00
                              Total                                                                                       50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the proposed project is to increase access, enhance market relevance,
                           and increase the results orientation of supported skills development institutions in agreed priority
                           areas
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed Skills Development Project will have several components for implementation in

                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                         colleges in the country:

                         Component 1: Increased Access to and Enhanced Market-Relevance Training in Higher Education
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The objective of this component is to support the reforms outlined in the NESP under two
                         subcomponents. Subcomponent 1.1 is the performance-based component part of the Credit and will
                         disburse against the achievement of agreed upon Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs).
                         Subcomponent 1.2 will strengthen capacities in the Government for compliance with DLIs.

                         Subcomponent 1.1: Compact for Expanding Access and Market Relevant Training in Higher
                         Education

                         The main instrument for implementing this subcomponent will be compacts between the NCHE and
                         selected public higher education institution: Mzuzu University, Malawi Polytechnic and Chancellor
                         College (both constituent colleges of the University of Malawi), and the Lilongwe University of
                         Agriculture and Natural Resources. The compacts will help clarify each institution’s distinctive
                         mission, the scope and focus of its educational provision, expectations of its performance, and the
                         labour market areas for which each institution prepares graduates. Compacts will include a set of
                         initiatives in line with the institutions mission and comparative advantage in the areas indicated in
                         the PDO. Draft initiatives will be negotiated as part of the project preparation. Initiatives considered
                         include (i) expansion of e-learning modules and basic infrastructure to enhance access; (ii)
                         development of relevant curriculum reform, introduction of research and entrepreneurship grants
                         programs, faculty development programs, and technicians training programs to enhance quality and
                         relevance; and (iii) improved quality assurance and fiduciary systems for institutional strengthening.
                         This component will also support strengthening the student financing system.

                         Subcomponent 1.2: Institutional Development for Enhanced Access and Expanded Market Relevant
                         Training in Higher Education

                         This subcomponent will finance the design and implementation of institutional strengthening
Public Disclosure Copy




                         programs linked to subcomponent 1.1. This includes capacity building and technical assistance to
                         Universities, NCHE and MoEST in areas of fiduciary reforms and Monitor and Evaluation; and (ii)
                         technical assistance to facilitate the implementation of initiatives in subcomponent 1.1.

                         Component 2: Increased Access and Enhanced Market-Relevant Training in TEVET

                         The objective of this component is to enhance access to skills training and broaden the skills base in
                         selected priority sectors through expanding TEVET to labor market entrants with special emphasis
                         on the needs of presently underserved communities in rural areas and strengthening the governance
                         and management of TEVET. The proposed challenge fund in rural areas will not only support
                         enhancing access to skills development for underserved communities but also build-up a national
                         stock of programs, curricula, training methodologies and materials for non-formal training as well as
                         developed best practice targeting for informal sector training.. There are currently several
                         Development partners (AfDB, CIDA, and UNESCO) addressing issues of access and quality in
                         formal TEVET programs through ongoing infrastructure and teacher training interventions
                         supported, thus this subcomponent will limit its support to formal TEVET to institutional
                         strengthening interventions. The institutional strengthening, policy and systems development this
                         component will complement their contributing to the creation of effective and efficient demand-
                         oriented governance and management structure of the Malawian TEVET system.



                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         Subcomponent 2.1 : Challenge Fund For Increased Access and Enhanced Market-Relevant Training
                         in TEVET
                         This subcomponent will finance (i) the development and implementation of a competitive grant
Public Disclosure Copy




                         funding facility (“challenge fund”) for the expansion of relevant skills development in the national
                         priority sectors agriculture/agro-processing, construction and mining, with a strong focus on lower
                         level artisan training and target groups in the rural areas through non/informal training– accessible to
                         both public and private TEVET institutions upon competitive bidding; and (ii) evaluating the
                         effectiveness of this intervention to improve employment outcomes for youth in rural communities.

                         The development and implementation of new TEVET non/informal training programs in the priority
                         sectors will be supported through a challenge fund, whereby institutions compete for grant funding
                         on the basis of project proposals. Clustered in different funding windows, this challenge fund will
                         provide financial support to projects implemented and managed by the training providers themselves
                         for activities including expansion of existing facilities (rehabilitation of classrooms, building/
                         construction of new classrooms/training centers, etc.), teacher training, tuition fees for students. The
                         fund will be built on the extensive experience with other recent challenge funds in the education and
                         training sector to facilitate tailored approaches to skills development, which is important to cater for
                         specific target groups and target labour markets. Through the competitive access to funding, based on
                         sound project proposals, the fund will also be instrumental in improving institutional capacities in the
                         TEVET sector and facilitate the development of institutional development plans.

                         Subcomponent 2.2 Institutional Development for Increased Access and Enhanced Market-Relevant
                         Training in TEVET

                         This subcomponent will finance institutional development for TEVET. This includes (i) capacity
                         building in TEVET A and Ministry of Labour for policy development, strategic planning, and
                         financing; (ii) review of apprenticeship system; and (iii) design and implementation of a harmonized
                         assessment/certification system including the development of a roadmap and funding of capacity
                         building measures.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will cover public university colleges and training centers across the country. All foreseen
                         infrastructures are expected to be rehabilitated/built on already existing premises. The specific
                         locations, sizes of pieces of lands needed for such expansion/civil works, the scope of construction/
                         rehabilitation works of lecture rooms, laboratories are not known at this stage. Some of the
                         information on the above aspects will be gathered throughout the preparation phase.

                         Preliminary scope of some activities has been outlined, while some subprojects will be known at
                         later stage upon further scoping and definition of the specific needs of colleges. To this end, it should
                         be noted highlighted description of proposed components reflects the final decision on the
                         investments to listed education centers or represents an indicative list of subprojects, which may
                         change during project implementation.

                         Preliminary description of civil works on the four main public colleges will include expansions and
                         rehabilitation works as outlined in the following:
                         (i)      Rehabilitation and expansion works at Chancellor College.
                         Activities will include maintenance of selected leaking roofs, broken fittings, drains, water and
                         electrical installations, painting of some buildings. Planned expansion involves the construction of


                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         additional lecture rooms, 2 laboratories, 2 office blocks, library facilities, office space, boarding
                         facilities, dining and kitchen facilities, ablution facilities for students and staff, and related walkways.
                         (ii)      Rehabilitation and minor expansion works at the Malawi Polytechnic.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Activities will include maintenance of leaking roofs, broken fittings, drainage maintenance, water
                         and electrical installations, and painting. Planned minor expansion involves the construction of one
                         double storey office block (with 32 offices), one conference hall, two lecture theatres, and one
                         instruction workshop, with ancillary store rooms, cloakroom and ablution facilities for students and
                         staff, and related walkways, access road, and storm water drainage inside the campus.
                         iii)       Expansion and rehabilitation works of Mzuzu University.
                         Activities will include maintenance of leaking roofs, broken fittings, storm water drains, water and
                         electrical installations, and painting. Planned minor expansion involves the construction of satellite
                         learning centres (for distance learning) in seven Malawi’s Education Divisions, construction of a
                         new classrooms, with ancillary store rooms, ablution facilities for students and staff, and related
                         walkways, access road, and storm water drainage inside the campus.
                         iv) Expansion and rehabilitation works at Lilongwe University of Agriculture
                         and Natural Resources.

                         Activities will include extensions to library, repairing of malfunctioning drainage, water and
                         electrical installations, and painting. Planned expansion involves the construction of ancillary store
                         rooms, ablution facilities for students and staff, and related walkways.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
                         Hastings Solomon Mumba (AFTA3)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              The project is classified as Environmental and
                         BP 4.01                                                Social Assessment (ESA) Category B - Partial
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                Assessment as it is expected to generate
                                                                                moderate and site-specific adverse impacts during
                                                                                the construction of new classrooms and
                                                                                rehabilitation of existing structures. Negative
                                                                                environmental impacts may include natural
                                                                                vegetation clearing which may result in soil
                                                                                erosion, noise pollution, dust emissions,
                                                                                accumulation of solid wastes, water pollution, and
                                                                                disruption of social patterns, etc.

                                                                                Since the actual sites locations for the
                                                                                construction and tertiary institution will not be
                                                                                known by project appraisal, the borrower will
                                                                                prepare an Environmental and Social
                                                                                Management Framework (ESMF) which will
                                                                                provide a uniform approach for addressing all
                                                                                potential social and environmental impacts in all
                                                                                sub-projects. The ESMF built upon that of the
                                                                                former education project will also establish clear
                                                                                procedures and methodologies for social and


                                                                        Page 4 of 9
                                                                         environmental assessment, review, approval and
                                                                         implementation of sub-projects to be financed
                                                                         under the HESDP, namely environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         social screening form (ESSF) and environmental
                                                                         and social check-list, (ESCL),specify appropriate
                                                                         environmental and social clauses to be included in
                                                                         contractors’ contracts, as well as roles and
                                                                         responsibilities, and outline the necessary
                                                                         reporting procedures, for managing and
                                                                         monitoring environmental and social concerns
                                                                         related to the project.

                                                                         The ESMF was consulted upon and disclosed in-
                                                                         country and at the Bank’s InfoShop on December
                                                                         27, 2013.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           Ministry of Education, Science and Technology
                         BP 4.11                                         will not fund any sub-projects that will have
                                                                         negative effects on known physical cultural
                                                                         resources. In case cultural objects are found in the
                                                                         course of civil works, the project will utilize the
                                                                         chance find procedures included in the ESMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           This may happen during construction of new
                         4.12                                            satellite learning centers outside premises of
                                                                         Mzuzu University and Lilongwe University of
                                                                         Agriculture and Natural Resources. Potential risks
                                                                         are: loss of access to land, assets, loss of income
                                                                         sources or means of livelihoods whether or not
                                                                         affected people must move to another location.

                                                                         A RPF was prepared to guide procedures on all
                                                                         sub-projects in incidences of land acquisitions,
                                                                         in cases of negative social impacts to people such
                                                                         as losses of assets, loss of income sources, loss of
                                                                         access to assets and income sources. The RPF
                                                                         was disclosed, following public consultations, in-
                                                                         country and at the Bank’s InfoShop on December
                                                                         27, 2013.




                                                                 Page 5 of 9
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              •        Safeguard issues include potential negative environmental impacts, such as soil erosion,
                              dust emissions from civil works, noise pollution from construction workers, increase in solid waste
                              generation, increase in sewage generation within campuses, loss of trees and shade for students/
                              lecturers, and increase in solid waste and sewage generation from increased intake of students and
                              staff.
                              •        Potential negative social impacts would be: blockage of footpaths/roads/walkways, loss of
                              trees, loss of access to natural resources, Loss of productive asset ( land) in case of land
                              acquisition for new satellite centres for Mzuzu University and Lilongwe University of Agriculture
                              and Natural Resources.
                              •        Another potential issue is spread of HIV/Aids and STIs due to migrant construction
                              workers.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              No significant indirect or long term impacts have been identified.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              •        Government has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                              to guide the mainstreaming of environmental and social considerations in the projects.
                              Government has also prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to guide on resettlement
                              planning and compensation issues, if they occur.

                             •       Ministry of Education has no technical capacity to prepare detailed environmental and
                             social management plans for sub-projects at the public colleges. They will be assisted by a
                             consultant, that will be responsible for screening, development of appropriate mitigation measures
                             and monitoring the construction team on implementation of these mitigation measures. The
                             consultant should work with the Ministry of Education to build internal capacity for safeguards.

                             •       Government will require technical and financial support to prepare detailed
                             environmental and social management plans for each of sub-projects in line with OP 4.01.
                             Government will require technical support to prepare resettlement screening report for all sub-
                             projects before commencement of works.


                                                                        Page 6 of 9
                           Some of the mitigation measures proposed in the ESMF include the following:
                           •       Comprehensive vegetative cover after construction works –to check soil erosion
Public Disclosure Copy




                           •       Tree planting along perimeter of the premises to replaced cleared trees
                           •       Purchase existing buildings/properties ( in towns/cities) and convert such buildings to
                           ODL satellite learning centres instead of construction of new buildings.
                           •       Expansion of sewage works/septic tanks to for proper management of increase sewage
                           discharge
                           •       Purchase of more refuse bins for classrooms and hostels for solid waste disposal.
                           •       Use of cement blocks for construction to minimize loss of trees used for burnt bricks

                           Capacity for implementation of safeguards:
                           At District level safeguards capacity has improved as key technical staff includes Environmental
                           District Officer, District Environmental Inspectors and District Lands Officers who have been
                           trained in environmental management issues. Also, at district level, there is a District
                           Environmental Sub Committee (DESCO) which coordinates natural resources management
                           including environmental and social safeguards.

                           DESCO will have an active role in the implementation and monitoring of environmental and
                           social safeguards at local level. Recently, government has recruited Environmental Inspectors to
                           strengthen the environmental inspectorate and advisory management services in all parts of the
                           country. These Environmental Inspectors will play active role in further mainstreaming
                           environmental and social consideration of project activities under HESD. Additional technical
                           capacity will be provided by the project to further strengthen the technical safeguards capacity of
                           all key stakeholders.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
Public Disclosure Copy




                           safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           •        Key stakeholders are: Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, TEVETA, Malawi
                           Polytechnic, Chancellor College, Lilongwe University of Agriculture and Natural Resources,
                           students, National Council of Higher Education, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Climate Change
                           and Environment, International Development Association, lecturers, students, general public.
                           •        Some stakeholders have been consulted at this stage such as senior officials of the four
                           public universities, National Council of Higher Education, IDA and Department of Environmental
                           Affairs. Other stakeholders ( students, lecturers, communities around) will be consulted during the
                           preparation of detailed environmental and social management plans.
                           Disclosure Mechanisms:
                           •        Both ESMF and RPF will be made available to National Council of Higher Education,
                           four public colleges, students, lectures at colleges (sites of projects), district commissioners’
                           offices, public libraries in all public colleges and main towns.
                           •        Press releases will be inserted in four national newspapers with wide circulation in Malawi
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         13-Nov-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      27-Dec-2013



                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Malawi                                                           06-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      13-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   27-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Malawi                                                           06-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?



                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Deepa Sankar
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Svetlana Khvostova (RSA)                       Date: 03-Jan-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Barbara Weber (SM)                             Date: 14-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
