                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA9793
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Kazakhstan                         Project ID:    P150402
                            Project Name:     Kazakhstan: Fostering Productive Innovation Project (P150402)
                            Task Team         Karen Grigorian
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         18-Sep-2014                        Estimated   31-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GTCDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General industry and trade sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Other Private Sector Development (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        110.00                Total Bank Financing: 88.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  22.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     88.00
                              Total                                                                                    110.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to promote high-quality, nationally relevant research
                           and commercialization of technologies.
                            3. Project Description
                           Building on the visible achievements under the TCP project, the new operation would expand and
                           adapt the range of instruments used in the TCP and offer new programs for financing innovation to

                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         complement similar pilot innovation programs introduced by the government in recent years.

                         Project consists of five components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1 - Development of the Knowledge Base for Innovation ($40 million): The objective is
                         to assure appropriate R&D deal flow and advanced human capital for the Innovation Consortia and
                         Technology Commercialization Cycle Components. The component will finance grants for young
                         researchers and internationally recognized researchers ($30 million), and PhD training abroad in
                         technical areas strategic for Kazakhstan’s economy ($10 million).

                         Component 2 – Technology Consortia for Inclusive Innovation ($35 million): The objective is to
                         promote collaboration among the existing scientific research institutes and design bureaus, scientific
                         and engineering profile laboratories and between these research centers and world’s innovation
                         leaders through R&D and technology consortia and to take the effort to the commercialization stage.
                         The component includes two windows of Calls for Proposals: (a) Productive sector consortia
                         (agriculture, extractive industries, manufacturing; and (b) Inclusive innovation consortia (health,
                         education, water, urban and rural infrastructure).

                         Component 3 – Consolidation of the Technology Commercialization Cycle ($24million): The
                         objective is to complement the existing financial instruments and solutions suitable to different
                         stages of startup company development. The four sub-components finance: (a) Public Support to a
                         Funding Facility for technology-based enterprises and for providing a demonstration effect of
                         commercial viability of these investments ($10 million); (b) Innovation brokerage to generate deal
                         flow ($2 million); (c) Technology Acceleration Offices Abroad ($2 million); and (d) Network of
                         Technology Transfer Offices (TTO) at major Kazakh universities ($10 million).

                         Component 4 - Innovation Council ($6 million): The objective is to assure better coordination
                         between key stakeholders of the NIS, including mainly the MOES, Ministry of Industries and New
                         Technologies (MINT), Ministry of Agriculture, and Ministry of Oil and Gas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 5 - Project Implementation ($5 million). The Component will finance project
                         management, monitoring and evaluation, awareness raising and capacity development.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is expected to cover entire country with matching grants and SME support, including
                         equity investments for all eligible entities in Kazakhstan. The project would target work and R&D
                         that addresses strategic problems related to key sectors such as energy, minerals, metallurgy and
                         agriculture. Project would also include developing and providing public funds for a private-public
                         venture fund for technology companies all around the country. The project will provide grants to
                         upgrade the chosen facilities (laboratories) to international standards.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Lola Ibragimova (GSURR)
                         Natasa Vetma (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes           The Environmental Management Framework has



                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         BP 4.01                                        been prepared prior to appraisal and defines
                                                                        environmental procedures and due diligence for
                                                                        the project as a whole. The EMF builds on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        existing TCP and Croatian Science and
                                                                        Technology Project II, which covers similar types
                                                                        (wide range) of research activities.
                                                                        For Component 1, Grants to research teams,
                                                                        Component 3, Innovation matching grants to
                                                                        provide early stage support for commercialization
                                                                        of R&D, and for Funding program for innovative
                                                                        SMEs to provide matching equity, an EMF has
                                                                        been developed focusing on variety of
                                                                        environmental impacts that come from R&D
                                                                        sectors. Sub-projects might range from low to
                                                                        high category B projects, implying possible
                                                                        preparation of various due diligence documents
                                                                        like: EIA, EMP, EMP checklist for which criteria
                                                                        are defined in EMF. Category A projects will be
                                                                        excluded, as well those listed on IBRD non-
                                                                        eligible project list. For smaller rehabilitation
                                                                        expected under category 1-3, EMP checklist for
                                                                        rehabilitation will be prepared and template is
                                                                        part of the EMF. The EMF makes sure that the
                                                                        implementation of the project complies with both
                                                                        National and WB safeguards procedures.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No           The project will not support R&D activities in
                                                                        protected areas or natural habitats of high value.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No           The project will not support R&D activities in /
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        on forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No           The borrower will exclude any activities that
                         4.12                                           would involve land acquisition and do not meet
                                                                        “willing buyer/willing seller” criteria. The PMU
                                                                        would be responsible for confirming (as part of
                                                                        sub-project screening) that in any such case the
                                                                        seller was free to decline selling the land and also
                                                                        that any land purchased in this way was free of
                                                                        'encumberances" that could include informal
                                                                        occupants. The screening checklist is integrated in
                                                                        the operational manual. Verification spot check
                                                                        will also be required by the monitoring officers.



                                                                Page 3 of 7
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental Assessment Policies will apply to the proposed project.
                              The project triggers Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The project calls for B
                              environmental category.
                              The project will not have any potential large, significant or irreversible environmental impacts.
                              Only EA Category B and C sub-projects (includes grants for research and rehabilitation works)
                              will be eligible, and projects having large scale impacts (Category A) or those identified on the
                              non-eligible project list are excluded as described in Environmental Management Framework
                              (EMF).

                              Environmental due diligence will be applied through the procedures for the selection and
                              implementation of sub project agreed between the Bank, the Borrower and MoES. The EMF
                              outlines the guiding principles of environmental screening, assessment, review, management, and
                              monitoring procedures for two distinctive types of sub-projects: a) grants supported through
                              Components 1 and 3 and b) for smaller rehabilitations expected under Category 1-3. In addition, it
                              describes roles and responsibilities in carrying out the environmental work during the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                              implementation. The environmental due diligence procedures identified in the EMF comply both
                              with Kazakhstan national and World Bank environmental safeguards procedures. The EMF was
                              prepared, according to the Bank guidance, by the Borrower. The Bank, more specifically, the
                              safeguards team reviewed procedures proposed in EMF for both grants and rehabilitation sub-
                              projects and found them adequate and compliant with the World Bank safeguards policies.

                              Any land acquisition which does not meet willing buyer/ willing seller criteria is precluded from
                              financing under the project. In addition, the PIU at the initial pre-screening stage, will also exclude
                              all sub-projects supporting any activities which result in the loss of assets or access to assets and
                              means of livelihood.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The project will support wide range of sub-projects in science and research and it is not expected
                              that any proposed activities will cause multiple, significant, irreversible, and long-term adverse
                              environmental and/or health impacts. The screening procedures specified in the EMF are designed
                              to eliminate any sub-projects (including both sub-financing investments and TAs) which present
                              these types of risks.
                              As the project will finance scientific research sub-projects, cancerogenic, mutagenic agents might
                              be used, as well as trace radioactive materials and practices with ethical issues like testing on
                              laboratory animals. The EMF calls for detailed description of procurement, supply, use, handling,


                                                                          Page 4 of 7
                           storing and disposal of such agents and testing animals. Description of these practices should be
                           submitted with all relevant permits in the sub- project application period. These projects will be
                           prior reviewed by team in MoES and WB environmental specialist.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Despite a low likelihood of occurrence, sub-projects which would qualify for environmental
                           Category A are excluded from the activities eligible for the project support as stated in EMF.

                          For the rehabilitations of laboratories and science buildings, generic EMP checklist for has been
                          prepared as part of the EMF. For each rehabilitation sub-project a site specific EMP checklist will
                          be prepared and disclosed. EMF as well includes a list of international good laboratory practices.

                          Grant sub-projects categorized as Category B may vary on their potential impacts and therefore are
                          divided in two sub categories:

                          B+ mainly related to new construction / addition or activities for research purposes (not expected
                          under the project), which are recognized as one that might have significant, negative and/or short
                          term environmental impacts, of the magnitude of which are difficult to determine at the sub-
                          project identification stage and/or are activities of 3rd or 4th category according to national
                          legislation, i.e. The Ecological Code; and

                          B - involving smaller research investments, which may have intermediate levels of regular and
                          accidental emissions and typical simple construction related impacts.

                           Approval of higher risk Category B sub projects (B+) will require prior review by PMU and WB
                           environmental specialist. The status of environmental compliance will be reported by sub-project
                           beneficiary to PMU on regular basis and the PMU will provide this information to the Bank as a
                           part of general progress reporting.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           As part of the project Operational Manual the MoES, more specifically PMU has prepared an
                           environment section, which serves as the Environmental Management Framework and defines the
                           environmental screening and assessment procedures for the project and sub-projects (grants and
                           rehabilitation works).

                          Environmental screening of sub-project proposals will be essential to ensure that sub-projects are
                          properly categorized and respective environmental review is carried out for them. This mechanism
                          of environmental screening, review, approval, and supervision of sub-projects, including roles and
                          responsibilities of all agencies involved in the process, is described in the EMF and included in the
                          Operations Manual of the project. According to the established EMF, sub-project applicants will
                          be required to carry out adequate type of environmental assessment of the proposed sub-projects
                          according to the WB safeguards procedures and to obtain environmental permits as prescribed by
                          the national legislation.

                          MoES and its PMU will be responsible for environmental screening of sub- projects applications,
                          assigning relevant environmental categories to them, reviewing environmental assessment reports
                          for sub – financing submitted by applicants, approving them, and carrying out environmental
                          supervision and monitoring in the course of sub-project implementation.

                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                           Depending on the assigned environmental category, the sub-project application package would
                           include one of the following: a) EIA and EMP; b) EMP alone; c) simplified (checklist) EMP
                           alone; d) material EMP; and e) explanation why no EA or EMP is required.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           If required, Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) and / or other due diligence documents
                           defined in EMF, will be developed to provide guidance on the application of mitigation measures
                           and a system of monitoring will be introduced to ensure compliance of sub-project implementation
                           with EMPs.

                           The existing PMU of the MoES for the ongoing TCP, will be responsible for day-to-day project
                           administration, including environmental safeguards management. Currently, the PMU has a person
                           in charge for environmental issues. Nevertheless, the capacity of project institutions and applicants
                           for implementation of the EMF will be constantly built during the project cycle to successfully
                           follow project implementation. For all technical PMU members and other stakeholders working or
                           associated with the project and first round of applicants, the World Bank environmental specialist
                           will organize workshop on environmental compliance and implementation of the EMF. The World
                           Bank environmental specialist will closely monitor screening process to support the client. The
                           training will be repeated during the course of the project if required and other types of training
                           would be offered to the PMU staff.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders are the MoES and scientific and research community. The implementation
                           agency is MoES which will also carry on environmental screening of the sub-projects.

                           EMF, as well as the invitation to a public consultation have been published on September 10, 2014
                           on the official web pages of the MoES: http://edu.gov.kz/ru/uvedomlenie-ob-obshchestvennom-
                           obsuzhdenii-ramochnogo-plana-prirodoohrannyh-meropriyatiy-po-proektu . In addition to public
                           announcement, the invitation was sent directly to e-mail addresses of key counterparts and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           relevant people from the Kazakhstan scientific, business and public sector.
                           Public consultation will be held on September 19, 2014 in Astana. Comments will reflected in the
                           slightly revised EMF and the document will again published on the above mentioned web-pages
                           for additional public commenting.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Sep-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kazakhstan                                                       10-Sep-2014
                           Comments: URL of the EMF announcement on MOES website: http://edu.gov.kz/ru/
                                         uvedomlenie-ob-obshchestvennom-obsuzhdenii-ramochnogo-plana-
                                         prirodoohrannyh-meropriyatiy-po-proektu
                                         Date of public hearings: September 19, 2014.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/

                                                                      Page 6 of 7
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Karen Grigorian
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/      Name: Paloma Anos Casero (PMGR)                    Date: 19-Sep-2014
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 7 of 7
