                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA7061
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Burkina Faso                      Project ID:    P124015
                            Project Name:      Social Safety Net Project (P124015)
                            Task Team          Azedine Ouerghi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          27-Jan-2014                       Estimated   23-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTSW                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Public administration- Other social services (30%), Other social services (70%)
                            Theme(s):         Social safety nets (80%), Other social protection and risk management (10%),
                                              Nutrition and food security (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      50.00           Total Bank Financing:                  50.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                50.00
                              Total                                                                                      50.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to provide income support to poor households and to lay
                           the foundations for a basic safety net system in Burkina Faso.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project will be implemented using Investment Project Financing (IPF) for a period of 5 years

                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         starting in FY15. The project is expected to be financed by an IDA credit of US$50.00 million.
                         Based on the existing evidence and on-going activities, the project will achieve the PDO by: i)
                         designing and implementing a cash transfer program as one of the building blocks of an national
Public Disclosure Copy




                         safety net system, and ii) assist the country in establishing systems for coordinating and
                         implementing safety net programs.

                         The design of the proposed operation reflects the extensive analytical work and pilot experiences
                         undertaken by the government, the Bank, and other development partners on safety nets in Burkina
                         Faso (including the safety net assessment, poverty analysis, and the evaluations of pilot transfer
                         programs). The key recommendations of the safety net assessment stated that safety nets in Burkina
                         should directly support the consumption of the chronically poor households and ensure access to
                         basic social services in order to promote human capital investment. Key conclusions of the impact
                         evaluations note that transfer programs can increase food consumption both in quantity and quality,
                         increase the poor’s use of health services and school attendance, and improve the nutritional status of
                         children. Therefore, the priority principle of the system supported by the project is to ensure that
                         poor households receive regular and predictable support along with complementary programs to ease
                         demand side constraints preventing them from accessing to basic social services and improving their
                         nutritional intake.

                         The Bank and other partners are already engaged in the areas of safety nets and improving access to
                         services by the poor in Burkina Faso. The Bank has engaged in dialogue with the government for
                         more than 2 years and has established a strong relationship with the government and other partners
                         on the safety net agenda. A parallel Youth Employment and Skills Development project (P130735) is
                         currently implementing a public works program in urban centers such as Ouagadougou and Bobo
                         Dioulasso. The Bank is also supporting a Reproductive Health Project (P119917) which aims to
                         assist the rural population and particularly poor women to access better reproductive health services.
                         WFP’s voucher programs address other aspects of urban poverty, especially food poverty and
                         provided support to around 30,000 households in these two cities during six months in 2010 and
                         2012.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project aims to start to bridge the gap between safety nets and the humanitarian response system
                         and takes scalability and coordination issues at heart. The main target group of the project is
                         chronically poor households eligible for cash transfer support as a cornerstone program of the overall
                         safety net. However, the systems that will be developed under component 2 are meant to be usable
                         for other safety nets, such as public works or voucher programs, and for programs subsidizing access
                         to social services such as education and health so that government resources can be concentrated in
                         the fight against food insecurity, exploit synergies, and maximize impact and efficiency. For
                         instance, if urban areas were selected for the cash transfer program, they would take into account the
                         location of operations of the public works program. The project will coordinate with the
                         Reproductive Health Project which aims to assist the rural population to access better reproductive
                         health services as well as WFP which aims to improve food insecurity and nutrition in some of the
                         project areas.

                         Project Components

                         Component 1: Cash transfers and awareness programs for poor households (US$38.8 million).

                         This component will support the development and implementation of a cash transfer program to
                         serve as one of the cornerstones of Burkina Faso’s safety net. The cash transfers will support poor

                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         households with young children by increasing their income for a period of 3 years. The payments
                         will be made on a regular basis to allow beneficiaries to use the transfers to stabilize their food
                         consumption and, indirectly, to enable mothers and main caregivers to ensure children’s proper
Public Disclosure Copy




                         feeding (e.g. by breastfeeding and accessing micronutrients as needed), and growth monitoring. This
                         would contribute to improved nutrition in the household and decrease the need for negative coping
                         mechanisms.

                         The program will operate in the most disadvantaged areas of the country where chronic poverty and
                         malnutrition are the highest. These regions include the Est, Nord, and Centre-Est as these are by far
                         the poorest in the country. Targeting these areas is also consistent with the government’s efforts to
                         concentrate resources in areas with high food insecurity as prioritized in the MDG Acceleration
                         Framework. The focus will be on rural areas but may also include some peri-urban areas. The first
                         level of targeting will be geographic and will select regions, districts/provinces and even
                         communities based on recently available data on a combination of chronic poverty and prevalence of
                         chronic malnutrition (stunting=height-for-age <-2 std). It will also take into account the availability
                         of other complementary interventions such as those provided by the Reproductive Health Project and
                         others related to food security, nutrition, and health in order to maximize the synergy between supply
                         and demand.

                         The targeted groups will include poor households with children under the age of 15 years and/or
                         pregnant women. The second level of targeting will include a combination of simplified proxy means
                         testing (PMT), categorical targeting, and community-based targeting in order to identify the poorest
                         households with young children. The goal is to identify poor households whose children are at risk of
                         being malnourished because they live in areas with high malnutrition prevalence. Community-based
                         targeting has been tested in Burkina as a way of identifying the poorest in rural areas. While
                         international evidence indicate that the first 1,000 days of a child’s life are the most important in
                         terms of nutrition as any deficiencies incurred at this age are irreversible, the project will include
                         households with children up to 15 years of age to encourage regular health check-ups, proper
                         nutrition and school attendance for these children. In rural Burkina, almost all poor households have
Public Disclosure Copy




                         children under the age of 15 years old.

                         The transfer level and structure are based on careful analysis of household level data and impact
                         evaluations findings. In other African countries , a level equivalent to around 20 percent of monthly
                         expenditures of poor households has proven sufficient to allow households to improve their
                         consumption yet is low enough not to create any work disincentives. This level is equal to about
                         FCFA 10,000 per household per month in Burkina (see Annex 6). Each selected enrolled household
                         will be given one transfer payment per pay period. For households with less than five children under
                         the age of 15 the monthly average transfer level will be FCFA 10,000 and for households with five
                         children or more the transfer level will be around FCFA 13,000. Selected households will benefit
                         from transfers for a total of 36 months. Transfers may be paid every three months subject to
                         practicalities on the ground.

                         Operationally, beneficiaries will receive cash through payment agencies, which will use a payment
                         list provided by program management. The transfers will be provided to a female household
                         representative once they present their beneficiary ID card. The payment system will be based on a
                         centrally managed database, and payments will be made by fixed or mobile branches of the agencies
                         selected by the operation (see Annex 2 for details).

                         The component will also include accompanying measures in participating communities to assist

                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                         beneficiaries to improve household practices related to human development and in particular
                         nutrition. The aim of these accompanying measures is to increase the probability of the households
                         breaking the intergenerational cycle of poverty, reduce the incidence of malnutrition, and improving
Public Disclosure Copy




                         human development goals related to MDG 1, 2, 4, and 5. As such, they will serve as ‘soft conditions’
                         or beneficiary co-responsibilities. The project will target all household members with a particular
                         focus on pregnant women and children age 0-23 months, corresponding to the “window of
                         opportunity”, which is a crucial time to ensure optimum physical growth and development of the
                         individual child. The measures will include social and behavior change communication (SBCC) on
                         the importance of nutrition for pregnant women and children 0-23 months, community-based
                         promotion of cognitive development for children 24-59 months, education of children 5-15 years,
                         and the economic capacity and empowerment for women. The accompanying measures will include
                         demand-side measures but will not support nutrition direct interventions such as targeted feeding,
                         nutritional recuperation, food distribution, or provision of micronutrients. For thi s, the project will
                         coordinate with existing interventions at community level in order to link cash transfer beneficiaries
                         with food and micronutrient supplementation and distribution services.

                         As part of the SBCC, education, information, communication (IEC) services on topics such as good
                         nutrition, breast-feeding, basic health care and sanitation (see Annex 2) will be provided in the
                         communities. Beneficiaries will be urged to participate in these IEC sessions, as ‘soft conditions’ for
                         receiving cash transfers although failure to attend will not result in withdrawal of the payments.
                         Other SBCC activities that can be supported by the project include advocacy to local leaders and
                         authorities, community mobilization and organization, counseling, home visits and communication
                         via mass media (e.g. local radio).

                         This component will finance cash transfers to beneficiary households as well as administrative costs
                         for developing and implementing the program. The component will also finance implementation of
                         the accompanying measures. Administrative costs such as the targeting, identification and
                         registration of beneficiary housholds and the development and training of SBCC services are covered
                         in component 2.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Laying the foundations for a basic national safety net system (US$6.6 million).

                         This component will assist the country in designing and developing operational building blocks that
                         can be used for coordinating safety net programs and increasing their effectiveness through a
                         systemic approach. The objective is to contribute to the establishment of a long-term effective and
                         sustainable (institutionally, politically and financially) system of safety nets anchored in the national
                         social protection strategy. An important aspect of the proposed system will be the capacity to expand
                         and adjust the safety net in response to shocks by: (i) increasing the value of the transfer given to
                         current beneficiaries; and (ii) expanding the cash transfer program to additional beneficiaries, albeit
                         for a shorter period of time than for the regular beneficiaries. Because developing, testing,
                         implementing and updating systems takes time, this component will be implemented over the whole
                         project period.

                         This component will first support the development of the building blocks for the cash transfer
                         program, as the core pillar of the Burkina safety net. The most important building blocks for
                         coordinating and operating safety net programs are a) an effective targeting system for identifying
                         potential beneficiary households; b) a registry of these households to be used by the different safety
                         net programs; c) a Management Information System (MIS) linking the different interventions and the
                         different levels of operations of the program implementers; d) a secure and efficient payment system

                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                         for making and validating payments; e) an M&E system to allow evidence based policy making and
                         adjusting system functioning over time, which would include an audit; and f) a grievance redress
                         mechanism including formal and social oversight mechanisms. This component will finance these
Public Disclosure Copy




                         systems for the cash transfer program and put them into operation when implementing the cash
                         transfer program.

                         Secondly, the targeting system and associated registry will be developed as a key foundation of the
                         national safety net system. These two tools are key to identify the extreme poor in Burkina Faso and
                         help focus the provision of social services to enhance their human capital. The project will also, to
                         the extent possible, support the expansion of a selected number of other building blocks to be made
                         applicable to other programs at the national level. Such systems may include the payment system or
                         selected modules of the information system (MIS). The specific additional building blocks that may
                         be supported will be determined during the first year of project implementation in consultation with
                         the government and other partners. The project will use advocacy and policy discussions to facilitate
                         the adoption of the selected systems by other programs and ministries.

                         Thirdly, this component will include activities to strengthen the institutions needed for coordinating,
                         implementing, and monitoring safety net programs. It will finance technical assistance, capacity
                         building (such as training for government staff), operational manuals, and inputs and studies geared
                         at developing and harmonizing the key building blocks of a national safety net system. Especially,
                         the project will provide support to the newly established National Council for Social Protection,
                         including its secretariat, and the project implementing unit in the Ministry of Social Action and
                         National Solidarity (MASSN) for implementing and coordinating safety nets in the country.

                         Finally, this component would support monitoring, process evaluation and a rigorous impact
                         evaluation of the cash transfer program and its accompanying measures to learn whether the
                         promising impacts of the pilots transfer hold up in a government-run scaled-up versions of these
                         interventions in a low-income setting such as Burkina Faso.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Project management (US$4.6 million).

                         This component will support the management of the overall project. It will finance project
                         management and coordination activities related to the first two project components. The project
                         implementation unit will be housed in the Ministry of Social Action and National Solidarity
                         (MASSN). It will be team of recruited staff, paid by the project, including at a minimum a
                         coordinator, a procurement specialist, and a financial management specialist. The component fill
                         finance the salaries of project implementation staff, equipment, operating costs, training and special
                         studies needed to ensure proper project management, implementation and reporting. The project may
                         also finance support staff and consultants for implementation aspects such as social marketing,
                         information systems, evaluation and feed-back systems, and capacity-strengthening of specific
                         program implementers at the central and local levels.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         This project is classified as Category C (Not Required) because no civil works or other project
                         activities will be undertaken that have adverse environmental or social impacts. The project does not
                         require any land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of access to
                         resources and livelihood.



                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                           The program will operate in the most disadvantages regions of the country - where chronic monetary
                           poverty and chronic malnutrition (stunting) are the highest. These regions include the Est, Nord, and
                           the Centre-Est. Two of the three regions (Est is the exception) also overlap with the World Bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Reproductive Health project. In order to ensure complementarity, the project will operate in the same
                           districts that have been chosen in the health project’s second phase. While intraregional variance is
                           small, these districts also have among the highest levels of poverty and malnutrition in their
                           respective regions. In the Est, the project will operate in the three provinces with the highest
                           prevalence of malnutrition according to Enquête Nationale de Nutrition (ENN). The selection of
                           provinces/districts may be further refined and revised based on the poverty map currently under
                           preparation, the ongoing 2014 household survey , or based on other participatory methods. Within
                           provinces/districts villages will be randomly selected subject to population size, the number of poor
                           households and accessibility.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Liba C. Strengerowski-Feldblyum (AFTN2)
                           Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (AFTCS)

                            6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/       No
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is expected to have a positive social impact by improving household income and
                              behavior related to nutrition and preventative health practices in targeted communities. On the


                                                                        Page 6 of 8
                           basis of pre-determined criteria, the project will target the poorest and most vulnerable
                           communities, specifically by providing cash transfers as well as by providing community
                           awareness related to nutrition and other aspects of human capital and essential family practices for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           longer-term social benefits to adults and children in the area. As the household will be represented
                           by a woman to receive the cash transfer positive impacts on the empowerment of women is also
                           expected while both women and men will participate in the community events related to nutrition
                           and family practices.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The project is a Category C project, because no civil works will be undertaken and no adverse
                           environmental or social impacts are expected. The project does not require any land acquisition
                           leading to involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of access to resources and livelihood. No
                           safeguards policies are triggered as indicated in the table below.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           N/A
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           N/A
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         n/a
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                          Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                          be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                          issue, been prepared
                          Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the OP?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies


                                                                      Page 7 of 8
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Azedine Ouerghi
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Stefano Paternostro (SM)                    Date: 27-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
