                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA3813
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Africa                             Project ID:    P126974
                            Project Name:      Africa Higher Education Centers of Excellence Project (P126974)
                            Task Team          Andreas Blom
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          22-Jan-2014                        Estimated   04-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTEW                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Tertiary education (50%), Agricultural extension and research (15%), Health
                                              (15%), Oil and gas (10%), Other Mining and Extractive In dustries (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (70%), Technology diffusion (20%),
                                              Health system performance (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     279.00           Total Bank Financing:                  147.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          132.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 147.00
                              Total                                                                                       279.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to promote regional specialization among participating
                           universities in areas that address regional challenges by strengthening the capacities of these
                           universities to deliver quality training and applied research.



                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         3. Project Description
                         The project consists of two components. Component 1 will aim to strengthen the capacity of selected
                         institutions to establish Africa Centers of Excellence (ACE). These ACEs will deliver regional,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         demanded, quality training and applied research in partnerships with regional and international
                         academic institutions and in partnership with industry. Component 2 consists of regional activities
                         for the ACEs and their governments to build capacity, support project implementation, monitor and
                         evaluate, and develop regional policies. Further, component 2 will, in a demand-driven manner,
                         finance ACE support to selected countries in West Africa without Centers of Excellence.

                         Component 1: Strengthen Africa Centers of Excellence – IDA US$ 98 million (90 percent)
                         Component 1 will seek to strengthen around 15 competitively selected institutions to produce highly
                         skilled graduates and applied research to help address specific regional development challenges. An
                         institution can submit and be awarded up to two separate Centre of Excellence proposals. The
                         maximum grant amount for a Centre of Excellence grant will be US$ 7 million. The centers of
                         excellence will primarily support capacity building within the Science, Technology, Engineering, and
                         Math, as well as the agriculture and health sciences, but should be multidisciplinary as per the needs
                         to comprehensively address the development challenge of the proposed center.

                         The institutions to receive an African Center of Excellence (ACE) grant will be selected through an
                         open, transparent and merit-based selection process. The selection process will entail four main
                         standard steps: (i) call for proposals to institutions, (ii) submission of Center of Excellence proposals
                         through their government to the regional facilitation unit; (iii) evaluation of proposals by independent
                         African and international experts according to pre-defined criteria, and (iv) selection of institutions
                         by the steering committee and a no objection by the World Bank.
                         Selected institutions will implement their own Centre of Excellence proposal aiming to help address
                         a specific regional development challenge through preparation of professionals (education), applied
                         research and associated outreach activities with partners. The institutional-specific proposal
                         encompasses the following five elements:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Enhance capacity to deliver regional high quality training to address the development
                         challenge. This could include: Update curricula of existing programs or create new education
                         programs to meet the development challenge; meet international benchmarks for quality education
                         (e.g. international accreditation); deliver short-term courses for professionals; attract a regional
                         student body; training of faculty to introduce new approaches to teaching and learning; enhance
                         work-place learning such as internships; upgrading of qualifications of faculty; improve learning
                         resources, including lab equipment, and minor rehabilitation or extension of existing facilities.

                         •        Enhance capacity to deliver applied research to address the regional development challenge.
                         This could include: faculty development and staff training, scholarships and post-docs, networking
                         activities with national and international partners, hosting and participating in conference s, research
                         equipment and materials and lab refurbishment, and patenting or other Intellectual Property Rights-
                         related costs.

                         •       Build and use industry/sector partnerships to enhance impact of the Center on development
                         and increase relevance of the centers education and research. The activities include industry advisory
                         boards, internships, industry lectures, training of trainers for sector training institutions (such as
                         polytechnics, nursing, agricultural colleges etc.), joint research, and other activities to interact and
                         reach out to the sector/industry.


                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         •        Regional and international academic partnerships to raise quality of education in other
                         institutions in the region, preferably including institutions in fragile countries, and to raise the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Centers’ own capacity. The activities include joint delivery of education programs, professional
                         courses for regional faculty, faculty exchanges/visiting faculty, joint research, joint conferences,
                         sharing of specialized equipment and library resources etc.

                         •       Enhance governance and management to improve monitoring and evaluation, administration,
                         fiduciary management, transparency, ability to generate resources, and project implementation.

                         Upon selection, each institution will sign a performance and funding contract with the government
                         for the implementation of the selected project. At least 15 percent of the funding must be invested in
                         the partnerships, and at least 10 percent must be invested in partnerships activities with non-national
                         African partners. Further, civil works will be limited to 25 percent of the grant. This agreement will
                         include the government’s planned commitments for continued funding of institutional staff as part of
                         the funding and performance agreement.

                         Component 2: Enhancing Regional Capacity Building, Evaluation, Facilitation and Collaboration –
                         IDA US$ 11 million (10 percent)

                         Component 2.1 Enhancing Regional Capacity Building and Evaluation. This sub-component will
                         support: (i) capacity building, knowledge sharing and coordination between the ACEs, for example
                         through joint lessons learning as well as implementation of a communication plan; (ii) undertake
                         regional monitoring and evaluation activities to improve and assess the performance of the selected
                         institutions. This includes tracer studies, technical audits, collection of academic data, and topic-wise
                         evaluations; (iii) ECOWAS, and potentially other regional bodies, to prepare policy studies on
                         relevant higher education issues and build capacity for regional policy making, and (vi) activities
                         required for regional project facilitation and steering.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2.2 Demand-driven Regional Education Services. This sub-component will finance the
                         provision of higher education services by the Centers of Excellence assisted under Component 1 to
                         countries in the region without Africa Centers of Excellence. Up to three non-ACE hosting countries
                         (The Gambia, Sierra Leone, and Liberia) would negotiate a plan of required services to institutions
                         and civil servants. These services could include short-term specialized training to government
                         officials, short-term merit-based scholarships to young talent, faculty development for non-ACE
                         institutions, visiting faculty, and curriculum development provided by any of the ACEs to a non-
                         ACE institution.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will be located in 14 institutions of higher learning in the disciplines of STEM,
                         Agriculture, and Health sciences. These institutions will be spread across seven countries ( Nigeria,
                         Ghana, Senegal, Togo, Benin, Burkina Faso and Cameroon). The selected Centers are:

                         Nigeria:
                         •       African Centre of Excellence for Genomics of Infectious Diseases, Redeemers University,
                         Mowe, Ogun State/University of Ibadan, Nigeria
                         •       PAN African Materials Institute (PAMI), African University of Science and Technology,
                         Abuja, Nigeria


                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                         •       Centre for Agricultural Development and Sustainable Environment, Federal University of
                         Agriculture, Abeokuta, Nigeria
                         •       Centre of Excellence on Neglected Tropical Diseases and Forensic Biotechnology, Ahmadu
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria
                         •       Phytomedicine Research and Development, University of Jos, Nigeria
                         •       Centre for Excellence in Reproductive Health and Innovation, University of Benin, Nigeria
                         •       ACE Centre for Oil Field Chemicals, University of Port Harcourt, Nigeria

                         Ghana:
                         •        West African Center for Cell Biology of Infectious Pathogens (WACCBIP), University of
                         Ghana Legon
                         •        Developing WACCI into an African Centre of Excellence for training plant breeders, seed
                         scientists and seed technologists, University of Ghana, Legon
                         •        Regional Centre of Excellence for Water and Environmental Sanitation, Kumasi, Kwame
                         Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana

                         Senegal: Centre d’Excellence pour la formation et la recherche en Sciences et Technologies de l’Eau,
                         l’Energie et l’Environnement en Afrique de l’Ouest et du Centre, Université Cheikh Anta Diop
                         Dakar-Fann, Sénégal.

                         Togo: Centre d’excellence régional sur les sciences aviaires (CERSA), Université de Lomé Lomé,
                         Togo

                         Benin: Centre d’Excellence Africain en Sciences Mathématiques et Applications du Bénin,
                         Université d'Abomey– Calavi (UAC), Porto-Novo, Bénin

                         Burkina Faso: Centre d’Excellence pour la formation et la recherche en Sciences et Technologies de
                         l’Eau, l’Energie et l’Environnement en Afrique de l’Ouest et du Centre, International d’Ingénierie de
                         l’Eau et de l’Environnement (2iE), Fondation 2iE, Ouagadougou - Burkina Faso
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Cameroon: Centre d’excellence en Technologies de l’information et de la Communication (CETIC),
                         Université de Yaoundé I Yaoundé, Cameroon.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Liba C. Strengerowski-Feldblyum (AFTN2)
                         Hocine Chalal (AFTN1)
                         Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (AFTCS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             There will be rehabilitation of some academic/
                         BP 4.01                                             research institutions and minor construction in
                                                                             few of the campuses, and these are expected to be
                                                                             of small scale, therefore the environmental and
                                                                             social impacts are not expected to be significant.
                                                                             An Environmental Management Plan checklist
                                                                             (EMP checklist) was prepared for each one of the
                                                                             chosen institutions to manage environmental and



                                                                     Page 4 of 8
                                                                           social impacts; in some cases, the civil works are
                                                                           minor and localized and they will be done
                                                                           according to national and local laws and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           procedures. The impacts and mitigation measures
                                                                           stated in these ESMP checklist will have to be
                                                                           closely monitored and evaluated and the project
                                                                           must ensure to include an environmental section
                                                                           their reporting system to report the impacts and
                                                                           the mitigation measures which should be in
                                                                           conformity with part B (general construction/
                                                                           rehabilitation activities), F (toxic materials), H
                                                                           (disposal of medical waste) of the checklist.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No           The project will include rehabilitation and minor
                                                                           construction within existing university/institution
                                                                           campus grounds, and thus natural habitats will not
                                                                           be affected by project activities.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No           This policy is not triggered because the project
                                                                           will not involve forestry activities.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No           The project activities will not involve the use of
                                                                           pesticides.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No           The project will be implemented within the
                            BP 4.11                                        existing university campuses and will not involve
                                                                           excavations or other earthworks and is not likely
                                                                           to be located in, or in the vicinity of, recognized
                                                                           cultural heritage sites.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No           The project screening process indicated that the
                                                                           sub projects will not affect or involve indigenous
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           communities since the project footprint is limited
                                                                           to existing campus grounds.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No           Project activities focus on quality improvements
                            4.12                                           and not on expanding capacity to more students.
                                                                           All civil works will take place on existing campus
                                                                           grounds, i.e. within existing physical footprint,
                                                                           and therefore do not require any land taking nor
                                                                           will they cause involuntary resettlement, loss of
                                                                           assets and/or restriction of access to resources or
                                                                           livelihoods.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No           N/A

                            Projects on International        No            N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No            N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management



                                                                   Page 5 of 8
                         A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           No large scale or irreversible impacts are anticipated to be associated with the project.
                           Although most of the impacts of the ACE project are envisioned to be positive, the rehabilitation
                           and maintenance of centers of excellence, laboratories, workshops, etc. may have some
                           environmental and social impacts. Potential negative environmental impacts are those typical or
                           remodeling and renovation activities associated with existing structures. Particularly important is
                           the need to manage construction activities so as to minimally disrupt the academic environment;
                           however some disruption is unavoidable. Construction impacts will be limited to the duration of
                           construction activities. In some cases, the works are so minor and localized that environmental
                           measures may be carried out in accordance with national and local laws and procedures.

                           No land acquisition is envisioned as part of the ACE Project. Civil works are only expected to be
                           focusing on quality improvements of existing facilities and not on expanding capacity to more
                           students. All civil works will take place on existing campus grounds, i.e. within existing physical
                           footprint.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           N/A
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The project has produced Environmental and Social Management Plan checklists, which have
Public Disclosure Copy




                           been disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop before appraisal. These provide a set of templates
                           to be used by each participating institution to develop Environmental and Social Management
                           Plans to guide identification and implementation of safeguards mitigation measures within
                           individual project proposals. Any institution selected and confirmed as a center of excellence
                           (ACEs) has to meet the fiduciary requirements including on environmental and social management
                           and demonstrate compliance with the World Bank safeguard policies and capacity to implement
                           ESMPs.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Project stakeholders include (1) the higher education institutions (Africa Centers of Excellence)
                           which will be responsible for strategic planning and implementation of their institutional proposal,
                           monitoring, evaluation and reporting on environmental and social guidelines.
                           (2) Regional Facilitation Unit is set up as a regional body with at least 4 professional staff
                           established in the secretariat that deals with Project coordination and facilitation, support to ACEs
                           for monitoring and evaluation and various technical assistance, as necessary.
                           (3) National Project Performance and Review Committee. The fiduciary capacity available within
                           higher education or related project would provide implementation support and possibly oversight
                           for the ACE.
                           (4) a Project Steering Committee (PSC) whose main task is to set implementation guidelines,



                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                           review results and progress, oversee the RFU and assist ACEs to ensure the achievement of the
                           project objectives.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Jan-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Cameroon                                                         03-Feb-2014
                           Comments:
                           Ghana                                                            30-Jan-2014
                           Comments:
                           Nigeria                                                          31-Jan-2014
                           Comments:
                           Senegal                                                          03-Feb-2014
                           Comments:
                           Togo                                                             03-Feb-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies




                                                                    Page 7 of 8
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Andreas Blom
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                      Date: 05-Feb-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (SM)                      Date: 26-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
