                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA7538
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Cameroon                          Project ID:    P143417
                            Project Name:      Agriculture Investment and Market Development Project (P143417)
                            Task Team          Manievel Sene
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          07-Apr-2014                       Estimated   29-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTA2                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Crops (60%), Agricultural extension and research (20%), General agriculture,
                                              fishing and forestry sector (10%), Animal production (5 %), Irrigation and
                                              drainage (5%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural markets (35%), Rural policies and
                                              institutions (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     166.90           Total Bank Financing:                100.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       12.40
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             100.00
                              JAPAN Ministry of Finance - PHRD Grants                                                   3.00
                              Miscellaneous 1                                                                          40.60
                              LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                                      10.90
                              Total                                                                                   166.90
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?



                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                          2. Project Development Objective(s)
                         To support the transformation of low productivity, subsistence-oriented cassava, maize and sorghum
                         sub-sectors into commercially-oriented and competitive value chains in four agro-ecological areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          3. Project Description
                         The PDO indicators for the proposed Project include: (i) Increased yield of targeted crops of which
                         cassava (tons/ha), maize (tons/ha), sorghum (tons/ha) by beneficiary farmers; (ii) Increased quality as
                         measured by price premium of produce sold by beneficiary farmers in the targeted value chains
                         (FCFA) of which cassava (percentage), maize (percentage), sorghum (percentage).

                         The Project will comprise three components:
                         Component A: Support to production, processing and marketing (US$80.00 million IDA). The
                         objective of the component is to establish “Productive Partnerships” (PPs) between POs and ABs that
                         will lead to increased productivity, production, and quality of the identified value chains. These PPs
                         will be implemented through the provision of Matching Grants and facilitate access to rural financing
                         for investing in various PO Sub-Projects (SPs). Component A will also support certain nutrition
                         activities through women SPs and finance basic transport infrastructure SPs at the level of production
                         basins - to improve internal connectivity and to connect these production basins to main roads and
                         markets. The component is organized under four sub-components: (i) Establishment of PPs; (i)
                         Financing of PO Sub-Projects; (iii) Financing of basic public infrastructure Sub-Projects; and (iv)
                         Support to improve access to adapted Rural Finance.

                         Component B: Support to Seed system, Core public services and Technology transfers (US$15.00
                         million IDA). The component will support the implementation of component A by: (i) strengthening
                         the Seed system and the capacity of public services that are key for the Project, (ii) creating a
                         framework for cooperation between the Government, POs, ABs, FIs and other actors that will play an
                         important role in the Project; and (iii) enhancing agricultural technology transfers. It comprises three
                         sub-components: (i) Enhancement of Seed system and Core public services; (ii) Building
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Commodity-based public-private consultation and partnership framework; and (iii) Enhancement of
                         agricultural technology transfers.

                         Component C: Project Coordination and Management (US$5.00 million IDA). The objective of this
                         component is to: (i) ensure effective strategic and operational planning, monitoring and
                         implementation of the Project and efficient coordination between components A and B and the
                         various sources of funding and Project implementation partners; (ii) evaluate the Project’s final
                         results and impact on smallholders/POs; and (iii) communicate efficiently to various publics on
                         Project activities, outcomes and lessons learnt. The component has two sub-components: (i) Strategic
                         planning, coordination, management and implementation support; and (ii) Monitoring and
                         Evaluation, Communication and Knowledge Production and Sharing.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will cover few production basins in five agro-ecological areas: (i) Sudano sahelian
                         (Pitoa, Maroua) for sorghum; (ii) High savanna (Touboro, Ngaoundéré, Meiganga) for maize and
                         cassava; (iii) Bi-modal humid forest (Ngoumou, Nanga EBook, Abong-Mbang, Sangmelima) for
                         maize and cassava; (iv) Mono-modal humid forest (Melong, Pouma, Mbongue) for maize and
                         cassava; and (v) Highlands (Babesi, Galim, Bali, Batibo) for maize and cassava.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
                         Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTN1)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes           This policy is triggered as the project activities
                         BP 4.01                                         and mainly those related to component1
                                                                         (construction/rehabilitation of processing
                                                                         facilities; rural roads construction or
                                                                         rehabilitation; and market infrastructures) may
                                                                         have environmental and social impacts. The
                                                                         scope, nature and scale of these potential impacts
                                                                         are not known at this project preparation stage.
                                                                         The exact nature and location of activities could
                                                                         not be identified during the project preparation.
                                                                         An ESMF has been prepared, consulted upon and
                                                                         disclosed on April 25, 2014 to guide the way that
                                                                         potential negative environmental and social
                                                                         impacts of future sub-projects (following the
                                                                         positive list) will be identified and mitigated
                                                                         during the project implementation.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            The project will avoid financing any activity that
                                                                         should have any negative impact on natural
                                                                         habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes           The policy is triggered as the project expects to
                                                                         finance agro-forestry and re afforestation
                                                                         activities. The project activities will avoid any
                                                                         impacts on the health and quality of forests or the
                                                                         rights and welfare of people and their level of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         dependence upon or interaction with forests. The
                                                                         project will avoid financing any activity that
                                                                         should have any negative impact in the natural
                                                                         forests. The ESMF includes a positive list of areas
                                                                         where the agro-forestry and reforestation
                                                                         activities will be undertaken.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           The project activities will likely increase the use
                                                                         of chemical pesticides which could have negative
                                                                         environmental and health impacts. The Project
                                                                         beneficiaries are likely to adopt integrated pest
                                                                         management practices, which are included in the
                                                                         ESMF. A PMP has been prepared, consulted upon
                                                                         and disclosed on April 25, 2014.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The proposed operation will involve excavations
                         BP 4.11                                         and movement of earth for the building facilities.
                                                                         During the development of the ESMF physical
                                                                         cultural resources will be taken into consideration
                                                                         and baselines defined. The ESMF includes clear



                                                                 Page 3 of 8
                                                                                  procedures that are required for identification,
                                                                                  protection of cultural property from theft, and
                                                                                  treatment of discovered artifacts, and will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  included in standard bidding documents. The
                                                                                  ESMF also provides procedures for handling with
                                                                                  “chance finds” during implementation project
                                                                                  activities.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        Yes              The Policy is triggered because there indigenous
                                                                                  people present in the project areas and mainly in
                                                                                  the Eastern and Southern regions of the country.
                                                                                  They are also present in the center region. An
                                                                                  IPPF has been prepared, consulted upon and
                                                                                  disclosed on April 25, 2014.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes              Involuntary Resettlement is triggered in the event
                            4.12                                                  that sub-projects should involve involuntary
                                                                                  resettlement as the Project will finance
                                                                                  construction/rehabilitation of processing facilities;
                                                                                  rural roads construction or rehabilitation; and
                                                                                  market infrastructures that may imply land
                                                                                  acquisition in the covered areas. The RPF will
                                                                                  guide the management of such situations should
                                                                                  they arise during project implementation. RAPs
                                                                                  will be prepared as and when necessary during
                                                                                  project implementation. The RPF was prepared,
                                                                                  consulted upon and disclosed on April 25, 2014.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No               The project is not financing any dam, nor does it
                                                                                  depend on dams for its activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International            No               The project is not anticipating any irrigation
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                  schemes that will involve international water
                                                                                  bodies or riparian areas.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   The project is not being implemented in a
                            7.60                                                  disputed area.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Potential negative environmental impacts of these SPs are likely to include: (i) water and soil
                              pollution, increased use of pesticides and herbicides as well as agro-processing activities; (ii)
                              deforestation and water pollution due to land clearing; (iii) soil erosion due to poor agricultural
                              practices; (iv) loss of vegetation due to agricultural lands extension and access road rehabilitation;
                              (v) loss of fauna due poaching activities; and (vi) pressures on natural resources.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The negative environmental impacts of SPs could also have negative impacts on public health, for
                              several reasons. For instance: (i) an increase in the incidence of malaria and AIDS due to

                                                                          Page 4 of 8
                           population movement; (ii) pesticide poisoning due to the unsafe application and management of
                           pesticides and herbicides by untrained personnel; (iii) traffic accidents and exposure to dust and
                           noise of the population near construction or rehabilitation sites; and (iv) increase of social conflict
Public Disclosure Copy




                           due to land acquisition.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The ESMF has outlined the environmental and social screening process for SPs and describes in
                           detail the steps required. The ESMF has proposed institutional arrangements, including cost
                           estimates, for the implementation of above institutional and technical measures as well as
                           environmental training and public-awareness rising. The ESMP included in the ESMF is included
                           in the PIM.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The implementation arrangements for the relevant safeguards instruments are fully integrated with
                           the overall implementation arrangements of the project. An environmental and social Specialist
                           will be recruited as part of the PCU staff and if needed, regional environmental and social
                           specialist will be also recruited. MINADER, through the PCU has the ultimate responsibility for
                           the Project’s compliance with Cameroonian legislation and Bank safeguards guidelines. The PCU
                           coordinates closely with the Ministries involved in the Project, notably MINEPDED, MINEPAT,
                           and the Ministry in Charge of Compensation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Extensive public consultation was carried out during the preparation of the ESMF, RPF,
                           Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF) and PMP. A national validation workshop with
                           participation of the main stakeholders (agro-industries, small and medium enterprises/industries,
                           wholesalers PFIs such as Banks, Leasing companies and micro-finance institutions, Services
                           providers supporting POs as well as core Public services Civil society, Project-Affected People
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (PAP) was organized on February 8, 2014 and a final workshop was organized on April 14, 2014.
                           The consultation process will continue throughout project preparation and implementation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         22-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      25-Apr-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Cameroon                                                            14-Apr-2014
                           Comments: A first national validation and dissemination workshop was organized on February
                                         08, 2014 in Yaounde with all stakeholders including civil society organizations and
                                         several medias enterprises. A final national validation and dissemination workshop
                                         will be held on April 14, 2014. The minutes of the final workshop will be disclosed.
                                         Other workshops will be held in covered regions.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         22-Apr-2014


                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      25-Apr-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Cameroon                                                            14-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: A first national validation and dissemination workshop was organized on February
                                         08, 2014 in Yaounde with all stakeholders including civil society organizations and
                                         several medias enterprises. A final national validation and dissemination workshop
                                         will be held on April 14, 2014. The minutes of the final workshop will be disclosed.
                                         Other workshops will be held in covered regions.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         22-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      25-Apr-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Cameroon                                                            14-Apr-2014
                           Comments: A first national validation and dissemination workshop was organized on February
                                         08, 2014 in Yaounde with all stakeholders including civil society organizations and
                                         several medias enterprises. A final national validation and dissemination workshop
                                         will be held on April 14, 2014. The minutes of the final workshop will be disclosed.
                                         Other workshops will be held in covered regions.
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         22-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      25-Apr-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Cameroon                                                            14-Apr-2014
                           Comments: A first national validation and dissemination workshop was organized on February
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         08, 2014 in Yaounde with all stakeholders including civil society organizations and
                                         several medias enterprises. A final national validation and dissemination workshop
                                         will be held on April 14, 2014. The minutes of the final workshop will be disclosed.
                                         Other workshops will be held in covered regions.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector       Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?


                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?


                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Manievel Sene
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 16-May-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Severin L. Kodderitzsch (SM)                 Date: 16-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 8 of 8
