                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC7605

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nigeria                         Project ID:     P148616
                            Project Name:      Staple Crop Processing Zones Support Project (P148616)
                            Task Team          El Hadj Adama Toure
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Dec-2014                     Estimated       31-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GFADR                           Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Crops (25%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (25%), Transmission and
                                               Distribution of Electricity (15%), Rural and Inter-Urban Ro ads and Highways
                                               (15%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural markets (35%), Rural policies
                                               and institutions (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    300.00                    Total Bank Financing:       100.00
                            Financing Gap:         180.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          20.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                100.00
                              Total                                                                      120.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project development objective (PDO) is to increase market linkages for farmers and strengthen
                           the institutional framework for inclusive public and private investment in selected agribusiness
                           clusters.
                         The Project will contribute to the broader objectives of the FGN’s SCPZ Program consisting of
                         ‘increasing food production and reducing the demand for imports, adding value through processing,
                         reducing cost of doing business for processors, and attracting new investment to create jobs,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         especially in rural areas, and to drive the economy’. The expansion of the agribusiness- farmer
                         linkage models under the SCPZ program through the right mix of public and private investments will
                         ultimately, improve agricultural productivity, generate shared growth and substantially reduce
                         poverty in rural areas.
                         C. Project Description
                         The concept of the Staple Crop Processing Zones under ATA as proposed by the Federal
                         Government of Nigeria is based on the following three guiding principles: (i) take an integrated
                         approach to the value chain by addressing critical upstream and downstream bottlenecks and
                         facilitating market linkages; (ii) offer a superior operating environment that reduces the cost of doing
                         business, and iii) take a private sector-led approach. The Operating Principles are the following; (i)
                         investment-driven strategic partnerships with the private sector; (ii) integrated value chain approach;
                         (iii) Self-sustaining, government-support and private sector managed.

                         The SCPZ program aims to channel infrastructure investments to facilitate efficient value chain
                         linkages and reduce the cost of doing business, and improve the competitiveness of Nigeria’s agro-
                         industrial production. By creating an enabling business environment around selected value chains
                         clusters, the FGN and State Governments seek to attract private sector investors to set up processing
                         plants in high food production areas, in order to boost import substitution, create wealth opportunities
                         for farming communities, reduce post-harvest losses, create sustainable employment in agro-
                         production, processing and related activities, and drive rapid rural development.

                         The proposed Project will support the FGN to implement the first model SCPZ and assist in building
                         blocks for its sustainable expansion. The project approach to the Government's SCPZs Program
                         consists of test running the concept gradually in limited number of sites, as an integrated agribusiness
                         supply chain project, with strong farmers –agribusiness linkages aim to overcome the multiple,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         interlocking constraints in infrastructure provision and productivity growth along agricultural supply
                         chains. Project will focus its support on Cassava supply value chain in Kogi State (at least 70% of
                         project funding), with an open window for limited support in the form of technical assistance for up
                         to three other sites/States with strong business case, and based one following minimum criteria :
                         alignment with Government priority value chains and located in one of the SCPZ sites, existing or
                         ready-to-implement private investment project(s) with sizable financing, high potential for
                         improving agricultural productivity and generating benefits for farmers, strong support of state
                         Government and local communities, existence of other Bank assisted project or partnership with
                         other Donors funded project, and possible IFC intervention.

                         Project activities will be clustered around the following areas of intervention :

                         (a)      Support to public infrastructure development for the model SCPZ in Kogi State (around 75%
                         of project total cost) : consists of support to Government to develop off-site infrastructure and
                         subsequently identify and attract private sector investors willing to invest in on-site development,
                         operations and maintenance of the zone. The Project is also considering to support part of the on-
                         site infrastructure to guarantee minimum utility services (internal roads, water, gas, power) for up to
                         3 private investment projects (covering up to 40% of the 250 hectares of the core zones).

                         (b)     Support to farmers-agribusiness linkage and to economic opportunities along the value
                         chains (around 15% of total project cost). In coordination with FADAMA III Additional Financing
                         ( FADAMA III AF) and other relevant operations in the portfolio, the project will provide support to
                         link farmers, SMEs and communities in the catchment areas with the processing units as follows: (i)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Improving Farmers productivity: the project will work with agro-processors to develop off-take
                         agreements with farmers , aimed at structuring their organizations, and facilitating their access to
                         inputs and services, such as financing, extension, mechanization, land clearing, equipment and small
                         scale production and marketing infrastructures, grading, quality and standards, as well as skills
                         development. Project will partner with Fadama III Additional Financing which will provide on-farm
                         support to assist farmers deliver on the contracts; (ii)   Promotion of economic opportunities for
                         the community: The Project will establish a matching grants scheme to support activities aim at
                         strengthening agribusiness farmers linkages which could create jobs and increase income for the
                         communities, thus contributing to reducing poverty in the project intervention areas. This will
                         include support to women and youths and their groups, promoting development of mechanization
                         services, transport, application of chemicals, business planning for SMEs, training , financial literacy,
                         and ancillary activities of the value chains.

                         (c)      Institutional development in SCPZ (around 10% of total project cost): (i) Structuring of PPP
                         for zone development, operation and maintenance: project will provide support for the establishment
                         of a Specific Purpose vehicle (SPV) with a Board inclusive of all relevant stakeholders (Federal
                         Government, State Government, Local Government, Developer, and Tenants). It is envisioned that
                         the PPP transactions will result in specific contracts between the SPV and private investors; (ii) Land
                         and safeguards management: for appropriate management of farm land allocation to the nucleus
                         farms and for coordinated implementation of the SCPZ Master Plan in the catchment areas, the
                         project will assist the State Government in developing responsible land allocation and management
                         procedures following World Bank and international guidelines and standards, as well as adequate
                         instruments and M&E system for environmental and social safeguards; (iii) Technical assistance to
                         FMARD: The proposed Project will provide institutional support to FMARD and the SCPZ-
                         Authority being established to regulate the SCPZS, in terms of technical assistance (TA), training,
                         and experience sharing of best practices from across the world, and for scaling up the program to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         other sites based on lessons learnt from the pilot SCPZ in Kogi State; (iv) Technical assistance
                         selected States for development of agribusiness clusters: Specific TA might include market
                         assessment, SCPZ detailed feasibility studies, attracting private investor and structuring PPP,
                         promotion of the program within the country and abroad, etc. The project will also support FMARD
                         to support selected States, and upon their request, in developing their SCPZ projects.

                         (d)       Project coordination: dedicated project management and coordination structure will set up
                         and early as before negotiations, to initiate the implementation of the project and until the SCPZ
                         institutional framework is established and fully operational.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The SCPZs will be located in States across Nigeria. However, the proposed World Bank support will
                         focus on the Alape SCPZ, in Kogi States.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The country has the capacity to satisfactorily implement World Bank Safeguard Policies.
                         Specifically, the borrower is familiar with World Bank Safeguard Policies and their implementation.
                         In particular the Bank has a long history of engagement in the Agricultural Sector of Nigeria.
                         Currently World Bank funded projects in the sector include: FADAMA III, CADP, and WAAPP 1B
                           with satisfactory safeguards performance to date. The proposed project will benefit from the lessons
                           learned in the implementation of the above referenced projects.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Amos Abu (GENDR)
                           Edda Mwakaselo Ivan Smith (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The creation of the SCPZ, the anticipated agro-
                           BP 4.01                                             industrial processing activities in the zones, and
                                                                               the public and ancillary infrastructure such as
                                                                               access roads, water and gas pipelines and
                                                                               transmission lines have the potential for
                                                                               significant adverse impacts that will require
                                                                               careful mitigation. Since the precise locations
                                                                               are not known at this point, an Environmental
                                                                               and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                                                                               will be prepared and disclosed by the borrower
                                                                               prior to appraisal. In addition, for those
                                                                               activities whose scope and locations are known,
                                                                               site specific ESIA and ESMP will be prepared
                                                                               and disclosed country-wide in Nigeria and
                                                                               World Bank InfoShop prior to Appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         TBD             Based on the available information on the SCPZ
                                                                               project, Natural habitats are not expected to be
                                                                               impacted. However, since the exact locations of
                                                                               some of the critical infrastructure (routing of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               roads, water, gas pipelines as well as
                                                                               transmission lines for electricity are not known
                                                                               in sufficient details, further due diligence is
                                                                               required in this regard in the course of
                                                                               preparing the project to determine whether or
                                                                               not OP/BP 4.04 is triggered.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  TBD             Based on the available information on the SCPZ
                                                                               project, Forest lands are not expected to be
                                                                               impacted. However, since the exact locations of
                                                                               some of the critical infrastructure (routing of
                                                                               roads, water, gas pipelines as well as
                                                                               transmission lines for electricity are not known
                                                                               in sufficient details, further due diligence is
                                                                               required to determine whether or not OP/BP
                                                                               4.36 is triggered.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             Yes             Development of processing activities in the
                                                                               SCPZ would lead to intensification of
                                                                               agricultural production system in the catchment
                                                                               areas. The adoption of agricultural
                                                                 intensification technologies could lead to
                                                                 increased use of fertilizer, and pesticides with
                                                                 potential negative impacts on the environment
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 and human health. The project will prepare an
                                                                 Integrated Pest and Pesticide Management Plan
                                                                 (IPMP) to identify the potential risks and ways
                                                                 to adequately mitigate them. The IPMP will
                                                                 build on the existing IPMP developed for the
                                                                 Bank-funded projects in Nigeria, as well as on
                                                                 the lessons learned from experience in
                                                                 implementing the IPMP in the country. The
                                                                 proponent will disclose the IPMP in Nigeria and
                                                                 at InfoShop before appraisal and 120 days
                                                                 before Board date.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The project will involve considerable
                         BP 4.11                                 excavation and earth works and could impact
                                                                 movable or immovable objects, sites, structures,
                                                                 groups of structures, and natural features and
                                                                 landscapes that have archaeological,
                                                                 paleontological, historical, architectural,
                                                                 religious, aesthetic, or other cultural
                                                                 significance in the project area. Thus Physical
                                                                 Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) is triggered.
                                                                 The proponent will address the impacts on
                                                                 physical cultural resources in the SCPZ project
                                                                 area as an integral part of the environmental
                                                                 assessment (EA) process; the ESMF will
                                                                 include guidance on handling physical cultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 resources..
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                 area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Land would be expropriated both for the SCPZ
                         4.12                                    and the ancillary facilities such as access roads,
                                                                 transmission line, and water and gas pipelines
                                                                 right of way. Specifically, the total land area
                                                                 that would be occupied by the Kano and Kogi
                                                                 States core SCPZ activities is estimated to be
                                                                 250 hectares that would be buffered by a
                                                                 catchment area spanning 30 km radius
                                                                 (approximately 280 000 hectares). Since the
                                                                 precise location of the SCPZ zone especially the
                                                                 ancillary facilities are not fully determined yet, a
                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework RPF would be
                                                                 prepared and disclosed by the proponent before
                                                                 appraisal. However, for activities whose exact
                                                                 location and right of way are known, site
                                                                 specific Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be
                                                                                                                                 prepared and disclosed by the borrower prior to
                                                                                                                                 appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         Yes                           The SCPZ project activities might lead to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 intensification of agriculture including the
                                                                                                                                 construction of weirs, farm ponds, local silt
                                                                                                                                 retention dams, low embankment tanks and
                                                                                                                                 small dams or extraction of water from existing
                                                                                                                                 dam especially the SCPZ in Kano and Kogi
                                                                                                                                 States. Specifically only small dams of less
                                                                                                                                 than 15 meters in height are envisaged in this
                                                                                                                                 regard. Accordingly, generic dam safety
                                                                                                                                 measures designed by qualified engineers will
                                                                                                                                 used to ensure their safety as required by OP/
                                                                                                                                 BP3.37.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project does not involve or take place on
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Aug-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
                                      would be prepared: The QER is tentatively scheduled for July 24, 2014
                                      B.        For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      stage ISDS: Not applicable.
                                      C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                       The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      While the activities that would be supported by the World Bank are broadly recognized, however,
                                      the exact locations of the SCPZ and in particular the infrastructure and ancillary activities such as
                                      the routing of roads, transmission wires, water and gas pipelines are not known at this point.
                                      However, there are some first mover investments whose activities and locations are known. Thus
                                      an overarching Environmental and Social and Management Framework and Resettlement Policy
                                      Framework (RPF) that will outline the principles, process and procedure to be followed when any
                                      activity that will be financed by SCPZ has the potential to trigger any of the World Bank
                                      safeguard policies. Both the ESMF and the RPF will be consulted upon and disclosed prior to
                                      appraisal. In addition, site specific safeguard instruments such as ESIAs and Resettlement Action
                                      Plans will be prepared for those activities whose scope and locations are known and disclosed in
                                      Nigeria and InfoShop by closing of negotiations. Finally, an IPMP will be prepared, consulted
                                      upon and disclosed before appraisal.
                                      The safeguards approach of the SCPZ project is informed by the genre of activities that would be
                                      financed, the myriad of potential actors including the One World Bank Group (IDA IFC and
                                      MIGA). To this end, for such activities and investments that are private sector led, WB /IFC
                                      Performance Standards will apply. However, for public sector investments activities that will be
                                      financed by the Federal and or State governments, World Bank Safeguard Policies will apply.



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:   Name: El Hadj Adama Toure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)    Date: 02-Nov-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Practice Manager/   Name: Martien Van Nieuwkoop (PMGR)   Date: 07-Nov-2014
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
