                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC7389

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kazakhstan                        Project ID:      P147705
                            Project Name:      KZ Competitiveness and Access to Finance (P147705)
                            Task Team          Martin Melecky
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          19-May-2014                       Estimated        23-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSPF                             Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General industry and trade sector (60%), SME Finance (40%)
                            Theme(s):          Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (60%), Other Private Sector
                                               Development (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    100.00                      Total Bank Financing:        100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         100.00
                              Total                                                                         100.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project objective is to help increase economic competitiveness and diversification of the SME
                           sector in Kazakhstan.
                           C. Project Description
                           In order to increase SMEs’ competiveness and diversification, the project shall enhance, rationalize,
                           and expand current government programs, and introduce new targeted interventions to improve (i)
                         capacity of entrepreneurs and SMEs for business development and (ii) ease access to investment
                         finance. In addition, the project will explore innovative financing arrangements to extend its
                         development impact to local currency markets and crowd-in private resources. The project shall have
Public Disclosure Copy




                         two components:

                         Component 1: Enhance capacity of entrepreneurs and SMEs. Entrepreneurs, owners and managers of
                         SMEs in Kazakhstan lack adequate capacity to improve firm productivity to compete in external
                         markets, and to pursue new business opportunities offered by opening market niches. Component 1
                         aims to address this market failure through activities in two sub-components.

                         •        Sub-Component 1.1. Programs and policies for promoting SME development have largely
                         been inherited by the newly established MRD. Within this context, the Ministry is responsible for
                         deploying a national program that meets a variety of SME needs. Sub-Component 1.1 will begin with
                         technical assistance focused on a diagnostic assessment and gap analysis of existing programs to
                         support SMEs. The TA will determine the need for consolidation of existing programs, scaling down
                         of ineffective programs, and even introduction of new programs.

                         •       Building on the recommendations from Sub-Component 1.1, Sub-Component 1.2 will focus
                         on quality enhancement and expansion of SME support programs, ensuring the introduction of global
                         good practice, tailored to local context. This component will draw heavily upon recently published
                         approaches to targeted SME support and entrepreneurship education and training with a focus on
                         ensuring the appropriateness of program characteristics, outcome domains and moderating factors.
                         The sub-component will fund the scaling up of the identified core SME capacity building programs
                         throughout the country, with a view to significantly changing the landscape of support offered to new
                         and existing firms.

                         Component 2: Ease access to investment finance for SMEs. SME investment in expansion,
                         diversification, or innovation requires credit financing that has characteristics closer to those of
                         equity financing (longer maturity with a grace period), because of the significant risks associated
Public Disclosure Copy




                         with such investment. Without access to this type of credit, SME development will be restrained.

                         •        Banks and non-bank credit institutions (NCFIs) are challenged by difficult access to long-
                         term liquidity, foreign currency risk exposures, the NPL stock, and deficient functioning of financial
                         infrastructure and substandard financial sector regulation and supervision, among others. Sub-
                         Component 2.1 will provide technical assistance to the integrated financial sector regulator (the
                         NBK) to improve financial consumer protection of SMEs, the regulatory and supervisory framework
                         for NCFIs, financial sector infrastructure related to credit history, the secured transaction (collateral)
                         framework, NPL workouts related SMEs, and the insolvency framework for SMEs.

                         •       Further, state financial support provided through the Entrepreneurship Fund (DAMU) neither
                         meets the volume of SME demand for investment lending nor does it genuinely encourage SMEs to
                         graduate into commercially viable borrowers. Sub-Component 2.2 shall stimulate provision of
                         competitively priced investment loans to SMEs across regions channeled through eligible Banks,
                         MFIs, and Leasing Companies. Exploiting several institutional channels of financial intermediation
                         can help achieve the desired combination of secured and unsecured lending to SMEs and use
                         different branch networks for diverse physical access to financial intermediaries to enhance the
                         project M&E framework.

                         During the project preparation, the team will assess the need for a capacity building component for
                         the MRD in the area of M&E systems, and design and implementation of regional policy. A survey
                         of entrepreneurs participating in the project will be regularly conducted using a third-party
                         monitoring approach.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In project preparation, the team will identify and analyze gender issues relevant to the project
                         objectives or components, report relevant findings and determine whether it is meaningful to
                         incorporate gender into the design and/or M&E to address gender issues.

                         The project will explore innovative financing arrangements to extend its development impact to local
                         currency markets and crowd-in private resources. More innovative approaches can eliminate foreign
                         currency risk from the project and extend the project’s development impact to local currency
                         markets.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will operate throughout Kazakhstan. Eligibility criteria should prioritize SMEs in non-
                         extractive sectors of the economy with export potential and location in priority regions. Note that
                         these criteria do not exclude firms in non-extractive sectors that operate upstream or downstream
                         from larger corporations in the extractive sector. The project will not finance category A projects,
                         projects in extractive industry nor SMEs involved in any activities which are inconsistent with WB
                         policies (e.g. arms, tobacco, etc.). Project will also not finance activities that might trigger Natural
                         Habitats policy.

                         While Component 2 is the primary focus of the SG policies, opportunity is seen to introduce capacity
                         building through Component 1 on environmental and social aspects of good global practice.

                         SME Loans and trainings will be provided to eligible Banks, MFIs, and Leasing Companies. The
                         eligibility criteria are expected to prioritize SMEs in non-extractive sectors of the economy with
                         export potential. These criteria do not exclude from the project the firms in non-extractive sectors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         that are in the upstream or downstream from the firms in the extractive sector. The project will
                         explore innovative financing arrangements to extend its development impact also to local currency
                         markets and crowd in private resources. The following models are possible: (a)Government of
                         Kazakhstan (GoK) borrows from the Bank in USD using standard WB lending instruments; (b) GoK
                         borrows from the Bank in KZT taking advantage of a possible USD/KZT swap arrangement; (c)
                         GoK borrows in local markets through issuance of a KZT-denominated bond, partially guaranteed by
                         the Bank, and crowds in private resources.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The main implementing agency for the project is DAMU Fund, an implementing arm of the Ministry
                         of the Regional Development. It is a national development institute whose explicit mission is to
                         promote quality development of SMEs in Kazakhstan. This is the first engagement of the Bank with
                         DAMU. At this stage the borrower capacity needs to be further explored. The World Bank team will
                         work closely with the DAME expert to build the capacity during project preparation period. The
                         team is aware that while this is the first engagement of DAMU with the Bank, the borrower has
                         previous experience of implementing credit lines with funding from the Asian Development Bank.

                         The WB team will discuss with the client possibility of using performance standards for the project.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Lola Ibragimova (ECSSO)
                           Natasa Vetma (ECSEN)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes          Environmental Management Framework will be
                           BP 4.01                                        prepared for the project and will define
                                                                          environmental procedures and due diligence for
                                                                          participating SME and FIs. EMF will also
                                                                          introduce in sub-project evaluation which will
                                                                          include due diligence review to confirm thatthe
                                                                          SME’s are in compliance with environmental
                                                                          (including safety) national laws and regulations
                                                                          and have no pending legal actions or complaints
                                                                          against them. Procedures for financing of
                                                                          proposed action plans prepared based on due
                                                                          diligence will also be described. Site specific
                                                                          EMPs or limited scope EIAs depending on the
                                                                          environmental impact. These environmental due
                                                                          diligence documents will be prepared when
                                                                          SME loans /sub -projects are identified during
                                                                          project implementation.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No           Project will not finance any activities that might
                                                                          trigger OP 4.04.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes          The OP 4.12 is triggered and a Resettlement
                           4.12                                           Policy Framework will be prepared on a
                                                                          precautionary basis to allow for the possibility
                                                                          that minor land acquisition might be needed for
                                                                          some of the investments proposed for financing
                                                                          under the line of credit. As the loan applicants
                                                                          will be private companies, any land acquisition
                                                                          is expected to be through purchase rather than
                                                                          expropriation, but provision might need to be
                                                                          made for displacement of informal occupants or
                                                                          users of the purchased land. The RPF will set
                                                                          out the appropriate requirements, including
                                                                          clarifying that it applies to any land acquired
                                                                          specifically for the purposes of the sub-project
                                                                          proposed for Project financing, even if the
                                                                                                                                 acquisition was made prior to the loan
                                                                                                                                 application. In addition, the investment loans for
                                                                                                                                 SME sub-projects will be screened to: (1)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 ensure compliance with the exclusion list, (2)
                                                                                                                                 ensure that no sub-projects with significant
                                                                                                                                 impacts of a Category A type are supported.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-May-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The safeguards documentation, including the consultations on EMF, is expected to be conducted
                                      by the end of June, 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Martin Melecky

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 11-Feb-2014
                                 Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Paloma Anos Casero (SM)                                                                                              Date: 14-Feb-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
