                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA7592
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Bhutan                             Project ID:    P145392
                            Project Name:     AF for Bhutan 2nd Urban Development Proj (P145392)
                            Task Team         Shenhua Wang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         09-Dec-2013                        Estimated   20-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    SASDU                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Central government administration (40%), Urban Transport (30%), Water supply
                                              (30%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (30%), Urban planning and
                                              housing policy (30%), Water resource management (30%), Munic ipal
                                              governance and institution building (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      12.15           Total Bank Financing:                 12.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.15
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               12.00
                              Total                                                                                     12.15
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The revised Project Development Objectives are to: (i) strengthen municipal finance and
                           management systems in selected Thromdes, (ii) improve infrastructure services in Thimphu, and (iii)



                                                                      Page 1 of 11
                         strengthen national and local government capacity to implement the National Human Settlements
                         Policy of Bhutan
                          3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. The implementation arrangements of the original project will remain the same for the Additional
                         Financing (AF) project. The AF would continue to finance infrastructure construction in selected
                         Local Area Plans (LAP) and a water supply system in parts of the Northern Thimphu city. The
                         Original Project Components include: (i) a Municipal reform/institutional development; and (ii)
                         Thimphu Northern Area Development. The main proposed changes consist of the scaling up of the
                         urban infrastructure in additional LAPs, development of a central water supply system, expansion of
                         municipal finance reforms in two more thromdes, and technical assistance and capacity building
                         programs for the MoWHS and thromdes.

                         3.       The three project components will remain the same as in the original project, with scaled up
                         project activities as briefly described below. The project is currently implemented through the
                         Thimphu Thromde (TT) and the Ministry of Works and Human Settlement (MoWHS).

                         4.       Component 1: Municipal Finance and Management (estimated cost US$ 1 million) aims at
                         replicating municipal finance and management strengthening activities to two more thromdes of
                         Gelephu and Samdrup Jongkhar to enable them to function effectively as efficient, transparent and
                         accountable urban local governments.

                         5.       Component 2: Thimphu Northern Area Development (estimated cost US$14.15 million,
                         with IDA credit US$14 million) including (i) the construction of infrastructure services including
                         roads, water supply, drainage, sewerage and street lighting in Lower Taba LAPs; and (ii) the
                         provision of a water supply scheme to serve northern Thimphu city, comprising of a water diversion
                         structure, transmission main, and storage cum pressure reduction tanks.

                         6.       Component 3: Capacity Building (estimated cost US$2 million) will strengthen the national
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and local government capacity to implement the National Human Settlements Policy of Bhutan by
                         (a) developing Human Settlements Implementation Strategy and Valley Plan(s), (b) formulating
                         National Planning Act and Planning Standards, (c) support for the application of new traditional
                         Bhutanese architectural guidelines and urban development planning; and (iv) capacity building and
                         training activities for MoWHS and Thromdes staff, including office equipment, vehicle, and
                         incremental operating costs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         7.       In general Bhutan is home of several species of flora and fauna. The project activities under
                         the AF will be limited to two local area plans (LAP) including the Lower Taba, and development of a
                         new water source to serve parts of Thimphu City. The proposed LAPs are developed through land
                         pooling and is generally depicts rolling terrain. The water pipeline route area is proposed to follow
                         the existing road from Thimphu city to the Jigme Dorji National Park (JDNP) along the sides of
                         steep mountains.

                         8.        The intake for new water supply is the Thim Chu (river), at a point about 25 km from the
                         city, through a diversion that will abstract about 7% of the dry weather flow. The high elevation of
                         the intake and the absence of any settlements will provide water of good quality which can be
                         supplied following sand filtration and disinfection, as is being done in existing water supply systems,


                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                         without the need for any chemical treatment. The water supply system has been designed for a
                         planning period of about 30 years to serve the northern Thimphu city except for the areas served by
                         the two existing treatment plants, and will be developed in two stages of 7,000 m3/day. Design
Public Disclosure Copy




                         criteria include 200 liters per capita per day. The main transmission pipeline from the intake to the
                         edge of Thimphu has been sized for the planning period. Land provision has been made for a future
                         treatment plant. Water will be distributed through the existing storage tank network that will function
                         as storage and pressure reduction structures. The Additional Financing will finance the first phase of
                         7,000 m3/day, diversion channel, sand filters and disinfection, about 25 km of transmission mains,
                         and five storage-pressure reduction tanks. Final location will be selected on environmental/social
                         screening /assessment along with analysis of alternatives.

                         9.        The present population of the Thimphu core city is estimated at 79,000 and is expected to
                         increase to about 125,000 by 2017. More than 90% of the population in central area of Thimphu has
                         piped water connection. The City boundary was extended in 1999 increasing the urban area from
                         about 8 sqkm to about 26 sqkm. The present population of 79,000 is exclusive of the population in
                         the extended areas of the municipality.

                         10.      The lower Taba LAP has a total area of 49.48 ha having 266 housing plots and 6 service
                         plots. A total of 250 private persons own these 266 housing plots. Currently 127 households are
                         living in the lower Taba LAP with a total population of 480 persons including 209 males and 271
                         females. About 74% of the residents are migrants and only 26% are originally local. Out of the 227
                         households, 193 are tenants, who do not own any land or property in the area. Only 34 land owners
                         are living in the area.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Md. Akhtaruzzaman (SASDS)
                         Iqbal Ahmed (SASDI)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             In view of sub-projects nature, the overall AF is
                         BP 4.01                                              classified as a Category ‘B’ as applied in the
                                                                              original project and the safeguard policy OP/BP
                                                                              4.01 has been triggered to ensure that the sub
                                                                              project design and implementation is focused on
                                                                              reducing adverse impacts and enhancing positive
                                                                              impacts. Before approval of each subproject,
                                                                              environmental and social screening and
                                                                              assessment is being carried out with
                                                                              environmental management plan (EMP) and
                                                                              social management plan (SMP) that will include
                                                                              subproject specific mitigation and monitoring
                                                                              measures. EMP with cost will be incorporated in
                                                                              the tender documents of work contracts. Site
                                                                              specific EMP and RAP will be prepared before
                                                                              the bid process.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes             It is highly unlikely that any natural habitat
                                                                              formed largely by native plant and animal species



                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                                                                         will be affected or modified during the
                                                                         construction phase of water transmission and
                                                                         distribution lines. However, as advance
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         precautionary measures the policy has been
                                                                         triggered and the possible impact on natural
                                                                         habitats is addressed through subproject specific
                                                                         EMP .Also the alternative analysis will confirm
                                                                         that project activities under AF shall avoid
                                                                         significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                         natural habitats includes legally/officially
                                                                         protected, high conservation value.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The project entails risk/damage to cultural
                         BP 4.11                                         properties and has likelihood of finding
                                                                         Archaeological properties. Also the alternative
                                                                         analysis will confirm that project activities under
                                                                         AF shall avoid destruction or damage of PCR
                                                                         includes resources of archaeological,
                                                                         paleontological, historical, architectural or
                                                                         religious
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The project will use land pooling approach for
                         4.12                                            development of the lower Taba LAP and use only
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         public lands for the water supply system. The
                                                                         land owners in Taba will cut out a voluntarily
                                                                         agreed portion of their plots for infrastructure
                                                                         development and none of them will be physically
                                                                         displaced. Only some of the land owners will be
                                                                         affected with their physical assets and some
                                                                         tenants will be displaced from temporary rental
                                                                         accommodation and business premises. A
                                                                         Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been
                                                                         prepared for resettlement and livelihood
                                                                         restoration of these affected persons following the
                                                                         Bank OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International         Yes           The raw water of the proposed central water
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            supply system will be collected from river
                                                                         Thimchu (also called as Thimphu River) in
                                                                         Bhutan flowing from nearby mountains. The
                                                                         International Waterways policy (OP 7.50) is


                                                                 Page 4 of 11
                                                                               triggered to this project because the water
                                                                               tributary or body of surface water flows through
                                                                               two or more states. Under this policy, notification
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               is required to all riparians as per paragraph 7 (a)
                                                                               of OP 7.50. The Bank has undertaken the riparian
                                                                               notifications on behalf of Bhutan. The
                                                                               Government of India and Government of
                                                                               Bangladesh have been notified and asked to
                                                                               respond by February 24, 2014.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The findings from original project interpreted that the investment on urban structure and water
                              supply project has given net positive environmental enhancement by improving of roads, drainage,
                              street lights, water supply etc. The original project is one of the pilots for Country Systems (CS)
                              on environmental safeguards, and the provisions under OP 4.00 have been applied. As part of CS
                              assessments, Bhutan’s environmental policies applicable for urban projects have been determined
                              to be equivalent to the corresponding requirements of OP 4.00 with relevant acceptability
                              measures agreed with RGOB. The Sectoral Environmental Assessment prepared in compliance
                              with the Bank policies as well as Bhutan country systems has provisions to address environmental
                              impacts. The original Project (ongoing BUDP-II) supports development of infrastructure facilities
                              in selected LAPs of settlements in the northern part of Thimphu, namely Dechhenchholing and
                              Langjophakha. The facilities to be provided include construction of roads and drainage, treated
Public Disclosure Copy




                              water reservoir, water treatment plant (WTP) with water supply network, sewer treatment plant
                              (STP) with network, electricity cables with sleeves and street lights. The AF will mainly support
                              infrastructure improvement in the Lower Taba LAP and development of water supply system at
                              northern Thimphu to ensure safe and drinkable water for the city dwellers. Since the same scope of
                              work will be implemented and same nature of impacts will be expected, the AF is designed and
                              implemented using the same approach as the original project for environmental safeguards using
                              the country system. In accordance with the provisions of OP/BP 4.01, the AF also designated as
                              environmental ‘Category B’ as applied in the original project.

                             Regular monitoring (noticed and unannounced) for the original project is being conducted by the
                             Environment Unit of the Thimphu Thromde. In addition six-monthly monitoring by the Ministry
                             of Works and Human Settlement (MoWHS) and annual monitoring by the National Environment
                             Commission (NEC) are carried out. The environment monitoring reports of the original project
                             indicated that there were no major or irreversible impacts, no damage or loss to important flora
                             and fauna due to the ongoing project activities of development of LAPs. However, the
                             environmental safeguard policies Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) and Physical Cultural Resources
                             (OP/BP 4.11) have been triggered as advance precautionary measures. Although it is highly
                             unlikely that any designated physical cultural resources will be affected by the subprojects or any
                             natural habitant formed largely by native plant and animal species will be affected or modified by
                             the project activities. Also the alternative analysis will confirm that project activities under AF


                                                                       Page 5 of 11
                         shall avoid significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats includes legally/
                         officially protected, high conservation value as well as destruction or damage of PCR includes
                         resources of archaeological, paleontological, historical, architectural or religious.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The land pooling approach applied in BUDP II is based on the Land Pooling Rules and
                         Regulations (2009), which places emphasis on in situ development, minimizes resettlement and
                         enables original owners to retain title to the majority of the land. The land pooling approach is
                         based on voluntary agreement with affected landowners and the Regulations stipulates that at least
                         two third of land owners in a given area should sign Land Pooling Agreements. For a land owner,
                         the net economic benefit due to land pooling is calculated to be typically in the range of a 15 times
                         increase of the economic value of the remaining land. While land will be voluntarily contributed to
                         the LAP, Project Affected Families will receive compensation for loss of structures, other assets,
                         livelihood and resettlement assistance plus additional assistance to the most vulnerable according
                         to an Entitlement Framework developed by TT, compliant with OP 4.12. Resettlement Action Plan
                         (RAP) was prepared for infrastructural development in Dechencholing and Langjopakha LAPs
                         under the original project. The RAPs have the provision that a land plot will be acquired entirely
                         using Bhutan Land Act 2007 only when the owner of the plot declines signing off land pooling.
                         However, the TT attempted to make 100% of the land owners agree on land pooling and to avoid
                         land acquisition, which was successful in Dechencholing LAP under the original project.

                         Implementation of RAP in the Langjopakha LAP experienced difficulties over the land pooling as
                         the TT attempted the same approach of 100% agreement avoiding land acquisition. Owners of at
                         least three developed land plots declined on the land pooling and betterment charge in lieu of land
                         pooling was charged to them at the rate equivalent to the price of the quantum of land proposed for
                         pooling. This approach is in compliance with the Land Pooling law and will be applied by RGoB
                         in the selected LAP for similar improvement under the AF. The TT has carried a Social
                         Assessment (SA) and prepared a draft RAP for the lower Taba LAP in March 2013 which were
                         updated in December 2013 expanding the SA to include the water pipeline component under the
                         AF. According to the updated SA, 29 Families and persons will be affected losing their structures,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         other physical assets and livelihood resources, 20 of whom are land owners and the rest are
                         tenants. Appropriate compensation package for affected households will be provided for their
                         resettlement and livelihood restoration. 13 land owners in the lower Taba have declined on land
                         pooling as their plots are already developed with permanent structures. They have signed the
                         kappa form (surveyed form) agreeing on betterment charge in lieu of land pooling. The TT has
                         updated the preliminary SA of the Lower Taba LAP engaging an independent consultant that
                         covered all the components of the AF and the draft RAP for the LAP has also been finalized
                         following the revised SA. The updating of SA also included review of the experience of BUDP-II
                         in land pooling, and resettlement and rehabilitation of affected persons particularly in the
                         Langjopakha LAP under the original project.

                         International Waterways: The AF intends to improve water supply system at northern Thimphu to
                         ensure safe and drinkable water for the city dwellers. The raw water of the proposed central water
                         supply system will be collected from river Thimchu (also called as Thimphu River) in Bhutan
                         flowing from nearby mountains. This river drains to Wang-chu further south and finally enters the
                         Indian boundary as Raidak River. The proposed intake location is identified at Gepthang (Dodena)
                         about 25 km north of Thimphu city. The location is selected in terms of elevation, topography,
                         environment and raw water quality. It is estimated that the distance from the proposed intake
                         location and neighboring country (India) boundary will be 200 km. The capacity of the WTP is
                         proposed for 7 MLD (7000 cum per day) against of daily mean flow of 10.2 cum per sec (881280

                                                                   Page 6 of 11
                           cum per day). The number of beneficiaries for safe drinking water would be close to 45,000
                           people. The International Waterways policy (OP 7.50) is triggered to this project because the
                           tributary or body of surface water flows through two or more states. Under this policy, notification
Public Disclosure Copy




                           is required to all riparians as per paragraph 7 (a) of OP 7.50. The Bank has undertaken the riparian
                           notifications on behalf of Bhutan. The Government of India and Government of Bangladesh have
                           been notified and asked to respond by February 24, 2014, if any [to be updated once response
                           period is closed].
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The proposed interventions and or activities under the AF would not lead to adverse long-term
                           environmental impacts as the project interventions relate to improving services in one or more pre-
                           identified LAP(s) where land use regulations and NEC rules are enforced effectively. The
                           investment on the urban structures including water supply at Northern Thimpu will give net
                           positive environmental impacts. The original investment already implemented two water supply
                           sub-projects for Dechencholing and Langjophaka LAP areas. However, appropriate attention will
                           be given to the potential impacts on water resources from the increase sewage in water intake for
                           the proposed water treatment systems. However, appropriate attention will be given to the
                           potential impacts on water resources from the increased sewage in water intake for the proposed
                           water treatment systems. Fecal coliform at source water has been investigated on October 8 and
                           November 13, 2013 and found 4 CFU/100ML and 0CFU/100ML respectively. It indicated that
                           the raw water quality is fairly good and will require only basic and minimal treatment to achieve
                           drinking water quality standards. However, Sedimentation tanks should be provided to remove the
                           suspended solids before Water Treatment Plant (WTP). The treatment plant shall be a
                           conventional and consisting of rapid sand filters, clear water storage tanks, chlorination system,
                           laboratory and associated components including other basic amenities such as staff house, rest
                           room, store etc. A separate sludge lagoon shall be constructed for treatment and safe disposal of
                           sludge. During operation stage the potential impacts from increased sewage will also be
                           evaluated in timely manner and necessary mitigation measures will be taken, if cross the limit. In
Public Disclosure Copy




                           that case collective treatment systems may offer the best way to control wastewater. Suitable
                           sewage collection and storage systems should be thought on site to hold the sewage. Also the
                           Installation of a sewage treatment facility will be an alternative to treat the sewage to acceptable
                           discharge.

                           Experience from the original project shows that the negative environmental impacts will be
                           triggered mostly from the construction related activities and these are temporary and limited
                           within project boundary. The impacts include: felling of trees, disposal of wastes, air, water and
                           noise related impacts from construction activities, increased vehicle impacts, temporary
                           disturbance to local traffic and disposal of sludge from water tank. However, The limited expected
                           environmental impacts has been identified by Environmental Screening /assessment undertaken by
                           the Royal Government of Bhutan (RGoB) and proper environment management plan will be
                           adopted to avoid or mitigate the impacts. On the contrary, the improved provision of services is
                           expected to have considerable positive impact on the living conditions of and services enjoyed by
                           the population in the LAP(s) and the residents of the northern Thimphu City.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           With reference to water supply for the LAPs and the Thimphu City, the EA has considered three
                           options for the source of water supply. The site for raw water intake of the proposed central water
                           supply system is proposed at an extreme point devoid of settlement in the upstream of Thim chhu

                                                                     Page 7 of 11
                          about 25 km north of Thimphu city in Thimphu Dzongkhag. One of the proposed locations of the
                          proposed intake falls at the boundary of the JDNP upstream of the existing Bazam over Thim chhu
                          at Dodena. The elevation of the water intake is 2588m above mean sea level. Other two alternative
Public Disclosure Copy




                          intake sites is considering in the downstream from the National Park beyond settlement areas
                          along the Thim chhu. The EA includes environmental/social screening /assessment along with
                          analysis of alternatives for selection of the intake site.

                           The alternatives analysis for secondary roads, sanitation, and street lighting relates to technical
                           options minimizing the environmental impacts. The alternative to the land pooling approach
                           applied would be ordinary land acquisition which would have far greater impact on project
                           affected people, resulting in a larger number of people losing title to their land and having to
                           relocate, thus causing greater social disturbances than the land pooling solutions. According to the
                           preliminary SA (March 2013), 95% of land owners in Lower Taba have signed the land pooling
                           agreements (and the remaining 13 households signed Kappa form agreeing for payment of
                           betterment charge in lieu of land pooling), i.e. fulfilling the requirements for application of the
                           land pooling approach whereby they will contribute about 28.5% of their land in exchange for
                           provision of infrastructure services in the LAP. The analysis confirm that project activities under
                           AF should avoid significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats and legally/
                           officially protected sites of high conservation value and destruction or damage of PCR including
                           archaeological, paleontological, historical, architectural or religious sites or establishments.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The implementing agencies (Ministry of Works and Human Settlement and Thimphu Thromde)
                           has already gained the experience of IDA funded projects and developed its institutional capacity
                           on environmental management. The original project has carried out environmental screening and
                           environmental assessment following the Bank policies as well as Bhutan Country System, and
                           these have been reviewed and approved by the Bank and disclosed in country by the RGoB. The
                           environmental policies applied for BUDP-II were in conformity with the Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Act, 2000 and various relevant ECoP (Env. Code of Practice). Environmental issues in Bhutan are
                           administered by the National Environmental Commission (NEC), an autonomous body in the
                           RGoB. Environment Clearances were obtained for the ongoing original project from NEC dated
                           29/4/2012 and 10/9/2012. EIA disclosure was done through the websites of: www.mowhs.gov.bt
                           and www.thimphucity.bt.

                          The AF is designed and will be implemented using the same approach as the original project for
                          environmental safeguards using CS. The EIA of physical components under AF will be prepared
                          in consultation with the key stakeholders including the field level staffs and communities.

                          The physical components of the AF will be implemented by TT with DUDES of MoWHS
                          providing an oversight and monitoring function. The TT’s engineering division, with the support
                          from the environmental and social specialists, is responsible for safeguard compliance in
                          coordination with its urban planning division. In addition, the Environment Specialist of the
                          MoWHS will also be responsible for overall implementation of safeguard measures in compliance
                          with the CS.

                          For proper implementation effectiveness and sustain acceptability of safeguards, it is
                          recommended that the officials of NEC, Environment Division of Thimphu Thromde and the
                          ministry will be more involved in environmental monitoring.


                                                                     Page 8 of 11
                           The RAP has been prepared for the Lower Taba LAP to address issues related to involuntary
                           resettlement and/or the loss of assets or income as a result of the land pooling approach and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           demarcation and location of facilities in the LAP. This RAP identifies the broad scope of the
                           project and outlines the policy, procedures for acquisition of land, compensation and other
                           assistance measures for affected persons, as well as required institutional arrangements. The RAP
                           provides guidelines for how to address Land Acquisition in case of titleholders who may not agree
                           to land pooling. Their lands would be subject to full land acquisition based on the Bhutan land
                           acquisition policy (2007) and compliance with OP 4.12. The RAP has been updated following the
                           revised SA for the lower Taba LAP extended to the water systems route and the experience and
                           learning from the original project. The Social Development and Resettlement Cell (SDRC) in TT
                           is responsible for the implementation of the RAP, and capacity building of SDRC is part of the
                           RAP Implementation program. While SDRC will carry out internal monitoring of RAP, an
                           independent agency will undertake periodic review of RAP implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The original project is one of the pilots for Country Systems (CS) on safeguards which was
                           assessed prior to the project and a Safeguard Diagnostic Report was prepared and duly disclosed.
                           The site specific EIA along with environmental management plans and SIAalong with RAP for the
                           AF sub-projects are being prepared and will be disclosed in the websites of MoWHS (www.
                           mowhs.gov.bt) and the TT (www.thimphucity.bt) for the public. Environment Clearances from
                           NEC will be taken before commencement of any physical works. The stakeholder consultations
                           conducted as part of preparation of EA and SA includes, consultations with NGOs, citizens
                           groups, and population near to the proposed facilities. The draft final sub-project specific EA and
                           SA will be disclosed in the country for comments and suggestions before negotiation. The Land
                           Pooling Rules and Regulations (2009) comprise the provision of information and public
                           consultations as standard procedures. The population in the lower Taba LAP and those along the
                           water supply system routes and areas has been informed about the project and the land pooling
Public Disclosure Copy




                           approach through a number of public meetings and consultations since March 2013. The planners
                           developing the new area plans have undertaken very close consultations with titleholders and
                           made a number of adjustments to the plans in order to minimize negative impact and in order to
                           accommodate the concerns raised by the PAPs. During the implementation of the RAP(s),
                           consultations will continue in the form of a series of Focus Group Discussions among stakeholders
                           regarding RAP implementation and entitlement framework. The final SA (Executive Summary
                           and Entitlement Framework) and EIA will be translated into local language (Dzongkha) and
                           copies will be provided to public representatives, the library and the local school. In addition,
                           these documents will be available at the MoWHS and TT offices as well as on their websites. The
                           cost for implementation for sub-project specific EMP will be included in the respective bid
                           document and the sub-project specific RAP will be implemented before commencement of the
                           construction of respective works.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                        01-Sep-2009
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                     01-Sep-2009
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        01-Sep-2009
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


                                                                    Page 9 of 11
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bhutan                                                           01-Sep-2009
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01-Sep-2009
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   01-Sep-2009
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bhutan                                                           10-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]




                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Shenhua Wang
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Zia Al Jalaly (RSA)                             Date: 04-Feb-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Ming Zhang (SM)                                 Date: 04-Feb-2014




                                                                      Page 11 of 11
