                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA6116
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Niger                              Project ID:    P145268
                            Project Name:      Niger Disaster Risk Management and Urban Development Project (P145268)
                            Task Team          Richard James
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          21-Oct-2013                        Estimated   12-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTN2                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            GEF Focal          Multi-focal area
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%), Irrigation and
                                              drainage (30%), Flood protection (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Natural disaster management (25%), Other social protection and risk
                                              management (30%), Gender (5%), Municipal governance and institut ion
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              building (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     106.64           Total Bank Financing:                 100.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               100.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                           6.64
                              Total                                                                                     106.64
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?



                                                                       Page 1 of 12
                         2. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)
                            A. Project Development Objective(s)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The project development objective is to improve Niger's resilience to natural hazards through
                            selected disaster risk management interventions in targeted project sites and strengthening of
                            Government's capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency.
                            B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                            N/A

                          3. Project Description
                         The proposed components are: (i) flood protection infrastructure; (ii) support to local governance;
                         (iii) contingency component; and (iv) project management. The LDCF resources are expected to
                         contribute mainly to components 1 and 2. Details are as follows:

                         Component 1: Flood Risk Management Investments (US$79.64 Million) – This component will
                         finance a combination of infrastructure rehabilitation and disaster risk management structural
                         interventions. The overarching principle for this component is ensuring sustainability to future
                         flooding events in the urban and rural areas of Niamey, Dosso, Tillabéri, and Diffa regions.
                         Activities at the commune level have been prioritized by the local and regional authorities according
                         to their potential contribution to reducing flood risks or rehabilitating livelihoods in flood-affected
                         areas. Feasibility and technical studies are either ongoing - financed by the project preparation
                         advance - or expected to be launched at project effectiveness. Following are the sub-components:
                         1.1      Drainage, irrigation and socio-economic priority infrastructures (US$40 Million): This sub-
                         component will support construction of sewage collectors and primary networks in Niamey, Dosso,
                         Kollo, Say, Tera and Tillabéri; rehabilitating drainage canals and waste management in Niamey;
                         rehabilitation of drinking water supplies and social infrastructures for populations affected by the
                         2012 floods.
                         1.2      Flood protection infrastructure (US$14 Million, of which US$1.33 Million from LDCF ):
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Under this sub-component, the project will support biological and mechanical bank protection, stone
                         barriers and thresholds in “koris? (sandy intermittent streams) to reduce runoff intensity,
                         rehabilitation and upgrading of existing dikes to protect Niamey Commune 4 and 5 as well as 14
                         irrigated perimeters along Niger and Komadougou Rivers. LDCF would support biological bank
                         protection.
                         1.3      Rehabilitation of watersheds (US$25.64 Million, of which US$5.31 Million from LDCF):
                         This sub-component will support sustainable land and water management practices (soil recovery,
                         stone embankments, rock thresholds) in Sirba and Gouroubi tributaries’ watersheds that will enable
                         soil & water conservation, enhance infiltration and reduce peak flows; rehabilitation of 14 irrigated
                         perimeters damaged by 2012 floods along the Niger and Komadougou Rivers; sand dune fixation in
                         Diffa and Tillabéri regions; reshaping or re-profiling of natural drainage canals (former arms of the
                         Niger River and Gounty Yena) in Niamey; and pond control structures along the Komadougou River
                         in Diffa Region. The LDCF would support sustainable land and water management practices,
                         specifically for land recovery works on glazes and plateau.

                         Component 2: Capacity development and Social Accountability (US$22.0 Million). This component
                         will provide technical assistance for the development of central and local governments’ capacities.
                         Disaster risk management (risk evaluation, risk-informed planning, preparedness and response
                         capacities) and climate change adaptation will be mainstreamed as part of routine development
                         processes.


                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                         2.1     Support to elected officials, municipal services and civil society (US$5 Million): This
                         subcomponent is expected to strengthen local governments’ fiduciary and technical capacity;
                         collaboration frameworks (inter-government management); information management; development
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and sanitation master plans. The capacity development of local governments will leverage resilience
                         as an added-benefit.
                         2.2     Support to central government (US$6 Million): This subcomponent will support capacities
                         with a crosscutting approach and specific target towards institutional collaboration. Examples of
                         technical assistance would include: development of a national sanitation policy (stormwater,
                         wastewater, basic sanitation, and solid waste), capacity development for the Department of Planning
                         and Housing, equipment and training for monitoring river water levels and flows, supporting
                         maintenance of irrigated perimeters.
                         2.3     Strengthen disaster risk management capacities (US$11 Million): This sub-component
                         supports national and local disaster risk management capacities, including risk evaluation, risk
                         reduction, preparedness and emergency response capacity. Examples of technical assistance include
                         development of risk atlas (hazard, exposure, vulnerability and loss probability information);
                         development of real-time multi-hazard information systems for proper monitoring of risk and
                         available resources; standard operating procedures for early warning and response; guidelines for
                         safe construction practices and for mainstreaming disaster risk reduction and climate adaptation.

                         Component 3: Project Management (US$5.0 Million). This component will build institutional
                         capacity to ensure sustainable integration of project activities within the country’s existing
                         institutions and systems. It will ensure coordination of all the activities of the project, including
                         monitoring and evaluation. This component will cover all eligible expenditures including
                         strengthening institutional capacity; procurement of office furniture and equipment; hiring of
                         essential staff, including technical and financial audits; and all recurrent costs.

                         Component 4: Contingency Component: (US$0). Following an adverse natural event that causes a
                         major disaster, the Government of Niger may request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to support
                         mitigation, response, recovery and reconstruction. This component would draw resources from the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         unallocated expenditure category and/or allow the government to request the Bank to re-categorize
                         and reallocate financing from other project components to partially cover emergency response and
                         recovery costs. This component could also be used to channel additional funds should they become
                         available as a result of an eligible emergency. Disbursements would be made against a positive list of
                         goods, works, and services required supporting mitigation, response, recovery and reconstruction
                         needs. All expenditures under this component, should it be triggered, will be in accordance with
                         paragraph 11 of OP 10.00 and will be appraised, reviewed and found to be acceptable to the Bank
                         before any disbursement is made. Eligible operating costs would include the incremental expenses
                         incurred for efforts arising as a result of the natural disaster.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The specific sites for infrastructure investments and their scope will be determined during project
                         preparation based on the government’s detailed assessments of priority needs within the target
                         regions in consultation with local population and authorities and detailed technical studies to be
                         undertaken. The general areas include: Niamey, Dosso, Diffa and Tillaberi regions
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Liba C. Strengerowski-Feldblyum (AFTN2)
                         Richard James (AFTN2)


                                                                        Page 3 of 12
                         Amadou Konare (AFTN1)
                         Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (AFTCS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes             The project will rehabilitate and upgrade
                         BP 4.01                                         sanitation and infrastructure works in several
                                                                         locations. As the sites and works are not yet
                                                                         finalized, an ESMF has been prepared, consulted
                                                                         upon, and disclosed both in-country and at the
                                                                         InfoShop before appraisal. The ESMF formulates
                                                                         standard methods and procedures, along with
                                                                         clear institutional arrangements for screening,
                                                                         review, approval, implementation and monitoring
                                                                         of sub-project-specific safeguards instruments
                                                                         (ESMPs, ESIAs and/or RAPs) as necessary.
                                                                         These instruments will also be consulted upon
                                                                         and disclosed in-country and at InfoShop.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              Due to the location of interventions in urban
                                                                         areas, or in areas were infrastructure and/or
                                                                         productive activities were already in place, no
                                                                         negative impacts to critical or sensitive natural
                                                                         habitats are expected.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              No interventions are financed in forest areas, nor
                                                                         do they involve forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes             Although procurement of pesticides is not
                                                                         envisaged under the project, it is expected that
                                                                         intensification of agricultural production and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         productivity, as a result of water retention and
                                                                         land use planning for crop production purposes,
                                                                         will likely lead to an increased use of pesticides.
                                                                         The Government of Niger has recently developed
                                                                         a Pest Management Plan for the PRODEX and
                                                                         the Emergency Food Security Projects. The
                                                                         project has updated the existing PMP and submit
                                                                         it to the Bank for clearance and then disclosure
                                                                         in-country and at Bank InfoShop, prior to
                                                                         appraisal.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             The Physical Cultural Resources Policy (OP
                         BP 4.11                                         4.11) is triggered because Niger is viewed as a
                                                                         rich cultural heritage area. Though it is unknown
                                                                         at this time which sites may contain such
                                                                         resources, due to the lack of specifics on the
                                                                         locations, size, scale of planned investments
                                                                         under the project, it was judged prudent to use
                                                                         caution when implementing the productive
                                                                         investments, especially with the civil works for



                                                                 Page 4 of 12
                                                                        water retention and drainage infrastructures. The
                                                                        ESMF addresses potential impacts and includes
                                                                        suggested mitigation measures.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        Dispositions taken for subsequent sub-project-
                                                                        specific safeguards instruments will entail
                                                                        ensuring that ESIAs/ESMPs consultants and
                                                                        contractors are able to do the due diligence, or are
                                                                        teamed up with Physical Cultural Resources
                                                                        (PCR) experts to ensure that impacts on PCR are
                                                                        assessed and mitigation measures commensurate
                                                                        to those impacts, including proper handling of
                                                                        chance finds are implemented in the design, in
                                                                        accordance with national and World Bank
                                                                        policies.

                                                                        The Project team and implementers shall ensure
                                                                        that the proposed mitigation measures are derived
                                                                        from Projects and subproject specific ESIAs/
                                                                        ESMPs, and more specifically: (i) have been
                                                                        discussed and agreed upon by concerned parties;
                                                                        (ii) include an assessment of the capacity to
                                                                        implement the measures; and (iii) are acceptable
                                                                        within the national regulatory and legal
                                                                        framework, including laws and regulations
                                                                        concerning cultural heritage and the antiquities.
                                                                        These and other dispositions related to PCR will
                                                                        be discussed in the ESMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No              There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                        area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             OP 4.12 is triggered due to the potential impacts
                         4.12                                           related to civil works, which may lead to minor
                                                                        land acquisition, loss of assets and/or access to
                                                                        resources. A Resettlement Policy Framework has
                                                                        been prepared, consulted upon, approved and
                                                                        disclosed in-country andat the InfoShop prior to
                                                                        appraisal. Potential legacy issues/perceptional
                                                                        risk issues arising from resettlement already
                                                                        conducted by the UN and GoN will be addressed
                                                                        through a social assessment during project
                                                                        preparation once the exact intervention areas have
                                                                        been identified. The project team will consider
                                                                        cost effective ways to assist the resettled
                                                                        populations.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No              The project will not finance the building of
                                                                        dams and is not supporting dam infrastructure.
                                                                        Subject to technical studies the project may


                                                                Page 5 of 12
                                                                                finance local flood prevention structures that may
                                                                                temporarily retain excess water during peak
                                                                                volume events, but which do not pose dam safety
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                issues. If built, such structures may affect water
                                                                                availability to downstream riparians.
                            Projects on International           Yes               Two scenarios are at play. First, planned flood
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                prevention infrastructure investments along the
                                                                                Niger River and its tributaries, under Component
                                                                                2, may affect water flow into the Niger River, an
                                                                                international waterways servicing 9 riparian
                                                                                countries (Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad,
                                                                                Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea, Mali, Niger, and Nigeria).
                                                                                Second, the project plans to engage in the
                                                                                rehabilitation of existing dikes and renovation of
                                                                                water pumps along the Komadougou River in the
                                                                                Diffa region. With regard to the triggering of OP
                                                                                7.50 on 'International Waterways', the Policy is
                                                                                triggered for both the proposed interventions on
                                                                                the Niger River Basin as well as the Komadougou
                                                                                River Basin. The Government has already
                                                                                notified (September 13, 2013) the riparian
                                                                                countries through the Niger Basin Authority
                                                                                (NBA) and the Lake Chad Basin Commission
                                                                                (LCBC). The team is following up closely with
                                                                                both the NBA and the LCBC to expedite riparian
                                                                                response process. Once the response is received
                                                                                the team will prepare a Memo to the RVP taking
                                                                                into account NBA’s and LCBC’s feedback.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   OP 7.60 is not triggered as there are no known
                            7.60                                                disputes over project area

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               This proposed project is considered an environmental category ‘B’ project since the anticipated
                              impacts will be small in scale and site specific and therefore manageable to an accepted level. Five
                              safeguard policies are triggered: (i) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); (ii) Involuntary
                              Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12); (iii) Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09; (iv) Physical Cultural Resources
                              (OP/BP 4.11): and (v) Projects on International waterways (OP/BP 7.50).

                             Since at this stage only the general locations where most works will be conducted are known;
                             specific sites are yet to be determined. Accordingly, the following safeguard documents have been
                             prepared by the government and approved by the World Bank: (i) Environmental and Social
                             Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) Pest Management Plan (PMP); and (iii) Resettlement
                             Policy Framework (RPF). These documents have been consulted upon and will be disclosed
                             publicly in-country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal. Once specific sites and corresponding

                                                                        Page 6 of 12
                         impacts are identified, the Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental
                         and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared as
                         part of project implementation as necessary before any infrastructure is put in place.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Under component 1, the anticipated negative environmental and social impacts of the project
                         would result mainly from civil works associated with rehabilitation of existing infrastructure. The
                         consequence would be some disruption of livelihood activities, acquisition of land, use of
                         pesticides and related public health and perhaps physical cultural impacts. OP 4.01 is triggered to
                         account for and address these impacts. The Government has prepared an Environmental and Social
                         Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF provides guidance and measures, with the
                         associated implementation arrangements, with clear roles and responsibilities, along with capacity
                         strengthening measures for effective implementation and monitoring of the ESMF. It also provides
                         cost outlays and a timetable for preventing and mitigating all these potential impacts. In particular,
                         the ESMF provides steps for screening all subprojects, outlines procedures for preparing,
                         reviewing, clearing, disclosing and monitoring subproject-specific ESIAs/ESMPs. As a condition
                         of investment, it has been agreed that no civil works will commence, without proper compliance
                         with the above procedures.

                         A PMP has been prepared, which provides sound institutional arrangements, along with clear roles
                         and responsibilities for implementing and monitoring on pesticides-related impacts, in light of the
                         potential intensification and diversification of agricultural production and productivity.

                         OP 4.12 is triggered to cover civil works under component 1, which may require some land
                         acquisition leading to relocation and displacement of households and/or loss of assets. In case any
                         land acquisition or compensation becomes necessary, the costs will be covered by the Borrower.
                         The Borrower has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) with guidelines for
                         completion of a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), as needed, in case any land acquisition, and/or
                         restriction of access to resources should occur. The RPF includes the guidelines and procedures for
                         compensation and/or resettlement in the event that future activities under the sub-projects should
Public Disclosure Copy




                         require land acquisition, involuntary resettlement or cause restriction of access to livelihoods or
                         assets and resources. It contains (i) an assessment of the country regulatory and institutional
                         framework for land acquisition and compensation; (ii) likely categories of affected assets and
                         parties, as well as the scope of impacts; (iii) a gap analysis and a compensation framework
                         consistent with OP 4.12 and the national legislation; (iv) measures to assist vulnerable groups; (v)
                         a consultation framework to enable the participation of affected populations in the preparation of
                         specific resettlement plans; (vi) an institutional framework to implement the resettlement policy
                         framework; (vii) a grievance redress mechanism; and (viii) a monitoring and evaluation
                         framework and budget.

                         Even though a large number of infrastructure works will be performed, this will mostly be
                         rehabilitation of existing infrastructure in areas where negative envir onmental and social impacts
                         of the interventions are expected to be temporary and limited to the immediate area surrounding
                         the respective construction sites thus not requiring a physical footprint in addition to the existing
                         one. No civil works will take place without prior approval and disclosure of a RAP or ESIA/ESMP
                         in the country and the Bank’s Infoshop. In addition, specific environmental and social clauses will
                         be incorporated into relevant bidding documents and contracts to ensure compliance with the
                         respective safeguard guidelines.

                         Following the major adverse impacts of the 2012 floods, including severe damage to houses and

                                                                    Page 7 of 12
                           livelihoods, the Government together with UN agencies took emergency measures to relocate
                           people who had suffered from the floods to areas that were considered safer instead of continuing
                           to shelter them in schools. As compensation for resettlement, these people received a plot of land
Public Disclosure Copy




                           at the resettlement site, and assistance with relocation. Various NGOs have assisted the population
                           as well as the host communities by contributing social infrastructure such as a school, clinic/
                           medicine dispensary, drinking water, and construction of permanent housing. There is no legacy
                           issue with the resettlement, since it was conducted prior to and irrespective of the involvement of
                           the Bank. However, the future project activities may take place near or within the resettlement site
                           since locations are not know yet and therefore it is important to analyze the impacts of
                           resettlement and how the people are managing now to address any potential perceptional risk
                           issue. This will help to assess how to best contribute to reducing their vulnerability and ensuring
                           they are not adversely impacted by the project. This analysis is being done through a social
                           assessment of the relocation program and the results will be used when deciding on specific
                           locations for activities.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The project is in environmental category B, which signifies that impacts are site-specific and
                           manageable to an accepted level. It is not anticipated that any serious indirect or long term
                           environmental or social impacts will be caused by the project. The projectis expected to bring
                           positive benefits to communities, and individuals as the risk of major losses due to flooding will be
                           diminished. Women, in particular, are expected to benefit from this project because they are often
                           among the vulnerable groups most affected by adverse natural and man-made adverse events. The
                           project is expected to improve the food security status of households, by providing better
                           protection against flooding of urban and rural areas, consequently reducing the risk of losing their
                           livelihoods and assets.

                           Other socio-economic and environmental benefits directly or indirectly related to project’s
                           investments include the following specific positive impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           •        The realization of dikes, control structures and retention ponds allow better control of
                           water runoff at both streams (Sirba and Goroubi ) at the level of runoff ( thus reducing flood risks).
                           •        In urban areas, the renovation of cobbled streets and rehabilitation of roads destroyed by
                           floods will facilitate the free movement of goods and people and greatly reduce the stress of travel
                           -related cuts routes.
                           •        The rehabilitation of watersheds and treatment koris (i.e., biological protection etc.) will
                           not only significantly reduce water erosion, but also allow a gradual recovery and re-vegetation of
                           degraded lands, thus resulting in reduced siltation of rivers and ponds.
                           Potential project investment risks may include:

                           •        Construction/rehabilitation of storm water drainage infrastructures may pose some
                           problems: risk of disruption of certain commercial and craft activities and destruction of property
                           installed on the ROW. In the operational phase, the wrong choice or timing outlets could cause
                           flooding downstream. Also, the lack of cleaning and maintenance of drainage channels can cause
                           their transformation into real garbage dumps and waste of all kinds, even preventing the normal
                           flow of runoff, which can cause flooding. These infrastructures can also be used as a receptacle of
                           domestic wastewater or even illegal connection of septic tanks, if sustained awareness of the local
                           population is not assured.

                           •       Construction of food control micro-dams on the Sirba and Goroubi may cause some


                                                                      Page 8 of 12
                           negative effects on the aquatic environment, especially on the spawning grounds. In ecological
                           terms, the risk relates to migration constraints of aquatic wildlife, if crossing structures are not
                           developed. From public health standpoint, there is risk of development of vector borne diseases
Public Disclosure Copy




                           due to the permanence of water retention plans.

                           •        Increased use of fertilizers and pesticides, as a result of agricultural intensification and
                           diversification, may cause: (i) Pollution of water and soil; (ii) public health risks due to (a)
                           ineffective use of pesticides on the part of local agricultural producers and (b) the proliferation of
                           waterborne diseases due stagnant water bodies or the presence of ineffective drainage system in
                           agricultural perimeters.

                           The safeguards instruments prepared under the project include ample provisions/measures to
                           address all these potential risks. In addition, feasibility studies for the rehabilitation/construction
                           of infrastructures will take into account design-related risks/impacts and provide mitigation
                           measures commensurate to those impacts.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Alternatives to reduce the disaster related risks are minimal, given the vulnerability of the
                           population as demonstrated by the major losses suffered due to the recent floods, which in turn add
                           to the high level of poverty and overall vulnerability in the country. Niger is likely to face further
                           negative consequences of climate change, including changes in the intensity, duration, and
                           frequency of droughts, floods and heat waves. During the feasibility studies, alternatives to
                           minimize negative environmental and social impacts related to anticipated project activities will be
                           assessed.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The Government of Niger has previously successfully implemented Bank-financed projects for
                           which Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental and Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Management Frameworks (ESMF), and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) were prepared and
                           approved by the Bank. Further training and capacity building on safeguards policies will be
                           provided to the project management unit by Bank’s safeguards staff to ensure successful
                           implementation and supervision of the safeguards instruments. Implementing agency of the project
                           has recruited a safeguards expert for the project management unit to ensure proper implementation
                           and supervision of environmental and social issues. More specifically:

                           The project Steering Committee will bring together and ensure that all institutions involved have a
                           role to play, according to a monitoring work plan and intervention timetable and deliverables. The
                           Committee will decide on broad strategic directions for the implementation of the project and the
                           implementing rules thereto.

                           The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will hire an Environmental and Social expert (SEA / PIU)
                           who will coordinate the close monitoring of environmental and social aspects of project activities
                           work of the Project and assure the interface with other actors involved in project safeguard
                           function.

                           The beneficiary communes and technical services, responsible for the implementation (i.e.,
                           DGGR, etc.)will designate Social and Environmental Focal Points, who will participate in the
                           supervision of works. The Communes will also participate in awareness and sensitization

                                                                       Page 9 of 12
                           campaigns, as well as in the establishment of claims and conflicts management commissions.

                           The Bureau des Evaluations Environnementales et des Etudes d’Impacts (BEEEI), the National
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Agency (NEA), and its decentralized structures, will assure the external monitoring
                           of the implementation of the of the ESMF, RPF and PMP, including ensuring and validating that
                           the provisions of the ESMF and RPF, leading to further sub-projects environmental and social
                           assessments, are followed (i.e., sub-projects categorization, review, clearance and monitoring of
                           the sub-project-specific EIAs/EMPs and RAPs), on behalf of the Government. Overall project
                           environmental and social safeguards compliance, with national laws and regulations and
                           applicable World Bank operational policies and procedures, will be devolved to BEEEI. External
                           safeguards monitoring of project activities, will also involve and benefit from technical
                           backstopping of other institutions, such as: Ministry of Health, Ministry of Agriculture, Plant
                           Protection etc.

                           With this operation, the Project is not only building on many years of experience implementing
                           Bank-funded projects, but also on lessons learned from implementation of those operations. This
                           provides the Project Team and relevant actors a good framework for smooth implementation of
                           safeguards measures. The safeguard instruments include further provisions for capacity
                           strengthening at all levels for the successful implementation of the project safeguard measures, in
                           compliance with national and World Bank safeguard policies.

                           Support will also be provided by World Bank supervision teams. The supervision missions will
                           always include the environmental and social safeguards specialists on the team. To ensure
                           effective World Bank supervision, the Project Environmental and Social Unit will prepare and
                           update detailed reports on the implementation of ESMF, RPF and PMP, as well as activity-specific
                           EMPs and/or RAPs, whichever is applicable, before World Bank supervision missions.
                           Appropriate budget for supervision will be included in the Project financial evaluation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The preparation of the safeguard documents (i.e., ESMF, RPF, and PMP) followed a broad-based
                           and in-depth consultation approach that included interviews with relevant project stakeholder
                           groups, including: the steering committee, local communities, mayors, potential project affected
                           people, Ministry of Agriculture, the BEEEI etc, This consultation approach will be carried on
                           throughout project implementation and supervision.

                           The project will benefit the communities in four regions of the country, in both rural and urban
                           areas. Throughout the development of the ESMF, PMP and RPF stakeholder consultations,
                           including with flood affected communities in different regions, local and central level authorities
                           have been undertaken. Key issues raised included information on environmental impacts, most
                           effective ways to prevent future losses due to floods, and possible resettlement issues arising from
                           potential land acquisition.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          27-Sep-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       15-Oct-2013
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

                                                                     Page 10 of 12
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Niger                                                            14-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      27-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Oct-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Niger                                                            14-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Oct-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Niger                                                            14-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?


                                                                   Page 11 of 12
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Richard James
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                       Date: 21-Oct-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (SM)                       Date: 22-Oct-2013




                                                                       Page 12 of 12
