INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
6                                              Report No.: JSDSC1O97
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Jan-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Mali                       Project ID:   P151909
Project Name:   Mali - Economic & Environmental Rehabilitation of the Niger River (P151909)
Task Team       Hocine Chalal
Leader(s):
Estimated        15-Jul-2015               Estimated     16-Nov-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Ports, waterways and shipping (45%), Flood protection (30%), General
agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (25%)
Theme(s):       Natural disaster management (20%), Trade facilitation and market access (35%),
Other environment and natural resources management (2 5%), Environmental
policies and institutions (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      55.00            Total Bank Financing:   50.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               5.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     50.00
Total                                                           55.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
21.    The main objective of this operation is to improve economic and environmental services of
the Niger River in Mali to the benefit of the population and ecosystems in the Inland River Delta.
This objective will be achieved through reducing key constraints to Inland Water Transportation


﻿(IWT), implementing measures aimed at decreasing sedimentation and bank erosion in critical spots
and creating opportunities for improved livelihood of the local population.
C. Project Description
23.    Description: The project activities will contribute to establishing a holistic and long-term
vision for the socio-economic development of the Niger Inner Delta and establishing the parameters
and conditions that will ensure sustainability and resilience for its population. More specifically, the
project will aim at i) improving mobility and reliability of IWT particularly in the Niger Inner Delta;
a       and (ii) will contribute to the restoration of biophysical environment in the Niger Inner Delta. To that
effect the project will be articulated around two main components:
*      Transport component:
o      Enactment and implementation of the new Niger river navigation code as well as other
institutional and regulatory measures;
o      Dredging and cleaning at critical points of navigation channels;
o      Demarcation of the navigable channels;
o      Rehabilitation/reconstruction of river ports infrastructures.
*      Ecosystem preservation and livelihood improvement component:
o      Institutional and regulatory measures;
o      Protection and stabilization of river banks in sensitive areas;
o      Promotion of livelihood improvement approaches;
o      Restoration of gullies in immediate watersheds; and
o      Treatment of invasive species.
24.    A third component will relate essentially to project management, capacity building and
monitoring and evaluation.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Inner Delta, located roughly between the Markala dam (near Segou) and Timbuktu, provides
numerous ecological and economic benefits. It forms a 20,000 to 30,000 km2 flood plain where
many agricultural practices depend heavily upon the amount of water that reaches the area, namely
O
rice, cattle herding and fishing. A significant amount (depending on the author this amount can be as
high as two-thirds or as low as one-third) of the water is lost by evaporation and infiltration when
passing though the Inner Delta. The Inner Delta is an intricate web of channels that provide as many
ways to transport people as well as access to markets for the goods produced locally, thus
contributing to the economic well-being of a local population of about 1.5 million (according to the
2009 census and compared to 1 million in 1976). The tourism potential of this area is very important
but it has been stunted by the civil strife of the past few years.
In terms of its ecological value, the Inner Delta is a unique ecosystem. It has been a RAMSAR site
since 2004 hosting a large population of one hundred and twelve species of migratory and non-
migratory birds as well as endangered mammals such as hippopotamus and manatee. The great
variability in rainfall and runoff creates an extensive range of water flow. In the 1970s and 19780s
the region suffered from an extremely severe dry period but a significant rebound in the rainfall
patterns happened by the mid-i 990s, although without reverting fully to the earlier levels. The
models used by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) provide inconsistent insight
and do not yield a clear view of future trends although only the most optimistic models predict
increased rainfall. Among the various threats the most severe and immediate, however, might be


﻿those posed by the anthropic ones, mainly due to pressures from demography and infrastructures
(dams and irrigation). The importance of the Inner Delta cannot be overstated considering for
example its importance as a grazing area for forty percent of the livestock from the northern parts of
the country as well as from neighboring countries during the dry season, according to Wetlands
O
U       International.
With carefully targeted investments in dredging and river ports, and an improved institutional
framework, IWT could become the dominant transport mode for the Inner Delta. That is because it
provides cost-effective mobility to people and goods during the high water season when road
transportation is virtually impossible. More specifically, for up to six months out of the year, IWT is
the only transport mode to access most villages in the Inner Delta.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The implementing agency, the Niger River Basin Agency has been established in 2002. It has
however been relatively ineffective due to lack of resources and unclear mandate. The new
management of the Agency has a plan to clarify the mandate and boost its resources. The project will
support capacity strengthening of the agency so that it can act more effectively and decisively. The
agency has currently thirty six staff in its Bamako office and two regional antennas and its running
annual budget is about 190 million FCFA (about US$400,000) and the investment budget it
commands is about 1,600 million FCFA (about US$3.3 million). The Agency has initiated the
formulation of the Presidential Program for the protection/rehabilitation of the Niger River. This
program will be endorsed by the Minister of Water, Environment and Sanitation before being
submitted to the Council of Ministers for approval by the end of February 2015. This will provide an
opportunity for the Bank team to help consolidating this program. As a result of this project the
Agency should be able to claim more appropriate resources and obtain a clarification of its mandate.
In any case the agency management has started establishing a strong technical and fiduciary
counterpart team in order to start readily the preparation of the project in an effective manner. The
capacity of this team will be assessed and reinforced as needed.
The Niger River Basin Agency which will pass implementing agreements with national or local
entities, as needed. The identification of these entities will be carried out during preparation of this
project.
In addition, as mentioned above, it is anticipated that a PPA request will be submitted soon in order
to be able to increase the resources for financing the preparation activities of the project and allow
timely implementation of preparation activities described above.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Lucienne M. M'Baipor (GSURR)
Melissa C. Landesz (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The expected investments in works and infrastructure
OP/BP 4.01                              will be defined during project preparation
particularly in terms of scope and location. These
investments are likely to have significant impacts on


﻿the Inner Delta ecosystem, particularly the envisaged
dredgingactivities. The Environmental and Social
Impact Assessment (ESIA) will be prepared in
parallel with the technical assessment and during
project preparation to ensure that both contribute to
the best outcome.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes           The Inner Delta region is home to a huge number of
water fowls and has a population of endangered
mammal species such as the hippopotamus and the
manatee. The ESIA will address the impact of the
project on natural habitats and biodiversity in the
project area and propose mitigation measures for any
potential negative impacts.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           No           There are no forests in the project areas that will be
directly affected.
Pest Management OP 4.09      No           The project will not finance procurement of
pesticides nor promote their use.
Physical Cultural Resources  TBD          There may be Physical Cultural Resources in the
OP/BP 4.11                                project area; this will be determined closer to
appraisal.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  TBD         It is unlikely that the project activities will cause
BP 4.12                                   physical or economic resettlement of people,
however this will be ascertained during project
preparation.
Safety of Dams 0P/l3P 4.37   TBD          Dams exist upstream and downstream of the project
area. Although the operations and potentially the
failure of these dams can have an impact on the
project area, the applicability of this policy will be
further investigated.
Projects on International    TBD          The project will not affect water use, neither in
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      quantity nor in quality, so guidance will be sought
from LEGEN on the triggering of the policy and on
the notification requirements.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         The project is not being implemented in a disputed
BP 7.60                                   area.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 13-Jul-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
January 15, 2015 to July 15, 2015
IV. APPROVALS
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿Task Team Leader(s): Name: Hocine Chalal
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards   Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)           Date: 19-Jan-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/     Name: Benoit Bosquet (PMGR)                 Date: 19-Jan-2015
Manager:


