INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC4283
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Dec-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Cameroon                   Project ID:   P144637
Project Name:    Community Development Program Support Project-Phase III (P144637)
Task Team        Amadou Nchare
Leader:
Estimated        12-Jan-2015                Estimated      18-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                        Lending       Adaptable Program Loan
Instrument:
Sector(s):       General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (35%), General education sector
(20%), Health (20%), Water supply (20%), Other soci al services (5%)
Theme(s):        Rural services and infrastructure (35%), Participation and civic engagement
(20%), Municipal governance and institution building (20 %), Decentralization
(20%), Indigenous peoples (5%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     103.00             Total Bank Financing:    40.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               56.00
International Development Association (IDA)                      40.00
LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                               7.00
Total                                                           103.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
12. The development objective of phase III (PNDPIII) is to enhance the capacity of communes for
the implementation of the communal development plans, and extend the ongoing process in support
to decentralization in new district communes. The main beneficiaries will be the 329 communes that


﻿have been supported during phase I and phase II and that already have communal development plans,
plus 31 additional district communes. At the end of this phase, the program will achieve national
geographic coverage. Indeed, all the 360 district communes of Cameroon will be covered by the
program (100% national coverage).
o
C. Project Description
13. Phase I of the project was successfully implemented. It defined the approach and methods and
allowed for their implementation in five of the ten regions in Cameroon. In this phase, the project
a      funded studies led by MINATD which led to laws and regulations onthe decentralization process,
including: Law 2009/011 of July 10, 2009 on Financial regime of decentralized territorial entities, (ii)
Law 2009/019 of December 15, 2009 on the local tax system, (iii) Ministerial Order No.00136/A/
MINATD/DCTD of August 24, 2009, making enforceable standard tables of municipal jobs and
organizational chart of Communes. The project also supported the development of several planning
tools, including: (i) The first methodological guide for regional and communal planning, (ii) the
guide for stakeholders involved in the process and implementation of contracts financed by PNDP in
the communes and, (iii) the methodological guide for the preparation of land use and management
plans for communes. Finally, 151 communal development plans were prepared during this phase.
14. In the second phase, the local development responsibilities were gradually transferred from
project entities to communes where community investment decisions are made based on priorities
identified in the communal development plan. This phase covered all 10 regions, but not all district
communes of Cameroon. Indeed, 31 other district communes were not taken into account in the
project. During this phase, the Program supported the recruitment of 262 financial agents responsible
for tracking fiscal assets and 259 development agents responsible for monitoring and evaluation of
communes. These staffs are operational and their personal contribution to the improvement of
communal management is already noticeable and appreciated by 91 percent of Mayors. Furthermore,
178 new communal development plans (CDPs) were prepared by the municipalities. These CDPs
have revealed significant needs in basic social services (health, education, water and sanitation),
productive infrastructures and capacity building. Moreover, by letter No. 003356/MINEPAT/CAB of
August 13, 2013, the Ministry of Economy, Planning and Regional Development has requested IDA
funds for the financing of the third phase of the program. Therefore, there is a strong expectation of
stakeholders for a third phase of the program.
15.    The third phase will support the consolidation of successful approaches to service delivery,
community empowerment in 329 district communes and the expansion of program activities to 31
additional districts communes. Therefore, the project will provide financial resources to communes
in order to enable them to meet priority needs identified in their CDPs . Indeed, this phase will focus
on: (i) supporting the rural communes in implementing local development activities; (ii) improving
the quality of operation and maintenance of socio-economic infrastructure built to ensure their
sustainability; (iii) the institutional support and capacity-building activities aimed at developing a
sustainable institutional and financial mechanism that will support local development, including
strengthened citizen engagement and social and environmental screening processes; (iv) completing
the national coverage of the program through the inclusion of 31 additional districts communes and;
(v) communicating to the national coordinating bodies of decentralization process the experiences
and results of the evaluations conducted under PNDP to facilitate the popularization and adoption of
good practices in planning and implementing municipal investments in the country.
16. The new project will include three components, that is: (1) local development support; (2)
decentralization support for communes; (3) coordination, management, communication, monitoring


﻿and evaluation of the project. Because of its multisectoral nature, it will ensure consistency with each
sector strategy through effective coordination with other Bank financed projects: The Urban
Development Project (PDUE); the Energy Sector Development Proje ct (PDSEN); the Agricultural
Competitiveness Project and the forthcoming Agriculture Investment and Market Development
O
Project.
Component 1: Local development support:
17. The objective of Component 1 will be to improve the socio-economic conditions, to increase the
productivity of the natural resource base of each of the rural communes, as well as to increase
incomes. To achieve these goals requires putting in place various social infrastructures and economic
investments. Therefore, under this component, funds would be transferred to communes to finance
priority investments identified in their communal development plans. Communes would be fully
responsible for the selection and implementation of subprojects in a participatory manner. However,
the mechanism of transfer of funds in the accounts of communes will be specified during project
preparation in the project implementation manual (PIM). Regarding social infrastructures, sub-
projects will be funded in the field of health, education, water and sanitation. Sub-projects on
economic investments will be focused on productive investments such as the construction/
rehabilitation of rural markets, communities' storage facilities, rural roads, bridges, culverts, small
scale irrigation schemes for grassroots communities. These social and productive infrastructures are
intended to improve the agricultural production environment and to provide favorable conditions for
the diversification of economic activities through the development of agricultural and non-farm
activities by the grassroots communities.
18. The aforementioned rural investments will empower the poor to take advantage of income and
employment opportunities created by the expansion of economic activities and therefore contribute to
rural livelihood diversification, shared prosperity, extreme poverty reduction and to the
diversification of rural employment opportunities in Cameroon.
19. In addition, the preparation of CDPs for the 31 additional district communes and related activities
will be funded. Multidisciplinary teams comprising representatives of the decentralized services of
sectoral ministries or Local Service providers (LSP) will assist communes to prepare communal
development plans through a participatory approach. The municipal council of every commune will
a       be responsible for approving the PCD and its transmission to the divisional officer for administrative
validation. Communes covered will also receive support to develop their Annual Investment Plans
and to update their Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF).
Component 2: decentralization support for communes:
20. This component will seek to facilitate the sustainability of the PNDP's benefits and to strengthen
the capacity of institutions that support the decentralization process. It will also provide assistance
for the implementation of capacity building activities for communes and other stakeholders, such as
Local Service Providers (LSPs), multidisciplinary teams of the sectoral ministries and Technical
Services Providers (TSPs) to enable them to assume an effective role as promoters of local
development. This component has two sub-components: (i) institutional support to the
decentralization process, and (ii) capacity building of stakeholders in the decentralization process.
Sub-component 2.1: Institutional support to the decentralization process:


﻿21. The efficiency of the use of funds provided by the various parties (the State, the private sector,
and the civil society) to local governments, in partic ular to the rural communes, depends on the
successful implementation of the decentralization process. This component would make it possible
to: (i) further improve the legal and regulatory framework through specific activities and studies and
O
Q)      improve implementation of the project at the communes and intercommunes levels, (ii) help build
the case for decentralization (e.g., by using the M&E data on land use planning proactively to inform
the public about the benefits of decentralization), and (iii) improve budget management to increase
performance of local tax collection for a sustained decentralization funding mechanism.
22. The project will support specific studies and the preparation of draft decrees for the
implementation of decentralization laws mentioned. It will also finance workshops for the
finalization of the decrees, including relevant consultancy services for the workshops and
dissemination of the enacted laws and decrees. Furthermore, the subcomponent will finance the
acquisition of small cartography equipment and consultant services required for the mapping of
communes. The project will also finance study tours on decentralization and local development for
the National Council of Decentralization and the Mayors' Association. Finally, the project will
deploy financial and accounting management software developed in the second phase in all
communes covered.
Sub-component 2.2: Capacity building:
23. Strengthening the operational capacities of communes. The actual responsibilities transferred to
communes by the decentralization law require development of new capacities in order to ensure, on
the one hand, understanding and adopting their new roles and efficient accomplishment of their
missions, and, on the other hand, the right aptitude and adequate capabilities to assume responsibility
for the management of local investments. The Project will join forces with the Training Center of the
Municipal Administration "CEFAM (Centre de Formation de l'Administration Municipale)", and
under this component would make it possible to inform and train the members of the commune
councils and committees attached to it, including civil society in how to efficiently play their role,
providing them with the tools necessary for managing the local governance institutions, for
establishing an environment for local economic development and promoting public-private
partnerships.
o       24. Under this sub-component, several capacity-building activities will be carried out, such as: (i)
financing the development of a manual on the local economy, (ii) strengthening communal project
ownership, (iii) promotion of nationwide competitions for local governments on best practices on
CDPs and on enhancing good governance and transparency, (iv) acquisition of computer equipment
for communes that did not benefited from these facilities in the second phase, (v) building capacity
of the communal council in monitoring environmental and social impact of subprojects and, (vi)
enhancing social accountability.
25. Capac ity building for local stakeholders. This activity aims at strengthening and enhancing the
skills of the participants so that they can effectively assist the municipalities in the decentralization
process namely: local elected officials, communal staff, multidis ciplinary teams, and local services
providers. Workshops will be organized to inform all stakeholders about the objectives and strategy
of the project and to equip ordinary citizens to participate in planning, implementing, and monitoring
local development actions. To facilitate such capacity building, the project will finance technical
assistance for training of local service providers and multidisciplinary teams to improve their quality
of service. Furthermore, the project will promote cooperation among the Project Coordination Units,


﻿the decentralized offices of the Ministry of Environment, Nature Conservation and Sustainable
Development (MINEPDED), and other relevant sector ministries, and will assist in the organization
of an environmental training program for members of Municipal Councils, divisional administrative
staff, and project staff. Finally, exchange visits will be organized for stakeholders of decentralization.
0
Component 3: Coordination, management, monitoring and communication:
26. This component will facilitate: (i) administrative, technical, and financial management of the
project; (ii) coordination among all institutional partners to ensure efficient support to communes for
local development; (iii) effective contractual arrangements with communes, sectoral ministries, and
TSPs/private-sector operators, NGOs (TSPs), including the acquisition of the equipment required for
project implementing; (iv) monitoring and evaluation of the performance and the financial,
environmental, and social impact of the project (including developing monitoring scorecards to
assess satisfaction of the beneficiaries with services provided by communes); and (v) development of
communication activities to publicize and disseminate project implementation tools and local
development potential and practices. The National council for decentralization (NCD) will be a
member of the project's national steering committee. Compared to NCD, PNDP will position itself as
a major support tools to communes in the implementation of the powers transferred by central
government. At the end of this final phase, local development responsibilities would be totally
transferred to communes.
27. The integrated financial management software will be upgraded with additional tools to enable
permanent access to information in the accounting system of the regions for analysis and ensure
timely synchronized consolidation of accounts.
28. Under this component, the project will finance: (i) the rehabilitation of office spaces; (ii) the
purchase of office equipment and vehicles; (iii) training of the staff of the project's National
Coordination Unit (NCU) and the Regional Coordination Units (RCUs); (iv) consultant services,
including the preparation and publishing of manuals, establishment of an electronic library; and (v)
monitoring of the implementation of environmental and social mitigation measures. Also, it will pay
for meetings of the program's statutory supervisory and coordination organs and for the operating
costs of NCU and RCUs.
o      29. Project costs. The total cost of the third phase of the Community Development Program is
estimated to be about US$103.00 million. The proposed Bank-financed Support would cost about US
$40.00 million. The Borrower will provide US$ 56.00 million and the beneficiaries will con tribute
up to US$ 7.00 million. In addition, the French Development Agency is preparing a parallel
financing of agricultural production activities through the project, but the exact amount for this
funding is not yet known.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in the rural areas of all ten regions of the country.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Borrower has established an environmental and social management capacity under APL I and
APL II. APL III will use this capacity. APLIII will further strengthen capacity for the
implementation of the environmental and social safeguards instruments. During the second phase
additional Environmental and social Specialists at the regional level were appointed and they


﻿received relevant environmental training, with a particular emphasis on screening sub-projects for
potential environmental and social impacts at the planning stage. During this phase, the project
implementing unit will strengthen the collaboration with the Ministry of Environment , the Ministry
in charge of Lands and the Ministry in charge of social affairs.
0
A Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared for APL I to mitigate potential adverse social
impacts due to land acquisition identified during the screening process. Under APL III, this RPF will
be updated and will guide the project team in the cases in which a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
or abbreviated RAP is necessary. The updated RPF will be disclosed prior project appraisal.
The Indigenous Peoples Plans prepared for APL I and updated during APL2 will be updated and
disclosed prior project appraisal. The Environmental Focal Point responsible for environmental and
social management in the Southern and the Eastern regions will oversee the implementation of these
plans.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Lucienne M. M'Baipor (GSURR)
Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies             Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes           This policy is triggered due to the activities that
BP 4.01                                      will be financed under Component 1- Local
Development Support-. Social infrastructures,
construction/rehabilitation of rural markets,
communities' storage facilities, rural roads,
bridges, culverts, small scale irrigation schemes
for grassroots communities. While minimal to
moderate in terms of impact, these activities
will result to environmental and social impacts
that will need to be adequately handled. PNDP
phase 2 ESMF will be updated, consulted upon
and disclosed prior project appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No            The activities funded under this project will not
be undertaken in the areas where Natural
habitats will be threatened. The ESMF will
clearly exclude all subprojects that could have
negative impacts
Forests OP/BP 4.36             No            The activities funded under this project will not
be undertaken in the areas where forests will be
threatened. The ESMF will clearly exclude all
subprojects that could have negative impacts
Pest Management OP 4.09        Yes           While the project will not finance the purchase
of pesticides, the Project activities under
component 1 may induce the increase of
pesticides use in the communities storages


﻿facilities. A PMP will be prepared, consulted
upon and disclosed prior project appraisal.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  Yes             The project will finance some activities under
BP 4.11                                          the Local development Plan that may consist in
the land excavations. The ESMF will include
procedures for addressing physical cultural
resources encountered during project
implementation.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes             This policy is triggered with respect to the
pygmy communities living primarily in the
Southern and Eastern regions as well as in other
parts of the country. The IPDP from PNDP
Phase 2 will be updated, consulted upon and
disclosed before appraisal.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             This policy is triggered as the project is likely to
4.12                                            finance activities that could lead to Involuntary
Resettlement. Voluntary land contribution might
be expected from targeted beneficiaries as is
sometimes the case with community-driven
interventions. For this reason, the RPF might
need to include special provisions for land
acquisition; and accepting and recording such
voluntary contributions. The RPF from PNDP
Phase 2 will be updated, consulted upon and
disclosed before appraisal.
Safety of Dams 0P/l3P 4.37       No             The project does not involve the construction of
dams.
Projects on International        TBD             As the project is nationwide, the project under
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                             component 1 expects to finance small scale
irrigation schemes, this can be done in the North
and Far North, close of Chad and Niger
watershed basins. During project preparation, it
will be determined whether these activities will
need to trigger this policy. If it is determined
that this potential exists, a decision will be made
as to whether to exclude such sub-projects
through provisions in the operational manual or
trigger OP/BP 7.50 and carry out the
notification of riparian States
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No              N/A
7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-Nov-2014
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿Since the activities under APL III will be essentially the same as under APL II, the project will (i)
update, consult upon and re-disclose the existing Environmental and Social Management
Framework (June 2003), the existing Resettlement Policy Framework (June 2003); and the
existing Indigenous People Development Plan (June 2003) prepared under APL I and APL II prior
to appraisal. The PMP for Phase 3 will be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed before appraisal.
2   IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:    Name: Amadou Nchare
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)             Date: 08-Dec-2014
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/    Name: Jorge A. Munoz (PMGR)                  Date: 08-Dec-2014
Manager:


