                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA8909
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Myanmar                            Project ID:    P149960
                            Project Name:     Essential Health Services Access Project (P149960)
                            Task Team         Hnin Hnin Pyne
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         25-Aug-2014                        Estimated   14-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GHNDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (85%), Other social services (15%)
                            Theme(s):         Health system performance (85%), Other social protection and risk management
                                              (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     100.00           Total Bank Financing:                100.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              100.00
                              Total                                                                                    100.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase coverage of essential health services of
                           adequate quality, with a focus on maternal, newborn and child health (MNCH).
                            3. Project Description
                           Component 1: Strengthening Service Delivery at the Primary Health Care Level (US$86M)

                                                                      Page 1 of 11
                         The component focuses on channeling funds through MOH to the states/regions and townships for
                         operational expenses or non-salary recurrent expenditures.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Resources to the Township and Below. US$ 60 million (about 70 percent of the component
                         allocation) is expected to flow to townships and below. The funds will be used to (a) assist basic
                         health staff and medical officers to expand outreach, supervision, communications, and engagement
                         with communities; (b) keep facilities, vehicles, furniture and equipment functioning and maintained;
                         and (c) allow users of facilities to have basic needs met, such as clean water, therapeutic foods and
                         emergency travel costs. Funds will be provided to Township Medical Officers (TMOs), for use at
                         the township hospitals and onward disbursement to station hospitals, RHC, and maternal and child
                         health centers, based on Standard Operating Procedures (SOP). The allocation of resources across
                         facilities will be determined by a simple formula which results in a payment that is fixed for all
                         facilities of a particular type (township hospitals, station hospitals, RHCs, secondary (urban) health
                         centers, school health and maternal and child health clinics, but adds a 100 percent premium to
                         facilities located in hardship townships. The formula is designed with the following principles in
                         mind: simplicity, transparency (based on data that are easily available and beyond dispute), equity
                         (with larger allocation to facilities in hardship townships) and predictability (in terms of the facility
                         amounts and their timing).

                         Resources to the State/Regional Health Directorates. Around US$24 million will be provided to the
                         state/regional Health Departments for operational expenses, such as supervision, and coordination,
                         convening, communication activities, hiring basic health staff or financial officers on contractual
                         basis, and possibly for development of a convergence strategy by state authorities together with
                         ethnic organizations. The amount provided to each of the 17 S/RHDs will consist of an annual
                         allocation of US$200,000 per state/region plus an amount that varies proportional to the number of
                         townships in that state/region, for a total of between US$250,000 and US$400,000 per S/RHD per
                         year.

                         Community empowerment. Communities will be informed of Government’s efforts to improve
Public Disclosure Copy




                         services through increased operational budgets, empowered to demand services, and mobilized to
                         participate in planning, funded through the allocation for facilities and community actions. A
                         Community Engagement Planning Framework (CEPF) has been developed for this purpose.

                         Component 2: Systems Strengthening, Capacity Building, and Program Support (US$8M)

                         Systems strengthening will focus on the definition and costing of an Essential Package of Health
                         Services (EPHS) and a comprehensive health financing strategy for Universal Health Coverage. In
                         addition, it includes the preparation of health care waste management guidelines, development of
                         quality score card for township and below, and Standard Operating Procuedures for FM and internal
                         audit, among others. MOH at the central level intends to produce these outputs using in-house and
                         national expertise and carrying out consultation meetings and workshops.

                         Capacity building includes training, courses, South-South learning, workshops and seminars. It will
                         also support career development for basic health staff, who are recognized for their outstanding
                         performance, and for MOH officials for further studies in health economics, financing, management,
                         and other areas critical for universal health coverage. Criteria for selecting training programs,
                         institutions and the trainees, and other relevant details will be included in the Operations Manual.
                         This component will benefit technical and administrative staff at the central, regional/state, and
                         township levels, and basic health staff providing key services. In addition, it will promote inclusion

                                                                       Page 2 of 11
                         of national and local organizations working with ethnic groups and vulnerable populations in
                         capacity building activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Program support includes preparatory work for the implementation of Component 1, such as
                         strengthening data and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems, including studies and surveys,
                         and independent verification.

                         Component 3: Emergency contingency response
                         A provisional zero US$ amount component is adde d to allow for rapid reallocation of funds in case
                         of an emergency or disaster under streamlined procurement and disbursement procedures.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is nation-wide in scope, with disbursement linked indicators tied to strengthened systems
                         of financial management and inclusive planning.

                         The support to frontline service delivery is expected to increase the coverage of health services by
                         target populations and may generate incremental health care waste, such as sharps or contaminated
                         waste, which needs to be handled properly. Eligible expenditure items may include minor
                         renovations and repairs of existing facilities. Specific environmental safeguard mitigation measures
                         are described in the project Environmental Management Plan (EMP) (inclusive of ECOPs to address
                         generic construction impacts and Health Care Facility Waste Management Plan to address health
                         care wastes of the HCFs supported) and would be applied under the project.

                         It will be important that these basic services are available in an equitable manner to the entire
                         population including remote populations and ethnic minorities. The implication of fee-exemption
                         schemes and other possible financial protection measures also need to make sure equitable
                         application across different social groups. OP 4.10 is triggered and specific social safeguard
                         measures are applied under the project as described in the Community Engagement Planning
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Framework (CEPF).
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Svend Jensby (OPSOR)
                         Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             OP 4.01 is triggered as the project may increase
                          BP 4.01                                            health care waste and create further minor
                                                                             environmental impacts associated with small
                                                                             scale renovation activities planned for selected
                                                                             health care facilities and provision of medical
                                                                             equipment that can generate waste. In order to
                                                                             address the OP 4.01 requirements, MOH prepared
                                                                             before project appraisal an Environmental
                                                                             Management Plan (EMP) adapted to the project
                                                                             that will include: (i) specific ECoPs to address
                                                                             impacts linked to planned minor refurbishment
                                                                             works (e.g., wall painting, window repairs) and



                                                                     Page 3 of 11
                                                                    (ii) a general brief Health Care Waste
                                                                    Management Plan (HCWMP) adapted to the
                                                                    project that will ensure addressing properly health
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    care waste management impacts. The EMP and
                                                                    HCWMP include, among other aspects, info on:
                                                                    characteristics and hazards profile of health care
                                                                    waste (solid, liquid, infectious, pathological,
                                                                    sharps, pharmaceutical, radioactive and mixed);
                                                                    medical waste containment and storage
                                                                    requirements and locations; treatment, disposal
                                                                    and transportation, including options; emergency
                                                                    actions; responsibilities for health care waste
                                                                    management, and training. The EMP including
                                                                    the ECoPs and the Health Waste Management
                                                                    Plan are annexed to the project Operational
                                                                    Manual, and have been disclosed in country and
                                                                    Info Shop before project appraisal. Public
                                                                    consultations were held by MoH on the draft
                                                                    EMP in Yangon on July 7, 2014 and in
                                                                    Mawlamyine on July 8, 2014 to collect further
                                                                    input from stakeholders on project potential
                                                                    impacts. During project implementation, the
                                                                    project intends to support the development of
                                                                    national health care waste management
                                                                    guidelines. A social assessment was undertaken
                                                                    during project preparation to assess potential
                                                                    social impacts and risks as per OP 4.01 and OP
                                                                    4.10, and measures to address such impacts
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    during project implementation are addressed in
                                                                    the Community Engagement Planning
                                                                    Framework as well as site-specific plans in the
                                                                    form of adapted Township Health Plans.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No           Although the project covers the entire country,
                                                                    the project interventions linked to health care
                                                                    facilities are not located in or nearby protected
                                                                    areas or in areas with natural habitats. The project
                                                                    will not finance construction of new, or expansion
                                                                    of existing, health facilities given the weak
                                                                    capacity of the Borrower to implement relevant
                                                                    Bank environmental safeguard procedures. The
                                                                    investments will focus only on recurrent cost of
                                                                    front line services and may include only minor
                                                                    rehabilitation or repairs to facilities within the
                                                                    same footprint
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No           The project does not include any activities that
                                                                    could affect forest, forest health and forest-
                                                                    dependent communities.


                                                            Page 4 of 11
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            Project does not focus on disease control and will
                                                                         not finance pesticides, such as for control of
                                                                         vector-borne diseases such as malaria and dengue.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            As there will be no new constructions or
                         BP 4.11                                         expansions of health facilities, it is highly
                                                                         unlikely that the project will affect any physical
                                                                         cultural resources. There are no township
                                                                         hospitals or lower level hospitals which are on a
                                                                         national or international heritage list. As such, the
                                                                         project will not adversely affect sites with
                                                                         archeological, paleontological, historical,
                                                                         religious, or unique natural values.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           The project is nation-wide in scope and will
                                                                         include areas with ethnic minorities that are
                                                                         covered under OP 4.10. Myanmar is made up of
                                                                         135 officially recognized ethnic groups, grouped
                                                                         into 8 “ethnic races” including the majority
                                                                         Bamar. In the absence of exact census figures, it
                                                                         is estimated that eEthnic minorities account for
                                                                         one third or more about 30% of the total
                                                                         population. They, and live mainly in the 7 Ethnic
                                                                         States (Kayah, Kayin, Kachin, Chin, Mon,
                                                                         Rakhine, and Shan) in the border areas.
                                                                         The provision of health services supported by the
                                                                         project is not expected to have adverse impacts on
                                                                         ethnic minorities. However, the project presents
                                                                         issues related to equity in access and culturally
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         appropriate delivery of services and their quality
                                                                         in areas with ethnic minorities as well as other
                                                                         vulnerable population groups. A social
                                                                         assessment (SA) was undertaken during project
                                                                         preparation, along with as are consultations with
                                                                         various stakeholders, including organizations
                                                                         representing and working with ethnic minorities.

                                                                         Participating townships have not been selected at
                                                                         the time of appraisal, and a Community
                                                                         Engagement Planning Framework (CEPF) has
                                                                         been prepared based on the SA and consultation
                                                                         process to address policy requirements. The
                                                                         Framework includes the elements of an
                                                                         Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework as
                                                                         required under OP 4.10, but also addresses
                                                                         broader social issues and potential impacts for all
                                                                         communities. It contains procedures for a
                                                                         practical and site-specific participatory planning
                                                                         process involving free, prior and consultations,


                                                                 Page 5 of 11
                                                                               social analysis and preparation of site specific
                                                                               plans incorporating findings from the consultation
                                                                               and assessment process. The CEPF adapts
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               existing procedures, using the Township Health
                                                                               Plans, to meet OP 4.10 requirements for
                                                                               providing culturally appropriate benefits to ethnic
                                                                               minorities. The Township Health Plan is adapted
                                                                               to include elements contained in an Ethnic
                                                                               Minority Plan where ethnic minorities are present,
                                                                               but also addresses the concerns of other
                                                                               vulnerable and under-served population groups
                                                                               based on the community engagement process
                                                                               described in the CEPF. Broad community support
                                                                               to Township Health plans will be achieved
                                                                               through the participatory planning process and the
                                                                               involvement of township and village health
                                                                               committees.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No              The project will not finance construction of new,
                            4.12                                               or expansion of existing, health facilities and will
                                                                               therefore not involve any land acquisition.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No              The Project will not finance any activities related
                                                                               to the construction of dams nor affect operations
                                                                               of existing dams or affiliated reservoirs.
                            Projects on International        No                The project will not affect international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                No activities are planned in any disputed areas.
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project would channel funds through the Ministry of Health to the States/Regions and to
                              Townships and below for operational expenses such as transportation, outreach, health promotion
                              interventions, local labor, medical consumables, and minor maintenance and repair of buildings,
                              vehicles, and equipment. This will not have significant social impacts on local communities,
                              including ethnic minorities.

                             However, the project may have some short-term minor impacts associated with the renovation and
                             refurbishing activities of the HCFs financed under project component 1. The renovation and
                             refurbishing activities would be done in the same existing buildings, within the same footprint and
                             without the extension of the respective buildings. These activities are considered minor civil works
                             which may generate limited adverse environmental impacts such as dust, noise, vibration, waste,
                             solid waste and safety issues. Also, there could be isolated health risks associated with exposure to
                             asbestos containing materials in the case of old facilities that are using asbestos roofs.
                             Additionally, in the case of building renovation activities including changes of internal layout (e.


                                                                       Page 6 of 11
                           g., walls), there is a potential risk on the structure and safety of the existing buildings. These
                           impacts are assessed to be of small scale, localized, in short-term period and manageable if good
                           design and construction practices are followed. In this project case, specific Environmental Code
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of Practices (ECOPs) will be followed to avoid any possible impacts during such renovation
                           works.

                           Further, there are associated impacts related to lack of proper heath care waste management
                           practices. Some aspects of the project’s implementation (e.g., purchase of medication, syringes,
                           etc) could lead to an increase in site-specific environmental and health risks. An Environmental
                           Management Plan (EMP) has been developed to meet the project recognized potential of health-
                           care activities in creating additional waste that may be hazardous to human health and the
                           environment. In this respect it is important to ensure that when such waste is generated by the
                           project activities there must be safe and reliable methods for its handling to avoid any public
                           health consequences and any significant impact on the environment. Consequently, in addition to
                           the ECOP, the EMP includes an HCF Waste Management Plan to address health care wastes of the
                           HCFs supported by the project.

                           The project will support Townships and States/Regions with ethnic minorities.

                           Overall, communities will benefit from enhanced health services and will be encouraged to engage
                           in a participatory planning process to improve health services at townships and village levels.
                           Through existing mechanisms, such as health committees at village and township levels, network
                           of grassroots volunteers and women’s groups, communities would be informed of efforts to
                           improve service delivery, empowered to demand services, and mobilized to participate in planning
                           processes concerning the Township Health Plans. Communities’ role in providing feedback and
                           oversight would be enhanced.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Other than the potential risks concerning private health service providers discussed above, there
                           are no indirect or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in participating townships.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not applicable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The MoH has undertaken a social assessment (SA) and consultation process during project
                           preparation to assess potential social impacts and risks, and to inform the preparation of the
                           Community Engagement Planning Framework (CEPF). The CEPF provides measures to ensure
                           culturally appropriate benefits through a participatory community engagement process.

                           Further, MOH prepared an EMP as the project EA safeguard document to include: (i) specific
                           ECOPs to address potential adverse environmental impacts linked to planned minor refurbishment
                           works (e.g., painting, window repairs, possible risks from dismantling asbestos containing
                           materials such as roofs, etc.) and (ii) a simple health care waste management plan to address solid
                           and liquid wastes that will be generated by the Health Care Facilities supported by the project.

                           The MoH has no previous experience implementing World Bank-financed projects with its


                                                                     Page 7 of 11
                         specific requirements such as those under the Bank’s policy on indigenous peoples. The Bank will
                         provide capacity building and operational support to the implementation of the CEPF. The MoH,
                         with support from the World Bank, will provide training for Township Medical Officers and other
Public Disclosure Copy




                         relevant stakeholders on the elements of the CEPF, particularly with regard to the community
                         engagement and social analysis process, preparation and implementation of the Township Health
                         Plan, including on strategies to enhance the participation of local communities and health
                         committees, and broader consultations and engagement of stakeholders in regards to component 2.
                         This will be included in the capacity building plan.

                         Additionally, healthcare waste guidelines and occupational health and safety training program will
                         be developed under and financed by the project and provided to healthcare providers at HCFs on
                         aspects linked to Medical Waste Management and Occupational health and Safety. Consultants
                         with knowledge of environmental safeguard implementation (e.g., ECoPs and EMP provisions)
                         will be hired to provide implementation support and monitor compliance with the project
                         safeguard instruments.

                         Occupational and Environmental Health Staff under the guidance of the DG, DOH (at central
                         level) and TMOs (at township level) will coordinate activities to ensure that the project
                         investments comply with national environmental management requirements and the Bank’s
                         safeguard policies, including provisions of this EMP. The project will hire a consultant with health
                         care waste management skills that will provide guidance and training to Occupation and
                         Environmental Health Staff at DOH (central level), State/Region Health Department staff, TMOs,
                         and HCFs staff on health care waste management. Further, a Training of Trainers (ToT) program
                         will be developed under the project to reach all primary stakeholders involved in HCFs.

                         Component 2 will finance activities over the four year period (US 2.5 million), which include
                         among other aspects capacity building for health care waste management and project safeguards
                         management in line with the applicable safeguards documents targeting strengthening of related
                         procedures and regulations; skills of staff, and providing initial supplies to allow proper
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation of procedures in the health facilities.

                         Consultations with ethnic group organizations during project preparation have not revealed any
                         opposition to the proposed project and improved health services are in demand in the seven States,
                         where the majority of ethnic groups live, as well as in the seven Regions of Myanmar. NGOs and
                         ethnic group organizations, who provide health services in parallel with the Government mainly in
                         remote areas, do not deliver health services that are any different from government delivered
                         services, although the institutional and operational aspects may differ. Some risks and concerns
                         were, however, raised, including language and cultural barriers and concerns that the
                         Government’s efforts to reach its universal health coverage goals may replace current health
                         service providers organized by ethnic group organizations. The CEPF prepared for the project
                         includes a participatory consultation and community engagement process to address such concerns
                         at the State, Township and Village level. The Township Health Plans will be prepared through this
                         community engagement process and with the involvement of health committees, which will ensure
                         broad community support to the project’s financing of operational expenses at participating
                         Townships. The Township Health Plans will include the elements of an Ethnic Minority Plan in
                         Townships with ethnic minorities.

                         The DOH will be responsible for the implementation of CEPF and the site specific township
                         health plans which incorporate CEPF principles. The Project will provide capacity building and

                                                                   Page 8 of 11
                           training support for staff to be able to supervise and implement participatory planning and
                           monitoring the Project. During project implementation, WB will provide TA support to MOH to
                           prepare the first batches of township health plans (10 - 15) until they have sufficient basic capacity
Public Disclosure Copy




                           to do so. The rest of the township health plans can be reviewed post randomly and/or during
                           monitoring as plans will be participatory and include grievance redress mechanism. Once, as a
                           result of such prior review, townships are judged to have developed the necessary capacity to
                           prepare the township health plans, the WB’s role will shift to post review of these plans. The
                           implementation of the township health plans will be reported to MOH and the WB annually as part
                           of MOH’s annual reporting on project implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders include: MoH, State and Township medical staff and administrators; other health
                           care providers, such as NGOs, faith-based organizations, private providers, and ethnic minority
                           organizations providing health services in some ethnic minority areas not covered by the
                           Government; professional organizations; NGOs and civil society organizations with an interest in
                           the health care sector; and local communities at township and village levels, including vulnerable
                           and under-served population groups such as ethnic minorities.

                           Project preparation included an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), and a social assessment
                           and consultations with the various stakeholders listed above. The SA and EMP included field
                           visits to two townships and five villages. Public consultations on the draft EMP and CEPF
                           (version of June 2014) were held by MoH representatives on July 7 in Yangon and July 8 in
                           Mawlamyine. The meetings were opened by Dr. Yin Thandar Lwin, Director of Public Health
                           from DOH, MOH, who welcomed participants and introduced the purpose of the meeting – to seek
                           inputs and feedbacks from the participants on the project design and the draft safeguard
                           documents. Short relevant PowerPoint presentations were provided on project safeguards
                           documents including the content of draft EMP. Project social and environmental safeguards
                           documents have been finalized based on stakeholders input provided during consultations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The CEPF includes a process for consultations and participatory planning at the township level
                           during project implementation, including measures to address particular issues for vulnerable and
                           under-served population groups such as ethnic minorities.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         09-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      24-Aug-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           World                                                               03-Jul-2014
                           Comments: World Bank Group Myanmar Country website
                           Myanmar                                                             03-Jul-2014
                           Comments: Ministry of Health Website
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         09-Jun-2014


                                                                      Page 9 of 11
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Aug-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           World                                                            03-Jul-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: World Bank Group Myanmar Country website
                           Myanmar                                                          03-Jul-2014
                           Comments: Community Engagement Planning Framework disclosed on Ministry of Health
                                         website.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?




                                                                    Page 10 of 11
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Hnin Hnin Pyne
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                          Date: 25-Aug-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Toomas Palu (PMGR)                           Date: 28-Aug-2014
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 11 of 11
