                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC1339

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             World                             Project ID:      P128437
                            Project Name:        Ocean Partnerships for Sustainable Fisheries&Biodiversity Conservation
                                                 (P128437)
                            Task Team            Tim Bostock
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       02-Dec-2013                            Estimated        25-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AES                                     Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            GEF Focal Area:      Multi-focal area

                            Sector(s):           General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (25%), Other industry (25%),
                                                 Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forest ry (25%), Agro-industry,
                                                 marketing, and trade (25%)
                            Theme(s):            Biodiversity (25%), Environmental policies and institutions (25%), Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                 Private Sector Development (25%), Other economic management (15%), Other
                                                 rule of law (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     10.00                        Total Bank Financing:           0.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                Amount
                              Borrower                                                                          0.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                10.00
                              Total                                                                            10.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a            No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           14.      The project will develop business plans that attract investment into a series of fisheries
                         improvement pilots that mainstream the sustainable management of highly migratory stocks (such as
                         tuna, billfish and sharks) spanning areas within and beyond national jurisdiction. The business plans
                         will incorporate a value proposition for investment – the economic, technical, financial and political/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         institutional rationale needed to attract public and / or private sector investment.
                         15.      Once implemented (which can happen either during or after project completion), the pilots
                         will contribute to increasing sustainable, net economic benefits to coastal and island developing
                         countries while enhancing ocean biodiversity conservation.
                         C. Project Description
                         The project is a Technical Assistance (TA) operation that will finance prioritization, analysis and
                         development of business plans for up to four globally significant areas covering fisheries of highly
                         migratory stocks occurring within developing coastal and island states’ exclusive economic zone
                         (EEZ) and adjacent areas beyond national jurisdiction (ABNJ). Business plans will identify
                         investments that support sustainable rights-based fisheries management.

                         Business plan development will be undertaken through regional or global Executing Agencies (EA).
                         EAs will be selected during preparation of the project, and may include one or more of the following
                         entities:
                         •         Caribbean - West and Central Atlantic Fisheries Commission (WECAFC www.fao.org/
                         fishery/rfb/wecafc/en)
                         •         Eastern Pacific - World Wildlife Fund (www.worldwildlife.org); Inter-American Tropical
                         tuna Commission (IATTC - http://www.iattc.org/)
                         •         West and Central Pacific - Forum Fisheries Agency (Pacific Islands FFA - http://www.ffa.
                         int/)
                         •         Bay of Bengal - Bay of Bengal Program (BOBP-IGO - http://www.bobpIGO.org/)

                         The Project is organized into three components:

                         Component 1: Development of Business Plans to support public or private sector investment in up to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         four areas on sustainable fisheries. This component will support technical and financial development
                         of up to four regional long-term business plans for fisheries on highly migratory stocks occurring
                         within developing coastal and island states’ waters and in areas beyond national jurisdiction adjacent
                         to small island development states (SIDS) or coastal developing states. Business Plan Candidates
                         identified to date are listed in Table 1.

                         Table 1 – Indicative Business Plan Candidates

                         1. Caribbean billfish and shark: Potential institutional mechanisms to support compensation
                         payments to commercial / artisanal fishers to adopt catch and release, tagging or non-targeting of
                         iconic species. Partners include (for billfish) Western and Central Atlantic Fisheries Commission
                         (WECAFC).
                         2. Bay of Bengal India/Tamil Nadu [Sri Lank and Maldives]: Under consideration with Bank
                         IDA (Tamil Nadu and Puducherry Coastal Disaster Risk Reduction Project). Covers regional (India,
                         Sri Lanka, Maldives) tuna fisheries access management instruments, by-catch and conservation.
                         Partners include Bay of Bengal Programme and the Ministry of Fisheries in Tamil Nadu.
                         3. Western and Central Pacific: Supporting efforts by Pacific Island Nations to develop and take
                         forward initiatives on more effective management of tuna stocks. Under consideration with Bank
                         IDA investment (Pacific Island Regional Oceanscape Program - PROP). Partners include the Forum
                         Fisheries Agency and Parties to the Nauru Agreement Office.
                         4. Eastern Pacific Ocean          Exploring efforts to build on existing capacity measures under
                         InterAmerican Tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC) and ideas being tabled by industry and partners.
                         Ideas emerging include (1) tradable bigeye tuna by catch quotas in exchange for an exemption to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         annual closure; (2) trading of harvest capacity (expressed as hold capacity); (3) converting hold
                         capacity into tradable tonnage quota. Partners wide ranging and embrace industry (Mexico, Ecuador,
                         Spain), WWF, IATTC, ISSF.

                         Business Plan candidates will be selected based on their ability to demonstrate the potential to
                         achieve rapid transformational change. Once selected for inclusion in the project, activities to support
                         development of the Business Plans will involve: (i) preparatory analyses including identifying reform
                         pathways and supporting sector analytics and scenario planning, (ii) investment plan development,
                         and (iii) mapping of public and/or private capital to implement the final business plans .

                         The Project will not invest in the actual implementation of any of the suggested reform pathways that
                         are described in the Business Plans.

                         Component 2: Oceans Innovation Fund. This grant facility will contribute to the transformational
                         impact that the Business Plans are expected to realize. A $2 million grant window will support
                         further analytical work to inform development of the business plans. The aim of the fund is to
                         stimulate innovation that directly supports preparation of the business plans including, for example,
                         creation of links between market-based certification and rights-based management in target fisheries
                         as well as new techniques for by-catch reduction.

                         Component 3: Monitoring and evaluation of four project areas and Innovation Fund, advocacy and
                         lesson learning. This component will finance: (i) monitoring and evaluation of project activities,
                         including investments of those business plans successful in attracting third party financing; (ii)
                         knowledge, communications and advocacy; and, (iii) developing country engagement strategies.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         Location: The project is global in scope and will invest in the preparation of business plans to
                         support sustainable fisheries in up to four seascapes, including: the Caribbean, Eastern Pacific,
                         Western and Central Pacific and the Bay of Bengal.

                         Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis: This is a TA project, with no
                         physical footprint. Component 1 will finance analytical work and the preparation of business plans
                         for up to four areas. Though these business plans will not be implemented under the Project, the
                         investments will have a physical footprint and will generate both adverse and positive environmental
                         and social impacts that will need to be addressed.

                         Examples of the type of reforms proposed under the final business plans may include, for example:

                         a)      Small scale infrastructure works to allow for inspection of fish catch at landing sites.

                         b)      Installation of small to medium size fish processing plants.

                         c)       Support to restock beche-de-mer if it is deemed a viable method to sustainably restore
                         stocks. If so, hatchery facilities based on native brood stock would be used. Support would include
                         supplying fishers with juveniles to restock near shore habitats.
                           d)      Investments in small enterprise development associated with bêche-de-mer valued added
                           processing may also include installation of small scale civil works (e.g., solar dryers).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           e)      Strategies for controlling solid waste through economic incentives such as a system of
                           pollution payments may involve financing small scale waste management related civil works.

                           The business plans will require that all pathways proposed in each plan will be screened to ensure
                           that potential adverse environmental and social impacts that may be generated as a result of each
                           investment are identified, and appropriate safeguard instruments are prepared to avoid, minimize,
                           mitigate and, in such cases where there are residual impacts, offset adverse environmental and social
                           impacts. The screening of the business plans for environment and social impacts and the preparation
                           of appropriate safeguard instruments for each plan will be guided by the Environment and Social
                           Management Framework (ESMF), which will be developed during project preparation and disclosed
                           prior to appraisal.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Grant Recipient and the Executing Agencies for development of each business plan will be
                           confirmed during preparation. Once selected, a rapid assessment of the institutional capacity of each
                           to comply with the Bank’s safeguard policies will be conducted. The results of the rapid institutional
                           assessment will be included in the ESMF, including actions to address capacity constraints of the
                           EAs.

                           For Component 2, Conservation International will manage the innovation grant process. This agency
                           is deemed to have satisfactory experience managing Bank safeguard policies and instruments based
                           on its work with another global biodiversity operation (e.g., the Critical Ecosystem Partnership
                           Fund). CI’s experience with this operation includes successful development, implementation and
                           active supervision of a range of Bank-approved safeguard instruments. As such, Conservation
                           International is considered to have adequate capacity to handle the safeguard policy related
Public Disclosure Copy




                           considerations of this project with respect to the grants processed under Component 2.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Knut Opsal (AFTCS)
                           Cary Anne Cadman (EASIS)
                           Valerie Hickey (AES)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             While this is a TA project with no physical
                           BP 4.01                                              investment, the development of business plans
                                                                                under Component 1, when implemented
                                                                                regardless of the funding source, will have
                                                                                physical footprints and will generate both
                                                                                adverse and positive environmental and social
                                                                                impacts that will need to be addressed. For these
                                                                                reasons, OP4.01 is triggered.
                                                             To ensure that the business plans are developed
                                                             with due consideration of environment and
                                                             social impacts and in compliance with OP 4.01,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             an ESMF will be prepared during preparation.
                                                             The ESMF will guide the screening of the
                                                             business plans for environment and social
                                                             impacts and the preparation of appropriate
                                                             safeguard instruments for each plan. The ESMF
                                                             will contain an environmental and social
                                                             assessment screening process associated with
                                                             specific investments proposed in each business
                                                             plan, as well as examples of good practice
                                                             avoidance, minimization and mitigation
                                                             measures for the breadth of reform pathways
                                                             that the business plan may propose. This
                                                             Framework will ensure that each business plan
                                                             will put in place a robust approach to consider
                                                             environmental and social risks and impacts in
                                                             line with Bank safeguard policies, and to
                                                             prepare appropriate good practice safeguard
                                                             instruments for the actual reform pathways
                                                             identified in the final business plan.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The business plans developed by this TA will
                                                             lead to subsequent investments that are likely to
                                                             impact natural habitats, although most of these
                                                             impacts are expected to be positive.

                                                             The ESMF prepared for the project will include
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             provisions of how each business plan will
                                                             screen for potential impacts related to natural
                                                             habitats, and will describe the necessary
                                                             measures to avoid, minimize or mitigate these
                                                             adverse impacts as part of the ESMF’s
                                                             environmental and social management plan
                                                             (ESMP).
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   The business plans developed by this TA will
                                                             result in subsequent investments that may
                                                             impact mangrove forests.

                                                             The ESMF prepared for the project will include
                                                             provisions for how each business plan will
                                                             screen for potential impacts related to forests
                                                             and identify the necessary measures as part of
                                                             ESMP.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes   The Bank team will review the nature of the
                                                             proposed reform pathways in each business plan
                                                             to ascertain whether this policy applies to any of
                                                                 the business plans.

                                                                 A Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 prepared for the project that will include
                                                                 mention of how each business plan will screen
                                                                 for potential impacts related to pest
                                                                 management, identify the necessary measures
                                                                 for avoiding, minimizing and mitigating these
                                                                 adverse impacts. This PMP will include
                                                                 measures for the purchase, storage, application
                                                                 and disposal of pesticides, and will advocate an
                                                                 integrated pest management approach in cases
                                                                 where pesticides are necessary to the
                                                                 implementation of any activities under a
                                                                 Business Plan.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Subsequent investments identified under the
                         BP 4.11                                 business plans may have chance finds of PCR in
                                                                 the midst of infrastructure development or
                                                                 overlaps with PCRs that are considered sacred
                                                                 by communities, etc.

                                                                 The ESMF prepared for the project will include
                                                                 provisions ofhow each business plan will be
                                                                 screened for potential adverse impacts related to
                                                                 physical cultural resources. Chance find
                                                                 procedures will be included in the ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   Indigenous Peoples are likely to be present in
                                                                 some of the areas and are likely to benefit from
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 reform pathways when implemented.

                                                                 Each area and business plan will be screened to
                                                                 determine whether Indigenous Peoples are
                                                                 present. The ESMF prepared for the project will
                                                                 include an Indigenous Peoples Planning
                                                                 Framework (IPPF), the main elements of which
                                                                 would be a free, prior and informed consultation
                                                                 process to ensure that IPs are not adversely
                                                                 affected by project activities (e.g. siting of
                                                                 infrastructure and construction work related to
                                                                 component 2) and that they are not excluded
                                                                 from project benefits.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The subsequent investments identified from the
                         4.12                                    business plan may involve land acquisition,
                                                                 involuntary resettlement or result in loss of
                                                                 access to natural resources.

                                                                 The ESMF prepared for the project will include
                                                                                                                                 a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that
                                                                                                                                 will include the procedures and requirements for
                                                                                                                                 land acquisition, preparation of a Resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Action Plan, when needed, and a Process
                                                                                                                                 Framework in case there is loss or restriction of
                                                                                                                                 access to natural resources.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            Neither this project nor the implementation of
                                                                                                                                 the business plans will involve building dams
                                                                                                                                 nor will any of the future investments envisaged
                                                                                                                                 depend on an existing dam.
                                 Projects on International                                         TBD                           Application of this policy to the project will be
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            determined during preparation.

                                                                                                                                 The team will continue to consult and work with
                                                                                                                                 LEGEN and the RSA as to the interpretation
                                                                                                                                 and triggering of OP 7.50 in this global TA
                                                                                                                                 project.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP TBD                                                            There may be unresolved territorial claims or
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputes within the project boundaries. This will
                                                                                                                                 be confirmed during project preparation and if
                                                                                                                                 triggered the team will seek guidance from
                                                                                                                                 LEGEN and RSA as to the interpretation and
                                                                                                                                 triggering of OP 7.50 in this global TA project.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The project-level ESMF will be prepared prior to appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Tim Bostock

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Josefo Tuyor (RSA)                                                                                                   Date: 11-Nov-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mark E. Cackler (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 11-Nov-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
