                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                        Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSR3429
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Nepal                                        Project ID:           P120265
                                                                                           Additional
                                                                                           Project ID
                                                                                           (if any):
                            Project Name:     Urban Governance and Development Program: Emerging Towns Project
                                              (P120265)
                            Task Team         Elisa Muzzini
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       14-Feb-2011                                    Estimated   10-May-2011
                            Appraisal Date:                                                Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: SASDU                                           Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                           Instrument:
                            Sector:           Sub-national government administration (100%)
                            Theme:            City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (39%), Municipal governance and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              institution building (38%), Municipal finance (23%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                         No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        35.14           Total Bank Financing:                                      25.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                 Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                   5.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                         25.00
                              Local Communities                                                                                    2.14
                              GERMANY German Technical Assistance Corporation (GTZ)                                                3.00
                              Total                                                                                               35.14
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:




                                                                                Page 1 of 7
                          Is this a           No
                          Repeater
Public Disclosure Copy




                          project?

                          2. Current Project Development Objectives
                         The PDO is to improve delivery and sustainable provision of basic services and priority
                         infrastructure in the participating municipalities.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The proposed new Project Development Objective is "to improve the capacity of the participating
                         municipalities in delivery and sustainable provision of basic services and priority infrastructure".
                          3. Project Description
                         The project currently comprises three components: (i) Service Delivery Improvement, (ii) Socio-
                         economic Infrastructure Development and (iii) Institutional Development. The project supports the
                         six towns located along two important north-south economic corridors in the East and the West.
                         These are Mechinagar, Dhankuta, Itahari, Lekhnath, Baglung and Tansen.

                         Given the implementation delays faced by the project, a revision in the PDO, as well as a revision
                         and reduction in the scope of the activities is necessary to re-align the project outcomes to the on the
                         ground institutional capacity of the participating municipalities. The focus of the project is proposed
                         to shift from improving overall infrastructure and services to building capacity for planning,
                         implementing and funding urban development activities in the participating municipalities. The
                         results framework and the project component descriptions are proposed to be revised in line with the
                         change in project objective. The Service Delivery Improvement component is proposed to be
                         renamed Strengthening Planning Capacity for Urban Development; the Socio-economic
                         Infrastructure Development component is proposed to be renamed Capacity Building for Municipal
                         Infrastructure Development.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Part of fund allocated to the Capacity Building for Municipal Infrastructure Development for
                         municipal infrastructure sub-projects will be cancelled (USD 6.55 million credit), and part (USD 1.8
                         million grant and USD 207,000 credit) will be re-allocated to the Institutional Development
                         component for enhancing technical support and institutional development of the participating
                         municipalities and the PCO. An IDA-funded Municipal Support Team (MST), under the Institutional
                         Development component, will replace GIZ-funded ID support to the municipalities, which will phase
                         out in June 2014.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The restructuring does not change the project location.

                         The project is being implemented in six participating municipalities: Tansen, Dhankuta, Baglung,
                         Lekhnath, Itahari, and Mechinagar. Tansen and Dhankuta are hill towns serving as market and
                         administrative centers for the surrounding areas in the east and west, respectively. Mechinagar
                         comprising the towns of Dhulabari and Kakadvitta, is a gateway on the Indian border, which serves
                         as a trade and transit point in the east. Baglung is a hill town in the west at the end of a traditional
                         caravan route to Tibet. As an administrative centre, Baglung has been growing rapidly over the last
                         15 years after being connected to Pokhara by road. Lekhnath is a peripheral town near Pokhara.


                                                                        Page 2 of 7
                           Itahari a fast growing municipality in the east and is a transport node at the junction of the East-West
                           Highway and the main Biratnagar to Dhankuta route.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           This project supports the participating municipalities to improve planning, implementation and
                           funding for urban development activities.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)
                           Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDS)

                            6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  Yes

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The restructuring proposes to shift the focus of the project from improving overall the
                              infrastructure and services to building capacity for planning, implementing and funding urban
                              development activities. Given their limited borrowing and institutional capacity, the municipalities
                              would only be able to utilize USD 3.3 million credit and USD 4.44 million grant from the total
                              IDA allocation of USD 16.27 million for the implementation of municipal sub-projects under the
                              Capacity Building for Municipal Infrastructure Development. The amount that will not be utilized
                              will be in part cancelled, and in part reallocated to the Institutional Development component. After
                              restructuring, the project would fund enhanced technical support and capacity building for the
                              participating municipalities and the PCO. A MST, under the ID component, will replace GIZ-
                              funded Institutional Development support to the municipalities.


                                                                         Page 3 of 7
                          The safeguard risks are associated mainly with the provisions of physical infrastructure under the
                          Capacity Building for Municipal Infrastructure Development component. As there is a reduction in
Public Disclosure Copy




                          the scope of municipal infrastructure, the restructuring is unlikely to increase the safeguard risks.
                          The focus on institutional support and capacity building is likely to contribute positively to
                          implementation by strengthening environmental and social management capacity of the
                          municipalities.

                          The project continues to triggers six safeguard policies as indicated above.

                          Environmental Impacts: Environmental concerns of the project are related to the infrastructure/
                          civil works. Based on the final pipeline of municipal sub-projects, the type of infrastructure and
                          services supported under the project will include rehabilitation of local roads, improvement of
                          infrastructure in market areas, beautification of a gate, construction of local markets and
                          conservation of a temple. Municipalities will also receive support through the municipal block
                          grant for routine service delivery and O&M of existing assets. The Environmental Management
                          Framework (EMF) prepared for the original project will continue to be applied after the
                          restructuring. The EMF ensures compliance with the triggered environmental safeguards. The
                          assessment made during preparation of the EMF and experiences until date indicates that most of
                          the municipal infrastructure sub-projects are expected to have limited environmental impacts. The
                          EMF requires that higher environmental risks sub-projects are subjected to more rigorous
                          environmental scrutiny; however, none of the identified municipal infrastructure sub-projects
                          based on the final pipeline will require Environmental Assessment (EA).

                          Involuntary land acquisition and resettlement impacts: The Social Management Framework (SMF)
                          prepared by the borrower identifies social impacts likely to arise from the implementation of
                          municipal infrastructure sub-projects, which may include loss of land and structure, temporary
                          livelihoods impacts, impacts on community assets, etc. The participating municipalities have
                          identified their investment priorities and finalized the pipeline of sub-projects for the project. None
Public Disclosure Copy




                          of the identified municipal infrastructure sub-projects will require involuntary land acquisition.
                          However, the full nature and extent of resettlement impacts are not known at this stage, and the OP
                          4.12 has been triggered in view of the possible temporary disruption of economic activities which
                          may occur in the project areas.

                          Impacts on Indigenous People: The social assessment provided in the SMF indicates the presence
                          of janajatis (indigenous people), dalits and other vulnerable groups in the participating
                          municipalities. The existing government guidelines to municipalities emphasizes that 35 percent of
                          the annual block grants be spent for the welfare of janajatis, dalits and women. Nepal is a
                          signatory to ILO 169, which requires special attention to the welfare of the indigenous people. In
                          addition, Nepal has enacted several legislations to protect the interests of the IPs and vulnerable
                          groups including the National Foundation for Upliftment of Indigenous Nationalities, 2002 and the
                          Local Self-Governance Act, 1999. In order to minimize and mitigate any adverse impacts on and
                          enhance benefits for the janajatis and dalits, the SMF includes an Indigenous People-Vulnerable
                          Communities Development Framework (IP-VCDF) which provides guidelines to prepare and
                          implement IP-VCDPs for specific sub-projects.

                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:


                                                                      Page 4 of 7
                           Impacts of project-supported activities could be positive or negative depending on type and
                          location of an activity. The EMF and SMF include provisions for screening, preparing EMP /
                          RAP/ IP-VCDP, and monitoring the implementation of the activity-specific mitigations. None of
Public Disclosure Copy




                          the identified sub-projects based on the final pipeline will require EA or involuntary land
                          acquisition.

                           The municipal infrastructure prioritized by the participating municipalities are expected to have
                           positive long-term social and environmental impacts by providing market linkages, improving
                           basic services, and offering employment and income opportunities, including to the IPs and other
                           vulnerable groups. The actual indirect and long term impacts are assessed as part of the social and
                           environmental screening, as provided for in the EMF and SMF.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            Specific measures, including alternative sub-project design, will be considered based on the
                           social and environmental screening carried out for the municipal infrastructure sub-projects and
                           urban development activities funded by the municipal block grants as a part of the activity
                           planning and preparation. Guidelines for assessing project alternatives have been clearly
                           articulated in the EMF and SMF.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            (a) Borrower’s measures to address the identified safeguards issues include the following.

                          Environmental safeguards: An EMF has been prepared to address environment safeguard issues
                          for the municipal infrastructure sub-projects to be funded by the project. Theframework defines
                          the environment management approach for identifying the environmental issues associated with
                          the proposed activities, identifies the requirements of conducting environmental screening and
                          environmental studies and provides guidance to integrate environment safeguard measures during
Public Disclosure Copy




                          the planning, designing and construction phase of the sub-projects. The EMF proposes robust
                          environmental supervision and monitoring; including trimester monitoring by central agencies and
                          annual external monitoring.

                          Social Safeguards: The borrower has policies and legislations in place and has implemented social
                          management frameworks to deal with involuntary land acquisition, involuntary resettlement, and
                          indigenous peoples for projects aided by the World Bank and the ADB. The borrower has
                          prepared a Social Management Framework (SMF) based on social assessment, town profile,
                          political economy studies, and consultations held with various stakeholders in the participating
                          municipalities and at the national level.

                          Resettlement Policy Framework and Indigenous People-Vulnerable Development Framework
                          (RPF and IP-VCDF): The SMF has formulated a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) providing
                          necessary guidance to identify and address the potential involuntary land acquisition and
                          resettlement impacts of a sub-project from the planning stage to the implementation and post-
                          implementation processes. The GON has legislations relating to the management of involuntary
                          land acquisition and has established resettlement policies for other World Bank funded projects.
                          The municipalities, however, have limited experience in involuntary land acquisition and
                          resettlement, as they mostly acquire land through voluntary donation or direct purchase. The RPF
                          lays down the principles and procedures to carry out social screening and assessment; and


                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                         establish and implement RAPs for sub-projects. The RPF describes entitlements for various
                         categories of affected people and implementation arrangements to be established, including
                         consultations with civil society and grievance redress mechanisms (GRMs), framework for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         consultations, coordination of the resettlement process with the civil works, community-level
                         monitoring and independent evaluation, and budget.

                         The SMF also includes an IP-VCDF to address issues relating to the janajatis (indigenous people),
                         dalits, and other poor groups. The SMF has been prepared through stakeholder consultations at the
                         national level and in the participating municipalities. The consultations have been summarized in
                         the SMF. The SMF also provides guidelines for demand side governance and social
                         accountability. The SMF is compliant with Bank OP 4.12 and 4.10.

                         The EMF and SMF were finalized prior to the Board approval of the project. Both EMF and SMF
                         have benefited from a status update and lessons learned from implementation of safeguards, with
                         additional emphasis being paid on capacity building for effective implementation of the EMF and
                         SMF.

                         (b)Assessment of the borrower’s capacity to plan and implement the measures:

                         Environmental and social management capacity of the implementing agencies (municipalities and
                         central agencies) is weak as proven in the first two years of implementation. The implementing
                         institutions have not been engaged in a World Bank project in recent times. In general,
                         environmental and social management capacities of all directly involved institutions need
                         strengthening for effective implementation of the EMF and SMF provisions. The EMF and SMF
                         contains capacity strengthening measures including training, orientation, provision of additional
                         human resources and logistics (see EMF and SMF for details). The restructuring puts increased
                         emphasis on the safeguard capacity aspects.
                         At the national level, the Project Coordination Office (PCO) comprising of representatives from
                         the TDF, MoUD, MoFALD, and the DUDBC is responsible for the overall monitoring of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         safeguards management during implementation, with TDF being responsible for standard project
                         appraisal. The PCO is assisted by a GIZ-funded Municipal Support Team (MST), which includes a
                         social development advisor. The MST provides training and technical support to the municipalities
                         and to the PCO. The PCO is aided and advised by a national level Steering Committee comprising
                         representatives from key agencies and the civil society. The MST, currently financed under GIZ
                         parallel financing, will phase out in June 2014 and a new MST will be hired by the PCO, funded
                         by IDA. The IDA-funded MST would provide enhanced support to the municipalities to ensure
                         compliance with social and environmental safeguards.

                         The municipalities have social mobilization sections with dedicated community development
                         officers. Each participating municipality has a Municipal Coordination Committee (MCC),
                         including representatives from user groups, civil society and CBOs which provide a forum for
                         consultation and participatory review of implementation progress.

                         A two stage GRM has been established. The GRM committee in the municipalities is chaired by a
                         non-official nominated by the Municipal Board, and comprises representatives from civil society,
                         and CBOs. At the national level, the GRM committee is chaired by the Project Director and
                         include PCO members and civil society representatives including representatives from MuAN and
                         CSOs. In grievance cases relating to IPs, the Nepal Federation of Indigenous Nationalities



                                                                   Page 6 of 7
                             (NEFIN) will be invited to participate in the hearing process.

                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                During project preparation and environmental and social management framework preparation,
                              series of consultations were held with the municipalities and key stakeholder groups, including the
                              local committees (tole lane organizations), municipal officials, NGOs, and political
                              representatives. The draft EMF and SMF have been disclosed in the website of DUDBC (http://
                              www.dudbc.gov.np/). The executive summary was disclosed at the municipality level in local
                              language, in a manner accessible to the people. These documents were also disclosed in the Bank’s
                              Info shop.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Elisa Muzzini
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                        Date: 24-Oct-2013
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Shenhua Wang (SM)                               Date: 24-Oct-2013

                                                                        Page 7 of 7
