                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC8945

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Africa                            Project ID:      P150080
                            Project Name:      Sahel Women's Empowerment and Demographics Project (P150080)
                            Task Team          Christophe Lemiere
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Sep-2014                       Estimated        18-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GHNDR                             Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):          Population and reproductive health (70%), Child health (10%), Health system
                                               performance (10%), Other communicable diseases (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    200.00                       Total Bank Financing:       200.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   200.00
                              Total                                                                         200.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the project is to increase regional capacity and catalyze national
                           responses to improve women and adolescent girls’ empowerment and their access to quality
                           reproductive and maternal health products and trained health personnel in the participating countries.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project will include the following components:
                         Component 1: Improve regional demand for RMNCHN services and increase empowerment for
                         women and adolescents (US$90 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will help improve the lives of women and adolescent girls in the Sahel region by
                         supporting regional initiatives to deliver a number of critical interventions that seek to 1) increase the
                         demand for and use of quality RMNCHN services consistent with a voluntary, rights-based
                         approach; 2) improve sexual and reproductive health knowledge and practices; 3) enhance girls’
                         autonomy, social networks, and participation; 4) delay marriage and pregnancy.

                         The component will support countries in their Social and Behavioral Change Communication
                         programs (US$5 million): Strong social and behavior change communication (SBCC) is a critical
                         part of community mobilization which is necessary to address social norms, attitudes and practices,
                         especially for sustainability of results. Social change focuses on the community while behavioral
                         change focuses on the individual, making them complementary approaches that not only change
                         behaviors but also help the development of positive behaviors. To improve the impact of national
                         SBCC programs, the project will fund two activities:

                         •        Support a regional pool of experts on social mobilization, marketing, mass communications,
                         and knowledge management on the related topics, including subtle product placement and attractive
                         lifestyles (i.e. happy, small families) rather than explicit family planning messages. This pool of
                         experts will offer its services to all the selected countries engaged in large scale SBCC activities.
                         •        Launch a regional media campaign and/or incorporate gender informed messages into
                         existing campaigns, including through social media, radio, newspapers, and other relevant outlets.
                         Such a campaign would also include messages from high-level champions, which would raise
                         awareness among policymakers of issues surrounding access to RMNCHN services. The content
                         would ideally be locally generated so as to be most relevant and culturally appropriate.

                         The component will also set up a regional fund for designing, financing and evaluating country
Public Disclosure Copy




                         programs in women and girls empowerment (USS85 million). A regional fund will be established to
                         finance and foster innovation for adolescent girls’ programming. Through a regional call to
                         proposals, the proposed regional mechanism would provide funding, technical assistance and M&E
                         for countries wishing to scale-up already successful experiences or to implement large pilots.
                         Proposals will be submitted by countries for activities that empower girls and women, including (i)
                         support for keeping girls at secondary school (including conditional cash transfers to girls, monetary
                         and non-monetary support to their families, support for accommodation and food for schooled girls),
                         (ii) girls clubs (As in Ethiopia) for providing SBCC on health, nutrition, and population; life skills
                         training; vocational skills training; (iii) income generation activities; and (iv) education curricula
                         improvements to address RMNCHN skills. Such a mechanism would allow reaching both girls who
                         are in school and those who never entered or have fallen out of the school system, or even girls in
                         school whose needs the education sector alone cannot meet (for example, married girls). Proposals
                         will have to target geographical areas where fertility is high and age of marriage is low. Importantly,
                         with this regional funding, countries will have to use a common approach for evaluating the funded
                         programs, so as to maximize knowledge sharing between the Sahel countries. Thus, this regional
                         mechanism will fill an existing need to develop and share appropriate methodologies and tools for
                         adolescent girls’ programming in the Sahel and ensure that country-level expertise is shared with
                         other countries, fostering harmonization and coordination. Programs will be implemented by
                         countries, while technical assistance will be provided by UNFPA.
                         Component 2: Strengthen Regional Capacity for Availability of RMNCHN Commodities and
                         midwives (US$90 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will contribute towards an increase in the critical inputs required to provide
                         RMNCHN commodities and qualified staff.

                         The component will foster regional harmonization of registration, quantification and quality control
                         of Reproductive, Maternal, Neonatal and Child Health and Nutrition (RMNCHN) Commodities (US
                         $10 million). Specifically, the component would finance activities to (a) harmonize and strengthen
                         regulatory systems for medicines (US$6m), improve quality assurance in procurement and
                         distribution and in-market quality controls through a network of quality control labs (US$3m), and
                         (c) set up a regional network that can monitor stock levels at warehouses and facilities in target areas
                         and improve the matching of demand and supply from existing sources (US$1m). These activities
                         will be implemented by the countries, as well as WAHO and UNFPA.

                         The component will also support a Regional Pooled Procurement Process for purchasing RMNCHN
                         commodities (US$30 million). The project will support a regional procurement and financing
                         mechanism for certain maternal health commodities such as misoprostol, oxytocin and Mg sulfate
                         and potentially contraceptive pills and that can, through contracts with national distributors, quickly
                         respond to supply shortages at public or NGO facilities. Practically, this component will provide
                         funding to an existing regional mechanism: the Global Programme to Enhance Reproductive Health
                         Commodity Security (GPRHCS) currently operated by UNFPA. Countries will use this mechanism
                         for buying their RMNCHN commodities.

                         Through a regional fund, the component will support country efforts for enhancing the performance
                         of their RMNCHN supply chain (US$20 million). The project will support technically and
                         financially requests from countries to improve the distribution part of their supply chain. Country
                         proposals will have to be innovative, that is including use of IT or involvement of the private sector.
                         One example is the Informed Push Model (currently tested in Senegal). Another example is to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         include private providers of RMNCHN through a “buyer payment” system, where private providers
                         of RMNCHN will receive a subsidy. Also, the country requests may include support to private
                         franchising networks, so as to expand access to RM commodities. The regional fund will be managed
                         along the lines of the regional fund mentioned in component 1.

                         The component will also support rural midwifery training institutions in target countries to increase
                         the quantity and quality of midwives and other personnel involved in RMNCHN health (US$30
                         million). This component will contribute towards an increase in adequately trained health workers
                         that deliver RMNCHN services, particularly in rural and more remote parts of the Sahel. This will
                         be done by setting up and developing a regional “hub-and-spoke” model for rural midwifery training
                         that rural training institutions can draw on by:

                         •       Strengthening quality assurance and regulation of midwifery education at regional level by
                         supporting WAHO develop its accreditation department (with links to national departments) for
                         accreditation of rural midwifery training institutions, midwifery faculty, and internship sites.
                         •       Building capacity of one large mid-level training institution (i.e. the regional hub) to deliver
                         a new (WAHO-accredited) midwifery faculty training program for the region, and emerge more
                         generally as a regional center of excellence on midwifery education. In addition to capacity
                         strengthening for this regional center, scholarships will also be provided so that midwifery faculty
                         (with priority for those from rural areas) from the country can access this regional training. The
                         regional center of excellence will also have to provide support to countries for their request to (i)
                         revise curricula and teaching strategies including ensuring greater collaboration and division of labor
                         with community health workers and community agents, and (ii) develop and implement “rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         pipeline” strategies. The regional center will have to provide in-country training services from the
                         hub, in particular with regards to training clinical instructors.
                         •        Strengthening capacity of rural midwifery training institutions by a) providing financing for
                         rural midwifery training institutions in countries to tap into regional e-learning efforts to deliver
                         theoretical modules of midwifery curricula (freeing up time for clinical teaching), b) funding
                         equipment and supplies for existing rural schools and internship sites, c) funding incentives for
                         individuals/faculty to take serious their clinical supervision functions, and d) supporting these
                         institutio ns for providing rural training to midwives to be posted in rural areas.

                         Component 3: Foster Political Commitment, and capacity for policy making and project
                         Implementation (US$20 million)

                         The component will strengthen Advocacy and Political Commitment on RMNCHN at regional and
                         national levels (US$5 million). This would be achieved through:

                         •       Supporting the creation of a club of heads of states or the use of an existing one to discuss
                         and advocate for issues around the demographic dividend at the highest level. This club would also
                         include a peer control mechanism, along the lines of the African Peer Review Mechanism. Country
                         data on policies, budget allocation, and results for addressing the demographic dividend will be
                         collected at least annually and will be presented for discussion to this high-level club.
                         •       Supporting the establishment of regional networks with parliamentarians, religious leaders,
                         and civil society organizations. Data on budget allocations and results related to demographic
                         dividend issues will be collected regionally and will be discussed within these regional networks.
                         The component will support the collection of data and the operating costs of these networks.

                         The component will also strengthen Capacity for policy making, monitoring and evaluation related to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         demographic dividend issues (US$10 million). This component will strengthen the countries’
                         policymaking and analytical capacity on demographic dividend issues. In complementarity with
                         national efforts, the project will provide financing for technical capacity building efforts for National
                         Directorates of Population, National Population Councils/Committees, Ministries of Population,
                         Ministries of Health and Education, as well as Pharmaceutical and Human Resources for Health
                         agencies and regional institutions, as needed. A sub-regional training program for population studies
                         and demography will also be supported both through scholarships and through the creation of a
                         graduate degree in demographics in one of the countries’ universities. To also strengthen the M&E
                         system of the countries, a regional network of “Demographic Dividend Observatories” will be
                         created. A real-time early-warning system to provide data on key indicators in the Sahel region will
                         be supported too. These data will build greater understanding, monitor progress, and further catalyze
                         an informed movement for women’s empowerment driven by regional policy dialogue and political
                         action. The component will also fund surveys related to demographic dividend (including DHSs)
                         wherever a national project cannot support these costs.

                         The component will strengthen project implementation capacity (US$5 million). The component
                         will strengthen project management capacities for the implementing agencies. The component will
                         also include support to beneficiary institutions regarding sound management of medical waste and
                         obsolete drugs.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will be implemented in 6 countries (Burkina Faso, Chad, Cote d'Ivoire, Mali, Mauritania,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and Niger).
                           The project is not targeting any specific area in each of the countries.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           At this stage, it is envisaged that the health-related project will be implemented by the Ministries of
                           Health of the 6 respective countries. All the Ministries of Health have benefited or are benefiting
                           from Bank support to comply with environmental safeguards (especially medical waste management
                           plans).
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Hocine Chalal (GENDR)
                           Fatou Fall (GURDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No               The project will mostly fund consulting and
                           BP 4.01                                               training services, the project as well as will
                                                                                 mostly fund drugs, medical supplies, and some
                                                                                 equipment. No civil works is contemplated or
                                                                                 envisaged. It is advised however to ensure that
                                                                                 as part of the technical assistance appropriate
                                                                                 support is given to beneficiary institutions
                                                                                 regarding sound management of medical waste
                                                                                 and obsolete drugs. Consequently the project is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 classified as category C and no environmental
                                                                                 and social safeguards instrument is required.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No               The policy is not triggered. The project will not
                           4.12                                                  finance any activities necessitating involuntary
                                                                                 land acquisition resulting in
                                                                                 A.       Involuntary resettlement of people and/
                                                                                 or loss of (or access to) assets, means of
                                                                                 livelihoods or resources and
                                                                                 B.       The involuntary restriction of access to
                                                                                 legally designated parks and protected areas
                                                                                                                                 resulting in adverse impacts on the livelihoods
                                                                                                                                 of the displaced persons.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Jul-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      N/A
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Christophe Lemiere

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                                                                                            Date: 14-Aug-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Abdo S. Yazbeck (PMGR)                                                                                               Date: 19-Aug-2014
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
