INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Mar-2015
9 Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Tajikistan                 Project ID:   P154561
Project Name:   Real Estate Registration Project (P15456 1)
Task Team       Victoria Stanley
Leader(s):
Estimated       08-Sep-2015                Estimated     16-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Central government administration (50%), General agriculture, fishing and
forestry sector (30%), Information technology (20%)
Theme(s):       Land administration and management (80%), Personal and property rights
(20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      10.00            Total Bank Financing:   10.00
U       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
a         International Development Association (IDA)                     10.00
Total                                                           10.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed project development objective is to support the establishment of a unified real estate
registration system nationwide which is reliable, transparent and efficient.
C. Project Description
The proposed project will be financed with US$10.0 million IDA in the following percentages: 45%


﻿IDA grant financing and 55% IDA credit financing.
The proposed components include:
O
U       a) Real Estate Registration System Development. This component would support the establishment
of a national real estate registration system and the development of SUERIP. The component would
include: physical infrastructure improvements, improving customer services and transparency,
support to planning and institutional sustainability, support further development of policy and the
regulatory framework for registration, and support training activities.
b) IT Development and Data Management. This component would support the digitizing/conversion
of paper documents into a central database and development of an IT system for alpha-numeric data.
The component would include activities such as: data conversion, data capture and incorporation into
the new system (paper and digital), conversion of mortgage information and incorporation into the
new system, software development, and on-line services for professionals and the public.
c) Project Management, Public Awareness and Education, Monitoring and Evaluation. This
component would include: support to SUERIP to manage the project through financing a small
PMU, monitoring and evaluation, and public awareness and education campaigns and outreach
activities. Public awareness and educations activities would make use of non-governmental
organizations interested in land rights, rural citizens and women, in particular. Monitoring and
evaluation would include gender disaggregated data on registration as is already collected for
issuance of use rights certificates. Monitoring would also include a citizen engagement mechanism
to collect feedback to track improvements in customer service and confidence in the system. The
preparation will also consider the possibility to set-up a grievance redress mechanism for land
registration. A social assessment will be prepared to benefit inclusiveness in project design.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be national. The project will be mostly office work - scanning and document
management, IT systems development, training, public awareness, legal analysis, policies and
procedures.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The implementing agency is newly established and has no experience with Bank financed projects.
However there is Project Management Unit (PMU) established under the current Land Registration
and Cadaster System for Sustainable Agriculture Project, which does have some experience with
social and environmental safeguards. These skills will continue to be built during the proposed Real
Estate Registration Project.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (GSURR)
German Stanislavovich Kust (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         Though the proposed project will mostly be office
OP/BP 4.01                              work - development of systems, procedures,


﻿processes, HR capacity - there may be some office
renovations. The type of expected environmental
impacts of concern are localized in nature and more
adequately addressed through environment permits
and good construction practice, or in the case of
World Bank policies, through implementation of site
specific EMPs (in the case of renovations). It is
anticipated that environmental risks related to
rehabilitation and renovation would be easily
predictable and mitigated.
As sites for renovations to be funded are not yet
known, an Environmental Management Framework
(EMF) will be prepared prior to Appraisal, with site-
specific EMPs to be prepared as needed during
project implementation. At present it is expected
that all renovations will be sufficiently minor that
Checklist EMPs can be used for the subprojects.
Therefore, the project level EMF will also use the
Checklist EMP template, completed based on general
project information rather than site-specific details.
If during project preparation it becomes evident that
more substantial renovations requiring regular (non-
Checklist) EMPs for some of the subprojects, the
format of the EMF will be adjusted accordingly. The
project team will meet with RSA to discuss this at an
appropriate point during project preparation, possibly
around the QER.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
Pest Management OP 4.09     No
&       Physical Cultural Resources  Yes          4.11 is triggered as a precaution. It is not known
OP/BP 4.11                               which buildings will be renovated and it is possible
one or more may be cultural resources. However the
list of renovation sites is not available and may not
be known at appraisal. Cultural resources will be
included in the EMP Checklist and site specific
EMP-checklists prepared during implementation as
sites are known.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No           Indigenous Peoples as defined by OP 4.10 are not
4.10                                     present in the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No         Any civil works under Component 1 will be limited
BP 4.12                                  to office renovations and will occur within the
footprint of existing premises.


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No
Projects on International     No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Jul-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Further investigations for environmental impacts and physical cultural resources will be done
during the preparation in April 2015 and a project level EMP-checklist prepared. The EMP-
checklist will be disclosed and made available for comment.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Victoria Stanley
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                          Date: 24-Mar-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Jorge A. Munoz (PMGR)                       Date: 02-Apr-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


