                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                       Report No.: ISDSA7314

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Mar-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Mar-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Kenya                              Project ID:    P146630
                                                         Parent         P124109
                                                         Project ID:
   Project Name:      Transport Sector Support Project - Additional Financing (P146630)
   Parent Project     Kenya Transport Sector Support Project (P124109)
   Name:
   Task Team          Josphat O. Sasia
   Leader:
   Estimated          17-Feb-2014                        Estimated   26-Mar-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
   Managing Unit:     AFTTR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                         Instrument:
   Sector(s):        General transportation sector (78%), Aviation (15%), Public administration-
                     Transportation (7%)
   Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (93%), Other public sector
                     governance (7%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:     267.20           Total Bank Financing:                 203.50
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                        Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        63.70
     International Development Association (IDA)                                              121.30
     IDA recommitted as a credit                                                               82.20
     Total                                                                                    267.20
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:




                                              Page 1 of 10
Is this a            No
Repeater
project?

2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The Project Development Objectives are to: (a) increase the efficiency of road transport along the
   Northern Corridor and the Tanzania-Kenya-Sudan road corridor; (b) enhance aviation safety and
   security to meet international standards; and (c) improve the institutional arrangements and
   capacity in the transport sector.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   The revised PDOs are to: (a) increase the efficiency of road transport along the Northern Corridor
   and the Tanzania-Kenya-South Sudan road corridor; (b) enhance aviation safety and security to
   meet international standards; (c) improve the institutional arrangements and capacity in the
   transport sector; (d) restore the capacity of the international passenger terminal destroyed in a fire
   at JKIA; and (e) strengthen the capacity of KAA in disaster preparedness and responsiveness at
   Kenyan airports.
3. Project Description
The proposed Additional Financing and restructuring will enhance the attainment of the project
objectives by: (a) completing the on-going reconstruction of the major road works contracts on
critical Northern and Tanzania-Kenya-South Sudan trade Corridors that link Kenya with its
neighbors and whose scope and costs have increased; (b) enabling the provision of additional
facilities that will enhance the safety of pedestrians and other road users; (c) installing urgently, (i)
temporary arrival facilities at the international passenger departure Terminals 1 and 2, (ii) permanent
arrival facilities at the international passenger departure Terminal 4 currently under construction,
and (iii) replacing the airport equipment and services destroyed in a fire, that disrupted operations
and lowered service standards at JKIA, the busiest hub in Eastern Africa; (d) financing part of the
reforms in the transport sector notably institutional strengthening and policy changes, and enhancing
oversight functions; (e) strengthening the capacity and enabling KAA to position itself better in
preparing, responding and managing any disasters at Kenyan airports.

The proposed project components are as follows:


Component A: Support to KeNHA to Rehabilitate and improve roads, roadside facilities and road
safety interventions and for Institutional Strengthening

1.      Rehabilitating the Kisumu – Kakamega – Kitale section on the Tanzania-Kenya – South
Sudan road corridor including widening of the road carriageway; and constructing service roads,
interchanges, and non-motorized traffic facilities at market centers to improve road safety, through
provision of works and services required for that purpose.
2.      Constructing a second carriageway on the Athi River-Machakos turn off road on the
Northern Corridor and constructing service roads and non-motorized facilities.


                                              Page 2 of 10
3.       Rehabilitating the Maji ya Chumvi – Bachuma Gate road section on the Northern Corridor
including strengthening and widening of the existing road carriageway, and construction of service
roads and non-motorized traffic facilities to improve road safety, through provision of works and
services required for that purpose.
4.       Constructing four interchanges to improve road safety and flow of traffic at Nakuru-
Nyahururu turnoff; Nakuru-Njoro turnoff; Mau Summit-Kisumu turnoff and Ahero-Kisii Turnoff.
5.       Constructing access roads to the East Africa School of Aviation and the proposed office
block for KCAA and road sub-sector entities including associated non-motorized facilities, street
lighting, and drainage.
6.       Supervising the related construction works.
7.       Strengthening the capacity of various institutions in the road sub-sector through:

(a)        provision of training and acquisition of relevant equipment, vehicles software and systems
for KeNHA, KURA and KeRRA to promote their effectiveness in information management systems,
financial planning, contract management and service delivery;
(b)        carrying out feasibility and detailed engineering designs studies for the development and
management of the road network;
(c)        marking the boundaries for the right of way to secure KeNHA’s road assets; and
(d)        constructing an office building for the road sector entities through the provision of goods,
works and services required for that purpose.


Component B: Support to the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure

1.      Strengthening the capacity of the Recipient’s State Department of Infrastructure through:

(a)     supporting MoTI in realigning its functions with the new constitution;
(b)     preparing an inventory of the unclassified roads and recommendations for their
improvement;
(c)     provision of technical advisory services, and acquisition of goods, relevant software and
systems for the National Construction Authority, MoTI, Engineers Board of Kenya, Materials and
Research Department, Kenya Institute of Highways and Building Technology, State Law Office and
External Resources Department to enhance their operational capacity;
(d)     training; and
(e)     monitoring and evaluating the performance of the Project.

2    Strengthening the capacity of the Recipient’s State Department of Transport to:

(a)      implement the Integrated National Transport Sector Policy through: (i) setting up the
National Transport and Safety Authority and Nairobi Metropolitan Transport Authority; (ii)
enhancing the capacity of Kenya Maritime Authority in coordinating maritime search and rescue;
and (iii) developing the regulatory framework for the railway sector, through provision of goods and
technical assistance;

(b)      improve its oversight functions in the maritime sub-sector through: (i) provision of technical
advisory services and goods to develop the navigation charts for the Kenyan coastline and to improve
its search and rescue capacity on Lake Victoria, other inland waters and along the coastline; and (ii)
strengthening the capacity of the maritime training facilities at the Port of Kisumu, through provision
of technical advisory services, training, goods and works required for that purpose;

                                             Page 3 of 10
(c)     carry out transport sector studies on: (i) the strategy on addressing the urban transport
challenges; (ii) aviation sub-sector; ; and (iii) developing an integrated maritime policy;

(d)     provide training to staff; and

(e)     enhance its air accident investigations capacity by constructing a hangar at JKIA through
provision of technical assistance, goods and works required for that purpose.

Component C: Support to the Kenya Airports Authority

1.        Carrying out activities pertaining to the: (a) Upgrading Moi International Airport through: (i)
rehabilitating the runway, apron and taxiways; (ii) supplying and installing the ground lighting; (iii)
expanding the existing power supply station through construction of the civil and electrical works;
(iv) installing the necessary equipment and connecting it to KCAA facilities; (v) constructing a water
supply line and associated services; and (vi) supervising the relevant construction works; (b)
constructing a water supply line for Jomo Kenyatta International Airport, all through provision of the
necessary services, works and goods required for that purpose; and (c) Building the capacity of KAA
staff in safety, security and airports management through training and provision of technical advisory
services.

2.        Emergency Activities to install international passenger temporary and permanent terminal
facilities at JKIA, through the provision of goods, works and services for that purpose.

(f)     Supplying and installing Baggage Handling Systems (BHS) at the parking garage and
Arrivals Facility to serve Terminal 3.
(g)     Supplying and installing of an integrated security system for the Arrival Facility to serve
Terminal 3.
(h)     Supplying of airside buses, weather proof steps, and fire tenders.
(i)     Designing, supplying and installing bussing and transit holding lounges to serve gate 4, level
1 departure and transit lounge at Terminal 4,
(j)     Construction of an arrivals facility to service Terminal 4 on a permanent basis which will
replace the temporary international arrivals currently at the parking garage and reverting the garage
for parking services.
(k)     Consultancy services to carry out an assessment to determine measures to enhance the
capacity of KAA to prepare and respond to disasters at the airports and provision of related
equipment

Component D: Support to the Kenya Civil Aviation Authority

1.      Providing technical assistance to strengthen KCAA’s aviation safety and oversight capacity
and to separate its regulatory responsibilities from its service provision functions.
2.      Building the capacity of the KCAA staff in safety, security and oversight of the civil aviation
industry through training, technical advisory services and provision of goods required for that
purpose.
3.      Constructing an office block for KCAA headquarters and supervising the related
construction works.
4.      Supplying and installing equipment to upgrade and modernize KCAA’s air navigation
systems and upgrading its information communication technology.

                                              Page 4 of 10
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The major civil works involved in the project, namely rehabilitation of the Kisumu- Kakamega-
Webuye-Kitale road (150 km) on the Tanzania-Kenya-Sudan road corridor; the Maji ya Chumvi -
Bachuma Gate section (60 km); construction of a second carriageway on the Athi River-Machakos
Junction section on the Northern Corridor, and four interchanges on the Northern Corridor, all
confined largely to the existing Right-of- Way (RoW) and following the existing alignment. Except
for the construction of the three interchanges and the construction of a second carriageway on the
Athi River- Machakos Junction road section, all other works involve rehabilitation or reconstruction
of existing roads under stable environments. The longest road, namely the Kisumu- Kakamega-
Webuye-Kitale road section is in the Western region of Kenya, starting at the northeastern shores of
Lake Victoria, passing through rolling and some steep terrain and ending at about 400 km to the
border of Kenya with South Sudan. There is no sensitive vegetation or wildlife sanctuary within the
zone of influence of the road and the entire road has been in existence for over 40 years. However, in
the Malaba area, there is a 2 km stretch of highway cutting through a forest. This road will be
widened for the project. Similarly, rehabilitation of works envisaged at Moi International airport
Mombasa is limited to the existing runway. No physical resettlement of residential homes is
expected, though there is likely to be compensation and resettlement assistance paid to stall-owners
within the right of way along the interchanges who will have to be relocated. EIA reports for the
project were prepared by consultants and reviewed by the National Environmental Management
Authority (NEMA) and the World Bank. The Reports were disclosed to the public, both in the
country and in the Bankis InfoShop.

The improvement of the road is expected to have both positive and negative impacts on the
environment and local communities. The EIAs show that there are no significant irreversible
damages to the environment and the negative impacts are confined largely to the construction phase
requiring timely mitigation measures to minimize the effects. The likely impacts and suggested
mitigation measures are detailed in the EIA. Several consultation sessions have been held with local
communities and their views incorporated in the final designs. Despite the disruption and negative
impacts of some limited land acquisition and involuntary resettlement, there is overwhelming support
by local communities for the project. Overall, there are no major resettlement issues that are
envisaged. The construction of interchanges and rehabilitation of the road sections identified will be
within the existing RoW. The major civil works involved in the project, namely rehabilitation of the
Kisumu-Kakamega-Webuye-Kitale road (150 km) on the
Tanzania-Kenya-Sudan road corridor; the Maji ya Chumvi - Bachuma Gate section (60 km);
construction of a second carriageway on the Athi River-Machakos Junction section on the Northern
Corridor, and four interchanges on the Northern Corridor, all confined largely to the existing Right of
Way and following the existing alignment. Except for the construction of the three interchanges and
the construction of a second carriageway on the Athi River-Machakos Junction road section, all other
works involve rehabilitation or reconstruction of existing roads under stable environments. The
longest road, namely the Kisumu-Kakamega-Webuye-Kitale road section is in the Western region of
Kenya, starting at the northeastern shores of Lake Victoria, passing through rolling and some, steep
terrain and ending at about 400km to the border of Kenya with South Sudan. There is no sensitive
vegetation or wildlife sanctuary within the zone of influence of the road and the entire road has been
in existence for over 40 years. However, in the Malaba area, there is a 2 km stretch of highway
cutting through a forest. This road will be widened for the project. Similarly, rehabilitation of works
envisaged at Moi International Airport in Mombasa is limited to the existing runway. No physical
resettlement of residential homes is expected, though there is likely to be compensation and


                                             Page 5 of 10
resettlement assistance paid to stall-owners within the right of way along the interchanges who will
have to be relocated. EIA reports for the project were prepared by consultants and reviewed by the
National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) and the World Bank. The various
safeguards documents (ESIAs, EMPs, and RAPs) for the roads and airport structures have been
prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed. The ESIA and RAP for the Athi and Machakos Turnoff-
Ulu, prepared and disclosed in 2004, have also been updated. The Northern Corridor Transport
Improvement Project (NCTIP) RPF has been updated to address any potential land acquisition/
involuntary resettlement issues arising from the civil works at the airports.

None of the modified, expanded or new activities included in this Additional Financing for KTSSP
change the overall environmental category of the project, which remains at level B. No new
safeguard policies are triggered by the new activities.

The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) covers all the impacts of the original and the Additional
Financing project components. The experience of implementing the RAPs for the road works
currently under implementation has been satisfactory. Quarterly progress reports are submitted to the
Bank by the internationally-recruited supervision consultants for each contract, and these reports are
reviewed by the Bank’s team to ensure compliance with agreed policies. Any shortcomings in
complying with the RAP or the respective EIAs observed during the Bank’s regular supervision
missions are promptly identified and reported for rectification to the implementing agency or the
supervision consultant, as appropriate.

The emergency activities will be implemented under OP 10 paragraph 11. The proposed emergency
works at JKIA, neither land acquisition nor project-affected persons are involved, since the full
extent of the works is concentrated within the land and air-side security boundary of property owned
by the airport authority.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Gibwa A. Kajubi (AFTCS)
Svetlana Khvostova (AFTSG)

6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

Pest Management OP 4.09             No

Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes
4.12



                                            Page 6 of 10
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     Any potential environmental safeguard concerns related to the project are minimal to moderate,
     given that the project is largely confined to rehabilitation of existing roads and runways.
     Environmental issues include water abstraction and erosion control during construction,
     establishing a 2km wildlife corridor in the Kakamega forest, at Malaba and occupational health
     and safety, and road safety management. These issues can be handled with simple and inexpensive
     mitigation measures.

    Several safeguards instruments (ESIAs, ESMPs, RAPs) have been prepared for the original project
    and during implementation. An ESMP for the airport restoration sub-project has been prepared,
    consulted upon, cleared by the Bank, and disclosed.

     With regard to OP 4.12, the bulk of impacts will be along the Kisumu-Kitale road in Kakamega
     town which has congestion of hawkers, traders with moveable kiosks who will need to be
     compensated mostly for disruption of work as well as some congestion and structures in the four
     interchange. No involuntary resettlement issues are expected to arise with regard to the Aviation
     Component, given that the proposed structures to be built will be on secured government land and
     no additional land acquisition is envisaged. The RPF for NCTIP has been updated to address any
     potential resettlement issues, should they arise during project implementation. Resettlement
     Action Plans will be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed as and when necessary.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     Given that the project does not open new routes or runways and is largely limited to rehabilitation
     of existing roads and an existing runway as well as construction of interchanges within a confined
     area, no indirect or long term environmental impacts are expected.
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.
     The chosen project minimizes adverse impacts. Any project alternative would lead to an increased
     environmental and/or involuntary resettlement impact.
   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
     assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     The Borrower has more than sufficient capacity to address the environmental safeguards issues
     identified. The Borrower is familiar with the standard measures needed to address impacts in a
     transport project (erosion control measures, water conservation, dust control, occupational health
     and safety, rehabilitation of borrow pits, etc). The District Engineers without prompting, expressed


                                               Page 7 of 10
  concern for the safety of small mammals using a 2 km stretch of the Malaba forest route as a
  wildlife corridor, and suggested various innovative ideas to protect them (an overhead wire mesh
  passage, speed bumps/ramps, and signs for motorists). Local engineers also suggested the
  construction of a dedicated path for cyclists and pedestrians.

  Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) and/or abbreviated RAPs have been updated by KENHA for
  the various road sections after consultations with the Project Affected Persons. KENHA is
  familiar with the OP4.12 and has the capacity to oversee the implementation of the safeguard
  instruments.

  The Resettlement Policy Framework for the Kenya Transport Sector Support Project (KTSSP) (the
  same one as for the Northern Corridor transport Improvement Project (NCTIP) has been updated
  to accommodate the structures to be built in the Aviation Component and this updated framework
  will apply should there an unforeseen resettlement issue arise.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Key stakeholders are the communities adjacent to Moi Airport and along the roads and
  interchanges. Detailed consultations at local level have been held with stakeholders and are
  documented in the EIAs and RAPs. Key issues raised by stakeholders along the Kakagema-
  Webuye-Kitale road related to safety, the need for adequate erosion control, and appropriate
  drainage to prevent flooding (in cases where drainage run-off might create water channels through
  their private property. Stakeholders also mentioned their concern that they be adequately
  compensated for gravel used in road projects. In response to these concerns, a separate track for
  two-wheeled transport, and where necessary, pedestrian pavements, have been incorporated into
  project design. The EMPs incorporate mitigation measures for erosion and drainage control.
  Provision of adequate PPE equipment will be made compulsory in construction contracts. Market
  prices will be paid to local stakeholders for gravel used in road projects. No key environmental
  issues were highlighted by stakeholders in other project components. With regard to the RAPs,
  main concerns related to the timing and amount of compensation, and the concern for tenants
  living in properties on the road reserve about compensation for improvements made in these
  rented residences. It was explained to the PAPs that they will be compensated for any investment
  in non-movable assets and loss of crops planted on their rented property, and that a grievance
  mechanism exists for them to voice any concerns about compensation payments.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                        07-Feb-2011
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                     27-Feb-2011
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                           Page 8 of 10
"In country" Disclosure
  Kenya                                                            27-Feb-2014
  Comments: The Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for the Proposed JKIA
                Restoration Projects was received by IDA on February 7, 2014. The ESMP was
                cleared by the Regional Safeguards Advisor on February 24, 2014. It was disclosed
                in country on February 27, 2014 by Kenya Airports Authority on their website as
                follows: https://www.kaa.go.ke/customer-information/downloads and on the same
                day by Infoshop.
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      17-Feb-2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-Feb-2011
"In country" Disclosure

  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Sector Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?




                                            Page 9 of 10
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Josphat O. Sasia
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 10-Mar-2014
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (SM)                      Date: 10-Mar-2014




                                            Page 10 of 10
