                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC3878

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          China                           Project ID:     P133117
                            Project Name:     Chongqing Small Towns Water Environment Management Project (P133117)
                            Task Team         Ji You
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         17-Feb-2014                     Estimated       28-Aug-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    EASCS                           Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (60%), Wastewater
                                              Collection and Transportation (30%), Wastewater Treatment an d Disposal
                                              (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (60%), Pollution management and environmental
                                              health (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    163.95                   Total Bank Financing:       100.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                   63.95
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     100.00
                              Total                                                                     163.95
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           A preliminary project development objective (PDO) proposed for the project is to support
                           Chongqing’s urban-rural integration agenda in selected project counties through improvement of
                           water environment infrastructure services including flood management, water pollution management,
                           and capacity building.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed project will include the following two components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Water Environment Infrastructure Improvement
                         a.        Sub-component 1: Flood management in Tongnan County. This component includes the
                         construction of a river embankment of 6.7 km and a sluice gate needed to raise flood protection
                         levels along the Fujiang River to 1/20 year floods for the new urban expansion area (Dafuba) in the
                         county seat, with associated dike-top roads and non-structural measures.
                         b.        Sub-component 2: Flood management and wastewater treatment in Rongchang County.
                         Structural measures include a river embankment of 13.6 km along the Laixihe River upstream to the
                         county seat’s flood protection investment funded by the Bank’s previous loan project (CSCP), with
                         associated dike-top roads, pipe works (6.2km), and the upgrading of an existing WWTP from current
                         capacity of 350 m3/day up to 2,300 m3/day. Non structural measures will also be implemented.
                         c.        Sub-component 3: Flood and wastewater management in Shizhu County. This sub-
                         component includes a river embankment of 6.7 km along the Longhe River, upstream and
                         downstream to the county seat’s flood protection project funded by a previous Bank loan project
                         (CSCP), with associated dike-top roads of 2.6 km and sewage/drainage pipes of 14.4 km (including
                         wastewater collection pipes in the old urban area), and non structural measures.
                         d.        Sub-component 4: Flood management and wastewater management in Pengshui County.
                         Structural measures include a river embankment of 2.66 km on the left side of Wujiang River needed
                         to raise the flood protection level to 1/20 year floods for the county seat’s new urban area. Also
                         included are civil works for 4 km of sewage collection pipes and 2.6 km of drainage pipes, along
                         with non structural measures.
                         Component 2: Institutional Capacity Building and Project Implementation Support This component
                         has two sub-components.
                         a.        Non-structural measures for water environment and flood management. Innovation and
                         capacity-building in the area of non-structural measures will be important to enhance water
                         environment management effectiveness and sustainability. There is a need to link particularly the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities of the main sectoral agency, Ministry of Water Resource, and its regional entity, the
                         Yangtze River Commission, with those of local government organizations, particularly those
                         responsible for land use planning. The main non-structural measures being considered for inclusion
                         under the project include: (i) flood mapping and land use planning; (ii) optimal operation of physical
                         systems for flood and water environment management in the river basin or sub-basin context; (iii)
                         improved flood forecasting and early warning systems; (iv) development of flood contingency plans
                         or flood emergency preparedness plans; (v) flood management facility operation and management
                         staff training and knowledge exchange, (vi) public awareness raising of flood risk; and (vii)
                         dissemination of project results within Chongqing and China.
                         b.        Project management and implementation support through provision of consulting services to:
                         1.        Enhance the design, supervision, and certification of works carried out under the project;
                         2.        Strengthen the capacity of the Project Implementation Entity at the municipal and county
                         levels in the areas of project management, procurement and contract management, accounting and
                         financial management, and compliance with safeguards policies;
                         3.        Strengthen the institutional capacity for operation and maintenance (O&M) for urban flood
                         and water environment management facilities at the county level; and
                         4.        Develop funding mechanisms to sufficiently cover O&M of the improved structural and non
                         structural measures.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Chongqing Municipality (CQM), with an area of 82,400 km2 and a total population of 33.3 million,
                         has over 45% of its population living in rural areas (this rural population percentage is higher than
Public Disclosure Copy




                         those of the other three provincial level cities of Beijing, Shanghai, and Tianjin with rural population
                         levels of 14%, 11% and 38% respectively). CQM has a total surplus rural labor estimated at over
                         8.45 million people. The strategic challenges of urban-rural disparity, regional disparity, and income
                         disparity at the national level are mirrored in Chongqing. As a result, Chongqing was selected by the
                         central government in 2007 as one of two pilot municipalities (the other being Chengdu
                         Municipality) to promote urban-rural integration as part of the national strategies of Western Region
                         Development, Urban-Rural Integration and Development prioritized in the country’s 11th and 12th
                         Five-Year Plans (FYP).

                         Chongqing municipality has an average annual rainfall of 1,025 mm, mostly concentrated in the
                         flood season from June to September, and significant rivers such as the Wujiang and Fujiang flowing
                         through the project counties. River flooding is a common challenge with a 1/10 flood protection level
                         at most county seats. Associated with economic and population growth, flood damage is increasing
                         as exposure to flooding rises. The response from CQM represented by the water resources bureaus at
                         the municipal and county levels is to invest heavily into the flood management structures and
                         introduce critical non-structural measures such as flood forecasting and early warning systems.
                         Considering the expected impacts of climate change, the risk exists that the magnitude of extreme
                         events will increase and further increase flood damage. Implementing non-structural measures will
                         be important to enable populations to live with the increasing potential flood risk associated with
                         climate change.

                         Water pollution from increasing urban populations and intensifying industrial activities is also
                         becoming a very important issue in many parts of the municipality including several of the project
                         counties. The municipality as a whole, located upstream of the Three-Gorges reservoir, lacks sewage
                         collection and treatment infrastructure and capacity. The government is currently working to narrow
Public Disclosure Copy




                         this gap with funding from different sources.

                         Typically located in deep river valleys and built on scattered small pockets of scarce land available
                         for urban construction, the growth and development of these county seats has been severely
                         constrained by these cities’ disadvantageous mountainous topography, in particular in the two sub-
                         regions of the northeast wing and southeast wing. Given their topographic and geological conditions,
                         county seats in Chongqing are exposed to relatively high risks of events such as river flooding, land
                         slides and soil erosion, and water pollution.

                         Good progress has been made in recent years to reduce flooding risks, in particular in the existing
                         built-up areas of these counties seats, through structural measures. However, flooding risks in the
                         new residential and industrial areas or those currently under development in the county seats need to
                         be fully managed before these county seats can perform their roles in Chongqing’s urbanization
                         process in a safe and sustainable manner. While the current population has experience with previous
                         flood events, the new residents will be unaware of the urban flood risk. Awareness raising and
                         emergency preparedness will need to be reinforced.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         CQM and its Project Management Office (PMO) have been working with the World Bank for two
                         decades and are familiar Bank safeguards policies and requirements. The borrower has engaged a
                           qualified institute to carry out an environmental assessment (EA) for the project. Initial work of this
                           EA consultant team on preparing the Term of Reference (ToR) for the EA demonstrates adequate
                           capability. Training on the Bank safeguard policies and relevant guidelines has been provided by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Bank team to the project entities and their EA consultant, and will continue throughout the
                           preparation process.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Chongwu Sun (EASCS)
                           Meixiang Zhou (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Based on the project proposal and preliminary
                           BP 4.01                                               screening during project identification, this
                                                                                 policy is triggered.

                                                                                 The project will have significant benefits in
                                                                                 terms of providing improved flood control and
                                                                                 water management infrastructure and services.
                                                                                 Investmentsunder Component 1 include civil
                                                                                 works for water infrastructure such as flood
                                                                                 control facilities, embankments, access roads,
                                                                                 and sewer collection pipes, depending on the
                                                                                 scale and actual needs of each county. Limited
                                                                                 land reclamation would be required for
                                                                                 construction and expansion of proposed
                                                                                 infrastructure facilities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 Potential environmental and social impacts
                                                                                 include: i) construction impacts related to
                                                                                 disturbance to river beds, water quality
                                                                                 degradation, soil erosion, noise, dust, and
                                                                                 shipping and disposal of construction waste; as
                                                                                 well as ii) operational impacts related to a
                                                                                 potential change in river flow and changes in
                                                                                 wastewater treatment capacity with increased
                                                                                 wastewater collection.

                                                                                 A category A is proposed mainly because the
                                                                                 location of some proposed sub-components
                                                                                 could be environmentally sensitive (e.g., flood
                                                                                 control and embankment in Pengshui County’s
                                                                                 Wujiang River section and Shizhu County’s
                                                                                 Longhe River section), though some impacts
                                                                                 may be site-specific and few would be
                                                                                 irreversible. An Environmental Impact
                                                                                 Assessment (EIA) and a standalone
                                                                 Environmental Management Plan (EMP) with
                                                                 appropriate mitigation measures and estimated
                                                                 cost for EMP implementation and monitoring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 will be prepared for the project. For a Category
                                                                 A project, an EA Summary will be prepared
                                                                 based on the information from the EIA and
                                                                 EMP. In the EA process, cumulative impact
                                                                 assessment could be conducted focusing on the
                                                                 proposed expansion of the existing WWTPs in
                                                                 two project counties.

                                                                 During preparation of the proposed instruments,
                                                                 the WBG’s Environmental, Health and Safety
                                                                 Guideline is considered an important reference.
                                                                 Due diligence review would be conducted if
                                                                 there are any existing facilities and projects
                                                                 related to the proposed project.

                                                                 Public consultation and information disclosure
                                                                 will follow OP4.01 requirements during EA
                                                                 preparation. At least two rounds of public
                                                                 consultation will be carried out with potentially
                                                                 affected persons and other relevant stakeholders
                                                                 through various methods, e.g., questionnaire
                                                                 surveys, interviews, and public meetings as
                                                                 needed. The full draft EA will be disclosed
                                                                 locally. Social impact studies should be
                                                                 designed and conducted as part of the EA.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   Based on the information provided, there are no
                                                                 significant natural habitats in the proposed
                                                                 project areas. However, since the project
                                                                 components are located in various places, a
                                                                 detailed survey will be conducted as part of the
                                                                 EA process. The EA consultant will be required
                                                                 to do a screening during EA preparation to
                                                                 determine whether the policy is triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    Based on current information available, the
                                                                 proposed project components are not located in
                                                                 forest areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The proposed project will neither procure
                                                                 pesticides nor result in an increased use of
                                                                 pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Based on current information available, two
                         BP 4.11                                 national level culture heritage sites are within
                                                                 the project impacted areas in Tongnan and
                                                                 Rongchang. During the EA preparation, detailed
                                                                screenings and a survey would be conducted
                                                                and local culture authorities would beconsulted.
                                                                A PCR management plan would be prepared, as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                necessary, with appropriate mitigation
                                                                measures.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    TBD   The Bank loan project sites are located in four
                                                                selected counties of Chongqing: Tongnan,
                                                                Rongchang, Liangping, and Shizhu counties.
                                                                Shizhu and Pengshui county, the two
                                                                southeastern sub-project areas, are Tujia and
                                                                Miao autonomous counties, with respectively
                                                                72.3% and 61.9% ethnic minority population.
                                                                Tujia are the majority population in Shizhu
                                                                County, while Miao are the majority population
                                                                in Pengshui County. Since most of the project
                                                                areas within the counties are in urban or peri-
                                                                urban areas without distinct ethnic minority
                                                                communities, the Tujia and Miao people in the
                                                                project areas are fully integrated, both socially
                                                                and economically, with the Han populations in
                                                                the area. No distinctive Tujia or Miao customs
                                                                exist there as the minority populations are
                                                                integrated with the surrounding communities.
                                                                They are usually not seen as IP under the Bank
                                                                IP term.
                                                                However, since the scope of project impacts has
                                                                not been fixed or determined at this stage, a
                                                                qualified consulting team experienced in social
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                assessments for World Bank-financed projects
                                                                will undertake further social screening,
                                                                including a social assesment, to further identify
                                                                and confirm if the ethnic minorities in the
                                                                project areas are IP under the term of definition
                                                                in OP4.10. On the basis of the results of the
                                                                social survey and analysis presented in the
                                                                social assessment report, the final determination
                                                                whether the Bank Indigenous People policy
                                                                (OP4.10) is applicable will be made by the Bank
                                                                task team before project appraisal. An IPP will
                                                                be prepared if the Bank IP policy 4.10 is
                                                                triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   The proposed physical activities consist of river
                         4.12                                   bank rehabilitation and improvement,
                                                                construction of related roads, sewers and
                                                                drainage pipes, and construction of bridges and
                                                                culverts.
                                                                On the basis of the draft project proposals and
                                                                                                                                 site visits, the project has significant land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition and resettlement impacts and each
                                                                                                                                 sub-project within the four counties will involve
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 land acquisition and resettlement activities as a
                                                                                                                                 result of construction under the various sub
                                                                                                                                 projects. As a result, the World Bank policy on
                                                                                                                                 involuntary resettlement (OP4.12) is triggered.
                                                                                                                                 Full Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) for each
                                                                                                                                 subproject plus a consolidate RAP will be
                                                                                                                                 required.
                                                                                                                                 Although most resettlement impacts by the
                                                                                                                                 project can be clearly scoped and investigated
                                                                                                                                 prior to appraisal, some impacts related to the
                                                                                                                                 installation of sewers and pipes may not be
                                                                                                                                 determined prior to project appraisal. In this
                                                                                                                                 case, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                                                                                                                 will be prepared.

                                                                                                                                 With regard to any possible linked activities in
                                                                                                                                 relation to ancillaries of the project civil works
                                                                                                                                 and sewer pipes to the project funded waste
                                                                                                                                 water treatment plants, further screening is
                                                                                                                                 undertaken during the preparation of RAPs and
                                                                                                                                 RPF. The Bank task team will ensure any
                                                                                                                                 confirmed linkage issue under the OP 4.12 be
                                                                                                                                 properly addressed and included in the
                                                                                                                                 safeguards instruments as necessary.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         Yes                           The proposed project will not directly finance
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 the construction and rehabilitation of any dams.
                                                                                                                                 However, dam safety might be linked to
                                                                                                                                 proposed sub-projects in Component 1.
                                                                                                                                 Therefore, the task team will hire a dam safety
                                                                                                                                 expert to carry out a dam safety evaluation
                                                                                                                                 during project preparation stage.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             Not applicable
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             Not applicable
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 04-Nov-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             Draft EA and EMP by the environmental consulting team will be prepared by pre-appraisal.

                             Draft RAP by the social consulting team will be prepared by pre-appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The dam safety review report by the independent dam safety expert will be prepared by pre-
                             appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Ji You

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                  Date: 28-Oct-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                                 Date: 29-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
