                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA8157
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Sri Lanka                          Project ID:    P150140
                            Project Name:      North East Local Services Improvement Project - Additional Fianancing
                                               (P150140)
                            Task Team          Seenithamby Manoharan
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                             Estimated   15-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: SASDL                                  Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (40%), Sub-national government
                                              administration (30%), Water supply (15%), Irrigation and dra inage (15%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (25%), Participation and civic engagement
                                              (25%), Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruct ion (25%), Public
                                              expenditure, financial management and procurement (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      20.30           Total Bank Financing:                    0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     0.00
                              AusAID-World Bank Partnership for South Asia                                                20.30
                              Total                                                                                       20.30
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           Original Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support local authorities in the Northern and
                           Eastern Provinces to deliver services and local infrastructure in a responsive and accountable manner.

                                                                       Page 1 of 12
                         Revised Project Development Objective is to support local authorities in the Northern and Eastern
                         Provinces and Adjoining Provinces to deliver services and local infrastructure in a responsive and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         accountable manner.
                         3. Project Description
                         The parent project was initially financed with IDA resources. Co-financing grant has been received
                         grant from the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade – DFAT -World Bank.
                         Partnership for South Asia to continue the activities supported by the project. The project activities
                         eligible for financing will remain as it is for the DFAT funds.

                         There are five components in the project:


                         Component 1: Infrastructure Service Delivery: The objective of this component is to improve the
                         quantity and quality of public goods delivered and maintained by Local Authorities (LAs). These
                         may include rural roads, drains, culverts and bridges, public buildings, markets and fairs, waste
                         disposal, rural water supply, parks, recreation facilities and libraries, nursery schools, playgrounds
                         and dispensaries.

                         Component 2: Institutionalizing Accountabilities: This component aims at ensuring that LAs
                         undertake public expenditures and deliver local services in a transparent and accountable manner. It
                         will strengthen upward and downward accountability systems at the LAs and will support: (a)
                         transparent and independent annual financial audits of LAs to ensure their financial accountability;
                         (b) social and technical audits of public expenditures undertaken by LAs to ensure effective use of
                         funds in line with citizen expectations; and (c) systems and processes to bring greater transparency in
                         LA affairs and strengthen citizen voice in planning, budgeting and monitoring. This component will
                         also support an Information Education & Communication (IEC) campaign aimed at disseminating
                         project related information to different stakeholders at all levels.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Building Capacities: This component aims at strengthening the service delivery
                         systems and capacities of the LAs to deliver their mandated services as well as strengthening the
                         monitoring capacities of the provincial and national level institutions. It will support (a) improving
                         the efficiency of current systems and procedures relating to planning, budgeting, financial
                         management, revenue management and procurement at the LA level, (b) improving the efficiency,
                         timeliness and follow up of the internal and external audits of LAs, (c) training elected
                         representatives and staff of LAs on financial management, procurement and project management, (d)
                         providing effective hand holding support to LAs on day to day basis, and (e) developing a long term
                         capacity building strategy for LAs. It will also support the strengthening of the capacities of the
                         national and provincial level institutions that play a critical role in the support and oversight of local
                         government functions.

                         Component 4: Assessments and Evaluation: This component will finance: (i) activities pertaining to
                         establishing a comprehensive monitoring system, including baseline assessment, repeater surveys of
                         social assessments, social accountability assessment, and capacity assessments; (ii) evaluating
                         technical and social audits and preparation of citizens score cards; and (iii) other needed analysis as
                         and when they are needed.

                         Component 5: Project Management: This component will support the key agencies at the central,


                                                                       Page 2 of 12
                         provincial and local levels that are involved in the day to day management of the project to procure
                         necessary consultant, equipment and operational support for the smooth implementation of the
                         project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project will be located in the North and Eastern Provinces of Sri Lanka. Both provinces are located in
                         the low country dry zone in Sri Lanka.

                         Northern Province: Northern Province has an area of 8,884 square kilometers. The province is
                         surrounded by the Gulf of Mannar and Palk Bay to the west, Palk Strait to the north, the Bay of
                         Bengal to the east and the Eastern, North Central and North Western provinces to the south.

                         The province is divided into two distinct geographic areas: Jaffna peninsula and the Vanni. Jaffna
                         peninsula is irrigated by underground aquifers fed by wells whereas the Vanni has irrigation tanks
                         fed by perennial rivers. Major rivers include: Akkarayan Aru, Aruvi Aru, Kanakarayan Aru,
                         Kodalikkallu Aru, Mandekal Aru, Nay Aru, Netheli Aru, Pali Aru, Pallavarayankaddu Aru, Parangi
                         Aru, Per Aru, Piramenthal Aru, Theravil Aru. The province has a number of lagoons, the largest
                         being Jaffna Lagoon, Nanthi Kadal, Chundikkulam Lagoon, Vadamarachchi Lagoon, Uppu Aru
                         Lagoon, Kokkilai lagoon, Nai Aru Lagoon and Chalai Lagoon. Most of the islands around Sri Lanka
                         are to be found to the west of the Northern Province. The largest islands are: Mannar island, Kayts,
                         Neduntivu, Karaitivu, Pungudutivu and Mandativu.

                           The Northern Province tends to be hot and dry in the dry season (February to September), and
                         moderately cool and wet in the wet season (October to January) when the North-east monsoons takes
                         place. Province's climate is tropical and therefore during monsoons there is always the chance of a
                         deluge. In the lowlands the climate is typically tropical with the average temperature is around 28º to
                         30º for the year. Relative Humidity varies from 70% during the day to 90% at night. Annual rainfall
                         is less than 1250 mm in the north west and south east of the Inland.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Majority of the people earn their livelihood as farmers, fishers and professionals in the civil and
                         business sectors. Agriculture is the prominent source of livelihood for vast majority of the people.
                         Jaffna peninsula is irrigated by underground aquifers fed by wells whereas the Vanni has irrigation
                         tanks fed by perennial rivers. Agricultural is the prominent source of income for the people of the
                         province. The Major agricultural crops produced in this province are Paddy, Chilli, Red Onion, Black
                         gram, Green gram, Cowpea, Groundnut, Bombay Onion. Other agricultural productions are Fruits
                         such as Banana, Mango, Papaya, Lime, Orange, Guava. Major vegetables grown in this province are
                         Beans, Capsicum, Tomato, Cabbage, Beet root, Carrot, Vendakkai, Snakeguard, Bitterguard, Brinjal,
                         Ashplantain, Long beans, Manioc and sweet potatoes.

                           The Province has a wide range of flora and fauna, although there are hardly much information of
                         their status. The Province has wide range of ecosystems spanning from deep jungles in the interior
                         lands, scrub forest, thorn forest, drylands, wetlands and as well as beaches, estuaries, salt marshes,
                         mangroves, and to coral reefs of the Bay of Bengal and Gulf of Mannar providing habitat to diverse
                         array of fauna and flora.

                          Eastern Province: Eastern province has an area of 9,996 square kilometers. The province is
                         surrounded by the Northern Province to the north, the Bay of Bengal to the east, the Southern
                         Province to the south, and the Uva, Central and North Central provinces to the west. The province's


                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                         coast is dominated by lagoons, the largest being Batticaloa Lagoon, Kokkilai lagoon, Upaar Lagoon
                         and Ullackalie Lagoon.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The climatic conditions of the Eastern Province are similar to Northern Province with similar wet
                         and dry periods. Eastern Province has long coastline. The average temperature is around 24º to 32º
                         for the year. Relative Humidity varies from 40% during the day to 100% at night. Average rainfall is
                         from 70 mm in January and 396 mm in October.

                          The mains economic activities are paddy cultivation and fishery. Paddy from this province accounts
                         for the highest proportion of the countries rice production.

                          The ecosystems present are similar to the Northern Province and very little is known of their
                         biodiversity.

                         With the Additional Financing the adjoining districts of Anuradhapura, Polonnaruwa, Puttalam and
                         Moneragala. Anuradhapura and Pollonaruwa belong to the North Central province that borders the
                         Eastern and Northern Province. Puttlam belond to the North western province and borders the
                         Northern Province while Monaragala belongs to the Uva province and borders the Eastern province.
                         These areas have dry climatic conditions similar to that of the Northern and Eastern province as they
                         too belong to the dry zone. Anuradhapura and Pollonaruwa are both sites of historic significance,
                         where the main city areas have been built around the remains of the archeological remains of two
                         historical cities of the same names. The area around the main cities, that encompass the district are
                         mostly Paddy and Chena land and settlements and populations are fairly dispersed.

                         The adjoining districts consist by population belong to all three main ethnic groups with large
                         majority of Sinhala community. No identifiable in digenous groups live in these districts.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Mohamed Ghani Razaak (SASDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Mokshana Nerandika Wijeyeratne (SASDI)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                         BP 4.01
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes
                         4.12



                                                                     Page 4 of 12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Currently all resettlement activities in the North and East have already been completed.
                              The following environmental issues can be identified in these areas: (1) loss and change of natural
                              habitats due to human settlements, agriculture activities and infrastructure expansion, , (2)
                              pollution due to inadequate sewage systems and solid waste management, (3) promotion of
                              destructive fishing in the coastal areas, (4) contamination of groundwater due to agriculture
                              intensification and poor drainage systems within human settlements impacting water quality, (5)
                              flooding due to poor drainage, (6) poor sanitation among settlements, (7) unplanned natural
                              resource extraction for development activities, and (8) contributing to the human-elephant conflict.
                              The project is expected to ensure that these issues are addressed as part of the Local Authorities
                              (LA) service delivery activities and this has been done successfully in the North and East over the
                              previous course of the project Nevertheless, the proposed activities of the LAs have a potential to
                              be negatively impacting on the environment and will need to take necessary actions to ensure that
                              impacts are avoided or minimized through suitable mitigation measures.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              LAs have been conducting their planning process and prioritization of activities that will be
                             funded through this project. Based on the preliminary list of potential activities that will be carried
                             out by the LAs, the following overall environmental impacts have been identified, which will need
                             to be taken into consideration and will require mitigation measures when planning and
                             implementation of these activities.

                               Impacts due to raw material extraction: Most of the proposed sub-project activities will require
                             number of natural resources such as sand, timber, metal, clay, etc. in order to implement the
                             activities thereby increasing the demand for these materials. This increased demand for raw
                             material will invariably intensify mining and extraction from the environment. In addition, due to
                             lack of consolidated planning for sustainable extraction of required quantities, it is difficult to
                             assess the resultant environmental damage and their long-term implications. Therefore, it is
                             important to consider the cumulative impacts of natural resource extraction and follow the
                             guidelines for extraction and management of the resources. All World Bank funded projects
                             should not extract resources or carry out any activities within protected areas gazetted under the
                             Flora and Fauna Protection Ordinance and forest reserves under the Forest Ordinance.

                              Impacts on environmentally sensitive sites: The locations of sub-projects are crucial in
                             determining the nature and magnitude of human-environment interaction. While reconstruction
                             activities may have less potential to create negative impacts on sensitive areas, new construction


                                                                        Page 5 of 12
                           activities will have high potential for negative impacts. Site selection continues annually as part of
                           the local authority planning exercises and during site selection for activities, the safeguard process
                           ensures that encroachment on environmentally sensitive areas such as forests, mangroves, lagoon,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           marshes, archaeological reserves, river/stream/tank reservations, etc. have not taken place.

                              Overall, the project is expected to have general positive and little or no negative social impacts.
                           The expected positive impact is improved delivery of public goods and services from LAs along
                           with effective community involvement in the decision making process in managing resources. The
                           potential adverse social safeguard related impacts, as anticipated at this stage, would largely result
                           from land acquisition and involuntary resettlement which may be required in connection with the
                           LA investments in rural infrastructure such as rural access, rural water, sanitation, street lighting,
                           rural markets, and intra & inter village infrastructure.

                            Most communities of Indigenous Peoples in Sri Lanka live in remote locations in the East, such
                           as in Muraththanai, Akkuranai, Minuminuththaveli, Paalchenai and Kathiraveli in the Batticaloa
                           district and in Muthur East in Trincomalee, while the “Veddah” community is found in bordering
                           villages of the East. While OP/BP 4.10 does apply to these reasonably well defined grouLA in the
                           interior of Sri Lanka, the issue of ethnic and religious affiliation is a larger factor in determining
                           vulnerability at national and local level in the present Sri Lankan context.

                             A separate Social Impact Assessment has been completed prior to appraisal to assess and to
                           identify (i) the overall direct and indirect social impact of the planned project activities on the
                           general conflict potential in the two provinces, (ii) how local authorities have been functioning
                           during the years of conflict, and implications hereof for the present project, and (iii) the perception
                           of the role and function of the local authorities by the various stakeholder grouLA and their needs
                           and future expectations.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The above mentioned direct impacts will also have a potential to cause indirect and long term
                           impacts to the environment and natural resources. Resource extraction has the possibility of
                           degrading the land, reducing the watershed and hence the quality and quantity of water available
                           for natural ecosystems, people and their economic activities unless it is sustainable. Also if the
                           investments are provided for activities to take place even closer to sensitive ecosystems, through
                           time there is a high potential for communities to encroach into these areas. Therefore, it is
                           essential to conduct sub-project specific environmental assessments once the types and localities
                           are identified incorporating mitigation measures taking direct, indirect, short-term and long-term
                           impacts into considerations.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not Applicable
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Sri Lanka is one of the leading countries in the South Asian region in enacting environmental
                           legislations. Its concern for environment dates back to over two and a half millennia. The
                           constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka under chapter VI Directive
                           Principles of State policy & Fundamental duties in section 27-14 and in section 28-f proclaim
                           “The state shall protect, preserve and improve the environment for the benefit of the community”,


                                                                      Page 6 of 12
                         “The duty & obligation of every person in Sri Lanka to protect nature and conserve its riches” thus
                         showing the commitment by the state and obligations of the citizens. The constitution of Sri Lanka
                         contains several provisions, relating to the environment. (i.e. Article 27 (14) and Article 28). The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         13th constitutional amendment introduced a new level of institution for environmental protection
                         and management. Therefore, provincial government also has legislative and executive power over
                         environmental matters. (i.e. Article 154 (A) 9,19 and (III) 17).

                          The National Environmental Act (NEA) provides conservation and development guidelines for
                         natural resources including water, forest, flora and fauna in Sri Lanka. The 1988 amendment
                         transformed the Central Environmental Authority (CEA) to enforcement and implementing
                         agency. The CEA issues Environmental Protection Licences (EPL) to medium and high polluting
                         industries under the section 23 (A) of the NEA. Since 1994 issues of EPL to low polluting
                         industries has been delegated to relevant local authorities. Under the section 7 (1), there is
                         provision to establish an Environmental Council to in collaboration with respective line agencies
                         to advise the CEA. The section 9 (1) provide necessary guidelines to establish District
                         Environmental Agency and District Secretary is the Chairman of each District Environmental
                         Agency. Therefore, CEA has special power to monitor, assess and advise the government on
                         critical environmental conservation, management and development issues. Under the
                         Environmental Management functions of CEA, widely included, land use management, natural
                         resources management and conservation, management policy for fisheries and aquatic resources,
                         management policy for wild life, management policy for forestry and management policy on soil
                         conservation. In addition to this, there are number of legislations in relation to LA services that
                         provide guidance to environmental safeguards in conduction such activities.

                          Specifically for the project, the burrower has developed an Environmental and Social Assessment
                         and Management Framework (ESMF) to ensure compliance with the World Bank’s environmental
                         and social safeguard policies and the relevant provisions under the National Environmental Act
                         (NEA), the Land Acquisition Act and the National Involuntary Resettlement Policy (NIRP) and
                         associated regulations. ESMF has been prepared in lieu of a project specific EA, as the specific
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sites of interventions within North and East are not known at this point of time. The ESMF
                         provides the necessary background for environmental and social dimensions to be built into the
                         design of the project in order to ensure that project implementation will take place in an
                         environmentally and socially sustainable manner. To aid this process, the ESMF sets a framework
                         of guidelines and procedures, which is intended to direct the process of planning and managing
                         environmental and social concerns of project activities. The ESMF will serve as a template
                         document, identifying potential risks and based on which specific social and environmental impact
                         assessments will be conducted for specific project components or sub-components later in the
                         project cycle.

                          The ESMF has been prepared taking the following Bank safeguards policies into consideration:
                          OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment
                          OP/BP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples
                          OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources
                          OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement

                          Certain types of activities that the LAs generally carry out as part of their service delivery such as
                         waste management has been dropped off from this project, as there possibilities of opening up for
                         adverse environmental and social issues due to land issues. The ESMF has identified a negative
                         list of activities that will not be supported in addition to the negative list of the NEA.

                                                                    Page 7 of 12
                          All infrastructure sub projects are planned to be assessed for environmental and social
                         safeguards. The economic returns of sub projects should not be compensated for the negative
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental and social impacts they will have on the project sites and the immediate
                         environment, as well as the wider environment. Once planning process of the LAs have been
                         completed and sub-projects and technologies have been identified environmental screening will be
                         undertaken to deduce the form of environmental instrument as per the ESMF that should be used
                         to ensure each subproject is environmentally sound. Due to the nature of the subprojects
                         envisioned the typical instrument will be an site specific Environmental Management Plan, which
                         will be implemented and monitored throughout the period of the subproject Based on the project
                         experience in the North and East an Environmental Manuel should be prepared to assist the
                         Additional Districts as well as all LAs prior to project commencement.



                         According to GOSL regulations, reconstruction and rehabilitation activities will not require an
                         environmental assessment. Similarly new constructions will require an environmental assessment
                         only if it falls into one of the prescribed categories. Since the sites are not yet known as yet, it is
                         too early to review on the level of analysis that Project Approving Agencies (PAA) recommend.
                         However, as per the World Bank safeguard policies, the burrower and CEA have agreed that all
                         sub-projects and sites will be subjected to an environmental assessment and be cleared before fund
                         disbursement takes place.

                         The ESMF Coordinator at the national level and Environmental and Social Safeguards Officers at
                         the provincial level will be directly responsible for all environment related work and will take the
                         lead role in initiating the processes described above and for obtaining GOSL and IDA concurrence
                         for each EA, as relevant. The Environmental Committee at the LA level will be responsible to
                         assess the proposals initially ensuring all necessary safeguards documents are in place and also
                         contribute to the monitoring process once the implementation commence. In addition, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementing agency is planning to conduct an independent audit once in every two years from
                         the date of project effectiveness to review environmental safeguards compliance.

                          Each sub-project and site will also be subject to a social screening to determine whether land
                         acquisition will be required or any indigenous communities will be affected by the planned
                         investment. The Local Authority Operations Manual will provide the institutional input that is
                         required to conduct the social screening and will provide technical guidelines for land acquisition
                         process, Indigenous People’s Plan and Chance Find Procedures. The LAOM also provides the
                         process to be followed for both environmental and social safeguard requirements.

                           OP/BP 4.01: All proposed and potential LA service deliver activities that require infrastructure
                         development will be subjected to the sub-project specific EAs. The composite GOSL
                         environmental clearance process, in principle, is consistent with World Bank environmental
                         assessment and public disclosure requirements. The exception being the screening criteria adopted
                         in the GOSL process under the NEA, where project thresholds are used to determine the type of
                         clearance required and the content of public consultation. However, under the CEA the PAA can
                         take a decision based on anticipated impacts even if the project does not fall into the listed
                         categories and under the CCA and the FFPO the director has the discretion to request for an EA.
                         However, all activities under the proposed project will be subjected to the EA process regardless
                         of the project threshold, prior to disbursement of funds.

                                                                    Page 8 of 12
                           OP/BP 4.12: Since the exact location of project interventions are not know at appraisal, and will
                         be determined on a continuous basis according to the annual grants received by the LA, the GOSL
Public Disclosure Copy




                         has prepared a Framework for Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement, consistent with the
                         requirements of the NIRP and OP/BP 4.12. In the event that land acquisition is unavoidable, the
                         land acquisition process, consultation and compensation procedures and principles will be as per
                         Sri Lankan Governmental policies and compliant with OP 4.12.

                          OP/BP 4.11: The proposed operations pose limited risks of damaging physical cultural resources
                         since subprojects will largely consist of small investments in community infrastructure and minor
                         public works. Further, the ESMF comprises a list of negative subproject attributes, which would
                         make a subproject ineligible for support, including any activity that would adversely impact
                         cultural property. The stipulated procedures for identification, protection from theft, and treatment
                         of discovered artifacts should be included in standard bidding documents. This is a key
                         requirement as per the ESMF prepared/

                          OP/BP 4. 10: No identifiable indigenous communities live in the proposed new project locations.
                         However, initial social screening of subprojects will be carried to determine whether there are
                         any IP communities as such in new project locations, and any of these communities are to be
                         directly impacted by any NELSIP sub-project.. Based on the social screening results, NELSIP will
                         decide the specific implementation modalities for such communities, if necessary.

                          Borrowers capacity to implement safeguards measures: The proposed implementation agencies in
                         the new Districts currently do not have dedicated staff to implement safeguards measures.
                         However, at the LA level as per the LA Act, there is provision for Social Audit Committee and
                         Environmental Committee with responsibilities to ensure that social and environmental issues are
                         taken care of in their activities. In addition to that, the project proposed to include an
                         Environmental and Social Coordinator and an Environmental and Social Officer at the provincial
                         level for the North and East. For the new districts the Social and Environmental Officer in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         PMU will overlook the implementation activities and will be supported by the Provincial level
                         coordinators.

                         Current Project Experience:

                         Overall, the experience so far has been the sites selected for various activities were existing sites to
                         be rehabilitated such as roads, markets, and drainage connected to roads. The initial assessments
                         after project implementation also indicated these sites are generally not selected within sensitive
                         areas. No impacts (direct or indirect) towards physical cultural resources have been observed. It
                         was also witnessed that impacts were often low in scale, as the sub-projects supported have been
                         small in scale. Hence the project has focused mainly on preparing site-specific Environmental
                         Management Plans (EMLA).

                         Since the design of the project was to improve internal capacity to manage small works as part of
                         the Local Authority mandate, an attempt is being made to internalize the preparation of site-
                         specific EMLA through the support from Provincial Council to the relevant Local Authority. Since
                         the budget allocations have to be managed by the respective local authority to ensure maximum
                         benefit towards community is achieved, the EMLA were simplified focusing more on site-specific
                         issues with more detailed specification on environment, health and safety included in the bid
                         document. The project has provided initial training to prepare EMLA and compliance monitoring.

                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                          Project has been preparing bi-annual progress reports on the implementation of EMLA and
                          identifying practical challenges during implementation. It is proposed that a more formal training
                          should be provided to the Technical Officers (TOs) of the Local Authorities on integrating
Public Disclosure Copy




                          safeguards into the local authority activities.

                          A mew monitoring mechanism was introduced at the Mid Term Review stage, which focused on
                          strengthening monitoring at both the LA level and District level and ensures documentation is
                          done stringently and in a timely manner to ensure safeguard measures are implemented at the sites.
                          This involved the active participation of EOs of the Project Appraisal Teams (PATs) based at the
                          ACLG level. Continuous training of TOs , on an annual basis to all TOs involved in project
                          implementation is currently being done and copies of all training material are shared with all LAs
                          to ensure basic guidelines are available for new recruits when necessary.



                          Implementation support missions have reviewed the documentation process and implementation of
                          safeguard requirements at the site-level and found to be improving since the commenceme nt of
                          the project, but have space for further improvements. Documentation has been generally prepared
                          in local languages and has been made available at the PCs, offices of CLGs, ACLG and LAs. It is
                          proposed that an environmental audit should be conducted in 2014.


                           Districts like Moneragala, Polonnaruwa, Anuradhapura and Puttalam in the adjoining provinces
                           were affected during the conflict which resulted in a severe strain on their already thin stretched
                           infrastructure and service delivery systems. Hence the Government of Sri Lanka is desirous of
                           extending the scope of NELSIP to selected LAs in the adjoining provinces that were significantly
                           impacted during the conflict. The same safeguard mechanisms and activities implemented in the
                           Northern and Eastern Province will be duplicated in to the adjoining Districts as well. Capacity
                           building programs on safeguards implementation will be conducted for all LAs as the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           commences activities in the adjoining Districts.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           ESMF has been shared with the Provincial Council (PC) staff, Commissioners of Local
                           Government (CLG, Assistant Commissioners of Local Government (ACLG) and LA staff of
                           North and East Provinces for their review and comments. Overall consultation with this group was
                           held on August 31, 2009 and their inputs and suggestions have been incorporated into the
                           Environmental and Social Management Framework. Specific activities in each LA are yet to be
                           identified and therefore consultations with other stakeholders will take place once the LA plans to
                           be funded are finalized. Consultation with affected people and other stakeholders in preparing the
                           EMLA will be an integral part of the project and will be held prior to the finalization of sub-
                           project proposals. All documents will be made available all times to public throughout the project
                           period at the PCs, offices of CLGs, ACLG and LAs.

                          The project has continued to hold consultations with affected people and stakeholders as activities
                          are selected for financing. The ESMF of the parent project was updated to reflect the co-financing
                          received by the DFAT and has been re-disclosed prior to commencing the additional financing and
                          consultations will be held with stakeholders in the additional four districts accordingly.



                                                                    Page 10 of 12
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       28-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    19-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Sri Lanka                                                         28-Feb-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       27-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    28-Feb-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       27-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    28-Feb-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         In-country disclosure of Resettlement framework/RAPs and IPP not required as these policies
                         triggered only as precautionary measures under the Additional Financing. Thus the previous
                         disclosure dates of the original documents under the parent project stand.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?




                                                                   Page 11 of 12
                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
Public Disclosure Copy




                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Seenithamby Manoharan
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                          Date: 24-Mar-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Shobha Shetty (SM)                                Date: 25-Mar-2014


                                                                       Page 12 of 12
