INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCIO83
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Dec-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         India                      Project ID:   P151744
Project Name:    Himachal Pradesh Horticulture Development Project (P151744)
Task Team        Manivannan Pathy
Leader(s):
Estimated        16-Nov-2015                Estimated     25-Feb-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFADR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Agricultural extension and research (40%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade
(40%), Crops (20%)
Theme(s):        Rural markets (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Trade facilitation
and market access (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     167.00             Total Bank Financing:   135.00
U       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               32.00
o          International Development Association (IDA)                     135.00
Total                                                           167.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to "increase the productivity, profitability and market
access of selected horticulture commodities in Himachal Pradesh".
The primary target beneficiaries of the project will be small and marginal horticulture producers in
selected production clusters across the state.


﻿C. Project Description
The project will address key well known gaps and deficiencies in the horticulture sector in Himachal
Pradesh and transform the sector (and the overall rural economy) to being more productive, efficient
and profitable. By doing so, it will contribute to the key aspects of the Gol and the Bank's CPS
strategic objectives related to faster and broader agriculture sector growth and inclusive
development. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to "increase the productivity,
profitability and market access of selected horticulture commodities in Himachal Pradesh". The
a       project will achieve the PDO by: (i) improving producer's access to knowledge and climate resilient
production technologies so that producers are able to respond to climate changes and climate
variability and emerging market opportunities; (ii) promoting investments in agribusiness, fostering
backward and forward linkages in the value chains for horticulture products, facilitating access to
finance for agribusiness entrepreneurs, and, where appropriate, push for process, regulatory and/or
policy change; and (iii) supporting the development of an improved platform for market-related
information and intelligence, alternative market channels developed outside of regulated markets,
piloting negotiable warehouse receipts for horticulture commodities and improved services provided
by modernizing the promising traditional wholesale markets.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project location and boundaries are yet to be established. However, it is expected that the project
will cover the select fruit and vegetable growing areas in the State. This could be in middle to high
Himalayas with gentle to steep slopes and some rocky outcrops that are characteristics of the
Himalayan terrain. Locations, particularly for apple orchards could be adjacent to forests. Overall, a
good altitudinal gradient is expected with respect to project investment locations. As regard to
physical characteristics of project-specific areas relevant to safeguard analysis, a clear understanding
would only emerge once areas of project intervention are identified across districts in the State.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Government of Himachal Pradesh is well versed with the Bank's safeguard policies as it has
over the past several years implemented the HP Roads and Mid-Himalayas Watershed Projects. The
Department of Horticulture of the State Government would be the nodal institution responsible for
implementing the project in collaboration with its line department. However as regards safeguard
policies, the Department of Horticulture has limited capacity and arrangements. To overcome this, it
is proposed to co-opt staff from the Environment Department by the Client. Once the staff is in place,
their capacity, understanding and experience on safeguard policies will be determined and
accordingly technical support will be provided. In addition, the Client has agreed to hire a suitable
Consultant/ Agency for addressing the safeguard issues and for undertaking the Environmental and
Social Assessment (ESA) and develop an Integrated Environment and Social Framework (ESMF)
during project preparation for complying with the Bank safeguard polices.
The safeguards analysis would draw from the experiences of the Agro Economic Research Centre
(AERC) based in Shimla, which is a Centre of Himachal Pradesh University, that earlier conducted a
few cross-sector environmental and social impact assessment studies. The project would trigger three
safeguard policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP4.01); Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09); and
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10). The applicability of any other policies, viz., Natural Habitats (OP/
BP 4.04) and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50), would be determined during the
course of ESA.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


﻿Anupam Joshi (GENDR)
Shailendra Kumar Mamgain (GENDR)
Shankar Narayanan (GSURR)
O
U       Smrithi Talwar (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The proposed project poses no serious risk in
OP/BP 4.01                              changing the natural environment and landscapes
within its boundaries as bulk of the investments will
take place in established orchards and farms.
However, some of the activities and approaches that
Himachal Pradesh Horticulture Developmental
Project would finance have the potential to influence
both the environmental setting and social fabric
within a given landscape and, therefore, an
assessment is required triggering this policy. The
potential impacts need to be identified and mitigated
for ensuring sustainability of investments. The
project has provisions of introduction of cultivars of
foreign origin and their demonstration trial in the
nurseries may have environmental concerns, which
may need to be looked upon. The Environmental and
Social Assessment and Management Framework will
be developed to identify and assess the impacts
besides developing the appropriated action to
mitigate the potential impacts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  TBD         The project investments will take place in middle to
high Himalayan regions and moderate to steep
terrain. Some of the proposed rural infrastructure and
agro-marketing infrastructure could result in
impacting the natural habitats, particularly the
drainage lines. However, this will be assessed during
the course of project preparation. Hence the
triggering of this policy is TBD.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          Proposed investments are unlikely to result in any
changes in forest management practices and will not
finance clear felling of forestlands.
Pest Management OP 4.09     Yes         This policy is triggered as the use of chemical
fertilizers and pesticides is prevalent at various
stages of apple and vegetable cultivation in the State.
Under the proposed Himachal Pradesh Horticulture
Development Project which is primarily intended to
enhance productivity through technological
intervention will have further chances of increased
use of chemical fertilizer and pesticides resulting in


﻿significant impact on the local environment including
implications for the quality of soil and moisture
regime, water environment, public health as well as
livestock population. To prevent and control the
chances of increased use of pesticides by farmers,
there is a need of greater public awareness and
understanding in the areas of interventions, besides
change in existing practices entailing extensive use
of chemical and pesticides. An Integrated Pest
Management Plan is to be developed for proposed
interventions across various districts. No banned
pesticides (formulated products that fall in WHO
classes IA and IB, or formulations of products in
Class II) would be procured.
Physical Cultural Resources    No            There is no excavation planned and investments will
OP/BP 4.11                                   not impact existing Physical Cultural Resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       Yes           Project interventions specifically target small and
4.10                                         marginal farmers, a category that includes Scheduled
Tribe (ST) families, particularly in Kinnaur and
Chamba districts. The project will ensure the
meaningful participation of ST families, taking into
account their special cultural needs.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/   No            Department of Horticulture already owns a network
BP 4.12                                      of nurseries that will be used for root stock storage
and multiplication. The proposed new marketing
yards will also be established on land already owned
by the government. No land acquisition would be
required.
Safety of Dams OP/l3P 4.37     No            There are no investments on new and/or existing
dams.
Projects on International      TBD           The proposed investments under the project,
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                         including small and micro irrigation investments, are
not at scale that may impact flows in the major
rivers. However, this will be assessed during the
course of project preparation. Hence the triggering of
this policy is TBD.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No            There are no disputed areas in the project areas.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Aug-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The detailed timeframe will be provided in the PAD-stage ISDS. The safeguards work will
progress along with project preparation.
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s):   ame: Manivannan Pathy
U       Approved By:
Regional Safeguards  Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)              Date: 06-Jan-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/    Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (PMGR)              Date: 13-Jan-2015
Manager:


