                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA1065
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Tuvalu                              Project ID:    P151780
                            Project Name:      Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - Tuvalu (P151780)
                            Task Team          John Virdin
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          23-Oct-2014                         Estimated   22-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GENDR                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Environmental policies and institutions (25%), Other environment and natural
                                              resources management (20%), Other public sector governa nce (20%), Rural
                                              policies and institutions (20%), Regional integration (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       7.00           Total Bank Financing:                      7.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                   7.00
                              Total                                                                                         7.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of this Program is to strengthen the management of selected Pacific
                           Island oceanic and coastal fisheries , and the critical habitats upon which they depend. This will
                           provide the basis for sustainable and increased economic benefits to the region from this resource.
                           More specifically, the Program will strengthen: (i) the national and regional institutions responsible

                                                                        Page 1 of 14
                         for the management of the oceanic fisheries; (ii) the local and national institutions responsible for the
                         management of the coastal fisheries; and (iii) the institutions responsible for the conservation of the
                         natural habitats that support them.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         The following components and activities of the PROP will be financed in Tuvalu:

                         Component 1: Sustainable Management of Oceanic Fisheries (US$5.77 m IDA)
                         The objective of this component is to help participating Pacific Island countries strengthen the
                         management of the region’s purse seine and long-line tuna fisheries.

                         1.1 Strengthen the capacity of TFD to sustainably manage the shared tuna fisheries

                         These activities would support strengthening the vessel day scheme (VDS) for the purse seine fishery
                         and extending a compatible management system to the long-line fisheries, in order to sustainably
                         increase the benefits to participating countries from access to these fisheries.

                         1.1.1 Disbursements to the Tuvalu Fisheries Department for costs linked to indicators for
                         strengthened tuna fisheries management (US$3.7 million IDA)
                          This activity would disburse funds directly to the Tuvalu Fisheries Department (TFD) to reimburse
                         against eligible expenditures for costs linked to indicators for strengthened management of the tuna
                         fisheries. Such eligible expenditures would be tracked and subject to World Bank safeguards.
                         Disbursements will be made annually to TFD (with an advance for the first year upon effectiveness
                         of the project) upon independent third-party verification that the following management measures
                         have been achieved (expenditures for each indicator are priced equally):

                         Improving compliance with the VDS for the purse seine tuna fishery:
                         •       The number of days fished in Tuvalu waters does not exceed its agreed annual allocation of
                         fishing vessel days (PAE)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •       100% of fishing vessel days are recorded annually according to agreed criteria
                         •       100% of fishing vessel days used and sold are disclosed annually to the PNAO Fisheries
                         Information Management System (FIMS) and the other parties

                         Expanding the coverage of the VDS or compatible system, for the tuna caught in Tuvalu’s national
                         waters:
                         •       100% of tuna catch within Tuvalu’s national waters that is encompassed within the VDS or a
                         compatible system

                         Additionally, though not linked to disbursements, these expenditures would also support TFD to
                         increase efficiency and flexibility as appropriate: Increasing efficiency and flexibility of the VDS:
                         •       (Yes/no) more flexible measures are applied, such as creating multi-zone and multi-year
                         days, development of competitive VDS marketing arrangements, long-term contracts, creation of
                         secondary markets, etc., that increase the value of a vessel day above the baseline

                         The expenditures reimbursed will support improved fishery sector governance and management
                         arrangements, surveillance to enforce fisheries management measures, improved real-time
                         monitoring of tuna fishing activities through the national observer program, as well as building
                         capacity for the TFD to participate in the regional fisheries management system. Eligible
                         expenditures would include:


                                                                       Page 2 of 14
                         •        Fuel and additional costs to support increased fisheries surveillance patrols (both sea and
                         aerial patrols), in complement to the Government’s funding from the Government of Australia, as
                         well as and the operational support (aerial patrols, ship-rider agreements, joint exercises) from the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         governments of Australia, USA, New Zealand and France;
                         •        Training and expanded participation of TFD staff in fishery industry economic, biological
                         and operational analysis to allow development of negotiating positions with industry and in PNA
                         meetings;
                         •        Expansion of the National Observer Program by at least 100 percent: recruitment of 10
                         additional observers and 2 debriefers per year, observer and debriefer training and work attachments,
                         participation in sub-regional observer hubs in Pago Pago , Nadi and elsewhere; and
                         •        Policy, legislative and human resource development leading to the establishment of a
                         sanitary competent authority for fish caught in the country’s waters.

                         In terms of fisheries surveillance, the country’s maritime police currently carry out surveillance and
                         enforcement of the country’s fisheries legislation on behalf of TFD, via a patrol vessel provided and
                         partially supported by the Government of Australia. The maritime police generally respond to
                         specific infractions noted by the TFD through connection to the satellite-based vessel monitoring
                         system run by FFA, as well as conducting periodic patrols and inspections of fishing vessels. The
                         eastern and western borders of the country’s exclusive economic zone are generally the areas of
                         highest incidences of infractions, and the priority for patrols. The maritime police are increasingly
                         conducting joint patrols with the Government of Kiribati in neighboring waters under provisions of
                         the Niue Treaty, as well as providing surveillance services in the waters of Nauru and Tokelau.
                         Additional cooperation arrangements will be developed under Niue Treaty subsidiary arrangements
                         during 2014. However, the key obstacle to continued and even increased patrolling, and to
                         implementing improved patrol strategies (aimed at detecting unlicensed vessels, rather than ensuring
                         compliance by authorized vessels), is lack of resources to support the operating costs of the vessel,
                         particularly fuel.

                         In addition to increased sea patrols, TFD is currently in negotiations to purchase aircraft airtime to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         increase aerial surveillance, particularly of its eastern border with the high seas. Current discussions
                         center on the use of a Cessna aircraft based in Apia, Samoa, which would be chartered under
                         cooperative arrangements to carry out aerial surveillance of the EEZ of Samoa, Cook Islands,
                         Tokelau, Kiribati, Tuvalu and (possibly) Niue. This arrangement should enable aerial surveillance of
                         the Tuvalu EEZ on a monthly basis. Under this scenario the importance of surface patrols increases,
                         since this is the primary way in which infringements detected by aerial surveillance are followed up
                         and punitive actions implemented.

                         1.1.2 Goods and services needed for achievement of the disbursement-linked indicators (US$1.77
                         m)
                         Financing will be provided for procurement of specific goods and services needed to meet the
                         disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) for strengthened management of the tuna fisheries. Services
                         will include technical assistance to TFD staff in fishery industry economic, biological and
                         operational analysis. Goods and equipment will include the acquisition of hardware and software for
                         real-time monitoring by observers; and the hardware, software and bandwidth expansion to enhance
                         internet access for TFD, enabling utilization of vessel monitoring and fisheries information
                         management systems, and real-time e-reporting from vessels.

                         1.2 Ensure an equitable distribution within Tuvalu of the benefits of sustainably managed tuna
                         fisheries

                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                         These activities would support Tuvalu to make informed decisions and investments to ensure an
                         inclusive distribution of the benefits from sustainably managed tuna fisheries, via potential
                         establishment of community VDS funds.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.2.1 Pilot Community VDS Funds (US$0.3 million IDA)
                         Tuvalu will be one of the first countries in the region to pilot the development of Community VDS
                         Funds, potentially with one fund per island. These funds would provide a vehicle to secure a share of
                         tuna access revenues for communities. Technical assistance and advice procured through FFA and/
                         or other sources will support the development of a range of options and scenarios for discussion
                         among national Government, Island Councils, community organizations and other concerned
                         stakeholders. The consultative process would lead to selection and implementation of the most
                         favorable options, and ultimately the establishment of more equitable fishery resource rent-sharing
                         mechanisms in Tuvalu.

                         Component 2: Sustainable Management of Coastal Fisheries (US$1.13 m IDA; US$0.91 m GEF)
                         The objective of this component is to support participating countries to sustainably manage defined
                         coastal fisheries, focusing on those with the greatest potential for increased benefits, i.e. coastal
                         fisheries such as bêche-de-mer (BDM) that (i) can generate export earnings for the country, and/or
                         (ii) support livelihoods, food security and dietary health.


                         2.1     Sustainable Management of Targeted Coastal Fisheries
                         These activities would be implemented by TFD, to provide dedicated technical assistance and small
                         goods and operating costs to communities to strengthen management and value addition around
                         targeted coastal fisheries. Tuvalu’s coastal fisheries are under the jurisdiction of the local council
                         (Kaupule) on each of the nine islands, with support from TFD. The community on each island has
                         formed a fishers’ association, which operates under the umbrella of the national Tuvalu Fishermen’s
                         Association, and has in most instances led the development of some form of management measures
                         for approval by the Kaupule. Many of these measures need further development or assistance to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         achieve full implementation.

                         The status of coastal fisheries in Tuvalu is poorly known, though to date they have been relatively
                         protected as a result of isolation and lack of access to markets. For this reason, the TFD now aims to
                         work more closely with communities to take stock of the resource base, and start to develop or
                         improve management measures and institutions in advance of increasing pressure on the resources.
                         Access to Tuvalu’s outer islands is difficult and costly and this has in the past impeded progress in
                         these areas.

                         This component will support procurement of goods and the operating costs and services for TFD to
                         conduct resource and socio-economic assessments in selected islands, and then to provide ongoing
                         support to each of the islands to develop and implement management plans that would be approved
                         by the island councils. Specific items to be supported include:
                         •        Coastal fisheries resource assessments, including:
                         o        Initial resource and socio-economic surveys, community consultations and fisheries
                         management planning in (approximately) 5 of the outer islands, complementing funding provided by
                         the Government of New Zealand to commence work in two islands during 2014; and
                         o        Re-survey of all islands after 3 years and 6 years;
                         •        Coastal fisheries monitoring, including ongoing fishery catch and effort data monitoring
                         using the smartphone based ‘HapiFis’ system currently under development by USAID in the

                                                                      Page 4 of 14
                         Solomon Islands;
                         •        Stakeholder management of targeted fisheries, including annual follow-up monitoring and
                         community consultations in all outer islands in between the initial assessments and re-surveys, to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         develop and implement management plans that would be approved by the island councils; and
                         •        Restoration and management of Funafuti lagoon and the fisheries it supports. Funafuti, the
                         capital island in Tuvalu, presents a special case which is quite different from the country’s other
                         islands. Urban drift has led to significant overcrowding (more than 50 percent of the national
                         population now lives on Funafuti) and the presence of sub-communities from all of Tuvalu’s islands
                         leads to reduced compliance of decisions made by traditional leaders. High population densities
                         (6,500 people in an area of only 2 sq. km) have led to problems of sewage and solid waste disposal,
                         and these have in turn impacted on lagoon water quality and fish resources. Management of the
                         lagoon ecosystem has not kept pace with population growth in Funafuti. For this reason, the PROP
                         will finance a number of goods and technical assistance needed to support TFD to improve
                         management of the Funafuti lagoon and its fishery resources, via procurement of a small research/e
                         nforcmeent vessel for the lagoon (including dive and underwater survey equipment, water quality
                         sampling and assessment equipment, laboratory equipment for ciguatera toxin sampling and
                         assessment, and IT hardware and software), enhanced resource monitoring and surveys, development
                         with stakeholders of a management plan for the lagoon fishery and the wider ecosystem, and
                         enhanced awareness-raising and surveillance for enforcement. These efforts will build upon the
                         GEF-financed ‘Ridge-to-Reef’ project and the data collection, information, planning and training it
                         supports in Funafuti, in order to finance the direct management and implementation costs, notably
                         surveillance and enforcement activities.

                         Component 3: Sustainable Financing of the Conservation of Critical Fishery Habitats
                         This component aims to help identify revenue streams to sustainably finance the conservation of
                         critical habitats that underpin oceanic and coastal fisheries in the region. Towards this objective, the
                         component will include activities to establish: (i) Pacific Marine Conservation Development
                         Financing Mechanisms to support the growing number of large marine protected areas (MPAs) in the
                         region; and (ii) a pilot Pacific Blue Carbon regional program for small to medium scale fishery
Public Disclosure Copy




                         habitats. The aim of this component is not to provide sustainable financing for all regionally-
                         significant fisheries habitat conservation efforts, but rather to provide the catalytic upstream finance
                         needed to identify, develop and achieve consensus on the mechanisms to deliver such financing, and
                         then to help secure this financing from other sources, for example from the GEF, international
                         foundations, etc. Thus the financing from this component aims to leverage significant additional
                         finance to the region for conservation of critical fishery habitats. This component also provides
                         climate change co-benefits by supporting mitigation, in the form of conservation of vegetated coastal
                         habitats that sequester significant amounts of carbon. This component will be implemented at the
                         regional level.

                         Component 4: Regional Coordination, Implementation Support, Training and Monitoring and
                         Evaluation (US$0.1 m IDA)
                         The objective of this component is to provide regional coordination, implementation support and
                         program management, to ensure a coherent approach to program implementation and wide
                         dissemination of results and lessons learned; as well as regional and national implementation support
                         and training as needed for the program to achieve its objectives. Towards this objective, this
                         component would include support for national program management, monitoring and evaluation, as
                         well as collaboration with the regional program support unit located within FFA (see Annex 7).

                         4.1     National program management, monitoring and evaluation (US$0.1 m)

                                                                      Page 5 of 14
                         This would include the costs of additional staff needed for the Project Supporting Team Office of the
                         Tuvalu Aviation Investment Project to provide financial management for a national designated
                         account for the PROP, to support the Fisheries Department.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Tuvalu is the third-smallest independent country in the world, comprising nine, widely separated
                         inhabited islands (4 reef islands and 5 coral atolls) and a population of around 12,000, half of which
                         lives on the main island of Funafuti. The country has a very large Exclusive Economic Zone (slightly
                         under 1 million sq. km) relative to the size of its landmass (26 square kilometers) and tuna fisheries
                         provide the single most important source of revenue. On a per capita basis, Tuvalu is the most
                         fishery-dependent nation on earth, and has the highest rate of fish consumption of any country.

                         Tuvalu appears well aware of the importance of protecting its fragile environment and conserving
                         scarce natural resources. Traditionally Tuvaluans have depended heavily on the more easily
                         accessible resources of the nearshore reef environment for their immediate subsistence. Other reef-
                         related ecosystems in Tuvalu include small inland ponds with mangrove-covered fringes. Tuvalu’s
                         marine park, Funafuti Conservation Area, covers a large area of over 40 sq km on the western side of
                         the lagoon and includes six islets and adjoining reef and waters in that zone. It is possible that it will
                         expanded to include some of the outer islands.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Valerie Hickey (GENDR)
                         Olha Krushelnytska (GENDR)
                         Ross James Butler (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The aim of the project is to help improve
Public Disclosure Copy




                          BP 4.01                                              environmental and resource quality in Tuvalu in
                                                                               order to increase the economic benefits generated
                                                                               by the goods and services from healthy ocean
                                                                               ecosystems. As such, the overall impact of the
                                                                               project is expected to be highly positive and none
                                                                               of the eligible investments include activities that
                                                                               would generate significant risk or irreversible
                                                                               adverse impacts in the coastal or oceans fisheries
                                                                               targeted by the project. However, some
                                                                               investments under Components 1 and 2 may
                                                                               generate minor to moderate site specific and time
                                                                               bound adverse environmental impacts that can be
                                                                               readily mitigated through standard mitigation
                                                                               measures, when screened properly.

                                                                               Additionally, Component 3 (Sustainable
                                                                               Financing of the Conservation of Critical Fishery
                                                                               Habitats) might result in creation of the Marine
                                                                               Protected Areas (MPAs), in which case any
                                                                               potential access restrictions will be addressed


                                                                       Page 6 of 14
                                                                     through a detailed Process Framework (Annex E).

                                                                     The project also envisages TA for sustainable
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     financing and potential of protected areas, which
                                                                     may lead to potential minor environmental impact
                                                                     downstream. The Interim Guidelines on the
                                                                     Application of Safeguard Policies to TA
                                                                     Activities in Bank-Financed Projects and TFs
                                                                     Administered by the Bank is applied. Mechanism
                                                                     for administering safeguards in TA activities will
                                                                     include integration of safeguard policy
                                                                     requirements into the Terms of Reference of
                                                                     studies. As such, the safeguard documentation
                                                                     prepared for the project applies equally to the TA
                                                                     component(s) and Terms of References for the
                                                                     TA activities will be approved by the Bank to
                                                                     ensure the consultancy outputs comply with the
                                                                     Bank safeguard policies.

                                                                     At this stage in project design, the specific
                                                                     investments that may generate minor to moderate
                                                                     adverse impacts include: small scale
                                                                     infrastructure works to allow for inspection of
                                                                     fish catch at landing sites and restocking of
                                                                     beche-de-mer and establishment of the associated
                                                                     small scale drying facilities. Potential adverse
                                                                     impacts will be limited to waste management,
                                                                     construction noise, and health and safety of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     workers.

                                                                     Environmental and Social Management
                                                                     Framework (ESMF) has been prepared to guide
                                                                     investments that may generate any adverse
                                                                     environmental impact. Screening form will be
                                                                     used to screen for environmental and social
                                                                     impacts.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           Project activities will not involve significant loss
                                                                     or degradation of natural habitats. Most of the
                                                                     project activities will be in the marine areas
                                                                     (coastal and ocean) of Tuvalu, which are known
                                                                     sites rich in biodiversity. All project activities are
                                                                     designed to enhance positive and sustainable
                                                                     returns to these important habitats.

                                                                     The Program level ESMF contains measures to
                                                                     properly manage the risk of any unforeseen
                                                                     adverse environmental impact on natural habitats,



                                                             Page 7 of 14
                                                                         including critical natural habitats, as well as
                                                                         measures to enhance the project's positive
                                                                         environmental outcomes.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes           OP4.36 was triggered for the whole Pacific
                                                                         Islands Regional Oceanscape Program, as
                                                                         component 3 will include the technical assistance,
                                                                         scientific and survey expertise, and legal and
                                                                         regulatory support in order to enable participating
                                                                         countries to pilot trials to assess their blue carbon
                                                                         potential, limitations and opportunities and
                                                                         participate in blue carbon markets, and would
                                                                         create conservation incentives for coastal
                                                                         communities to conserve the mangrove habitats,
                                                                         the policy is triggered. Specific sites and activities
                                                                         in Tuvalu, if any, will be identified during the
                                                                         project implementation.

                                                                         The program level ESMF includes a screening
                                                                         form to ensure that the negative impacts on
                                                                         mangrove forests of any downstream activities
                                                                         under Component 3 are addressed, and any
                                                                         positive impacts are enhanced. TOR for the
                                                                         studies proposed under sub-component 3 will
                                                                         integrate policy requirements of OP 4.36.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project will not purchase, distribute, apply or
                                                                         dispose of pesticides, including bactericides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The project will not involve any major civil
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.11                                         works. Small scale infrastructure works are
                                                                         foreseen to allow for inspection of fish catch at
                                                                         landing sites and restocking of beche-de-mer and
                                                                         establishment of the associated small scale drying
                                                                         facilities. Given the small scale works involved,
                                                                         the policy is not expected to be triggered. A
                                                                         chance finds procedure is included in the ESMF
                                                                         and EMP.




                                                                 Page 8 of 14
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes           OP4.10 was triggered for the whole Pacific
                                                                        Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - series of
                                                                        projects, which is designed to include any of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        11 PICs who are member countries of the World
                                                                        Bank and are eligible to participate upon their
                                                                        readiness. Some of the countries in PICs have
                                                                        indigenous peoples.

                                                                        However, in Tuvalu this policy has not been
                                                                        triggered, as according to the World Bank
                                                                        assessment there are no indigenous people in the
                                                                        country.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           Project activities may require small-scale coastal
                         4.12                                           land acquisition. It is expected that market-based
                                                                        or voluntary donation will be the common
                                                                        approach. Any voluntary land donations will meet
                                                                        the World Bank requirements through the
                                                                        application of the Voluntary Land Donation
                                                                        Protocol appended to the ESMF in Annex D.

                                                                        Although it is considered unlikely, certain project
                                                                        activities may involve the involuntary acquisition
                                                                        of land and/or removal of assets. Accordingly, the
                                                                        policy will be triggered and a Resettlement Policy
                                                                        Framework (RPF, presented in Annex C) has
                                                                        been prepared. Subsequently, Abbreviated
                                                                        Resettlement Action Plans will ensure that all
                                                                        affected persons are compensated for involuntary
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        acquisition of land and/or removal of assets at full
                                                                        replacement cost.
                                                                        In case of downstream establishment of the
                                                                        MPAs, which could potentially restrict access to
                                                                        resources, IAs will select appropriate safeguard
                                                                        instrument(s) according to the responsibilities
                                                                        defined in the ESMF (and in particular the Annex
                                                                        on Process Framework).

                                                                        To address potential restriction of access to
                                                                        resources, a Process Framework (PF) has been
                                                                        prepared in compliance with requirements stated
                                                                        in OP 4.12 (See Annex E of the ESMF).
                                                                        Neither this project nor the possible downstream
                                                                        investments from project’s TA will involve
                                                                        building dams nor depend on an existing dam
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No            Neither this project nor the possible downstream
                                                                        investments from project’s TA will involve
                                                                        building dams nor depend on an existing dam.


                                                                Page 9 of 14
                            Projects on International           No              Following discussion with LEGEN and the RSA,
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                it was agreed that there will be no impacts from
                                                                                this project or its possible downstream
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                investments on international waterways as
                                                                                described under OP 7.50.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 Any project activities in areas which may be
                            7.60                                                disputed will be declared ineligible and not
                                                                                included in the project.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The overall impact of the project is expected to be highly positive and none of the investments
                              include activities that would generate significant risk or irreversible adverse environmental or
                              social impacts.

                             The project includes investments for both ‘physical’ goods and services, as well as ‘soft’ activities
                             such as technical assistance. Most of the physical investments would be made at the national level,
                             while ‘soft’ activities would be implemented at both the national and regional level.

                             Examples of the type of activities (salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                             analysis), which have the potential to incur adverse environmental or social impacts are as follows:
                             - Component 2, Sub-component 2 may include support to restock beche-de-mer if it is deemed a
                             viable method to sustainably restore stocks. If so, hatchery facilities based on native brood stock
                             would be used. Support would include supplying fishers with juveniles to restock near shore
                             habitats. This activity will not involve introduction of non-native species nor involve the purchase,
Public Disclosure Copy




                             distribution, use or disposal of bactericides during implementation. However, investments in the
                             area of small enterprise development associated with bêche-de-mer valued added processing may
                             include installation of small scale civil works (e.g., solar dryers) for drying.
                             - Component 3 investments related to the TA for sustainable financing of MPAs, and potentially
                             blue carbon. Activities under Component 3 Subcomponent 1 will support research to assess the
                             unique physical and ecological aspects of the MPAs that would generate ecosystem services (like
                             spawning or feeding grounds for tuna which migrate beyond EEZs of host nations) and that could
                             be incorporated into a system of payment for environmental services. Subcomponent 2 will
                             include TA in order to assess blue carbon potential and participate in blue carbon markets, and will
                             help identify potential blue carbon sites. Small scale infrastructure works are not expected to be
                             financed by the project.

                              The scale and likelihood of adverse impacts arising from these activities is limited, and the types
                              of mitigation activities well-known and proven. As such, the project is found to be Category B
                              interventions.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The potential impacts of the project will be identified during the preparation of the project
                              activities for Tuvalu. The ESMF provides guidance for the project implementation agencies on the


                                                                       Page 10 of 14
                           preparation of appropriate safeguard instruments to respond to the potential impacts found during
                           the preparation.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.
                           These will be considered within the project in consultation with all affected stakeholders and
                           knowledgeable and interested peoples.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The ESMF was prepared under the PROP to outline the process by which potential adverse
                           impacts will be identified and robust instruments prepared as part of each project.

                          Project implementation will involve a single agency as the national focal point entity and one or
                          two regional agencies involved in implementing regional activities and overall program
                          coordination and monitoring. These include:
                          •        Fisheries Department of Tuvalu’s Ministry of Natural Resources (TFD)
                          •        Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA)
                          •        The Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat (PIFS) in regard to coordination and monitoring of
                          regionally executed activities.

                          FFA, representing its member countries participating in the PROP, has experience with World
                          Bank safeguards because of the link to IDA-financed operations. TFD has a general knowledge on
                          bank safeguard policies as it was briefed on the PROP safeguard requirements during the
                          preparation missions. Capacity of TFD is currently low, however the unit has an external technical
                          expert from the government of new Zealand able to advice on safeguard policies. During the
                          project implementation, TFD will hire a PROP Project Coordination, who will also be supported
                          by the FFA Regional Support Unit.

                          The World Bank will provide necessary training and development of staff to the Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                          implementing agency in the first year of the implementation to build its capacity and provide
                          implementation support during the actual determination of the range of activities to be included in
                          the “menu” of country’s support.

                           Bank’s Interim Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard Policies to Technical Assistance (TA)
                           Activities in Bank- Financed Projects and Trust Funds Administered by the Bank will apply for
                           the TA provided by the project. Accordingly, Terms of References for the TA activities will be
                           approved by the Bank to ensure the consultancy outputs comply with the Bank safeguard policies.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The ESMF requires an inclusive, participatory community needs assessment process, screening
                           criteria, and forms to document broad community support and consensus on priority subprojects.
                           Subproject Consultation and Action Plans will be developed in the early part of implementation.
                           Community consultations will be facilitated and documented by suitably qualified personnel in the
                           Project Management Unit. Ongoing monitoring and community consultations by such personnel
                           will assess whether broad community support is maintained during implementation.

                          Project stakeholders include both men and women from affected communities whose livelihoods
                          are implicated and/or who depend on migratory fisheries; the private sector (fishing industry from


                                                                    Page 11 of 14
                           harvesting through to value chains / processing and investment); the public sector (national
                           ministries, regulatory and trade promotion authorities); and international bodies including regional
                           fishery bodies. The numbers and specificity of stakeholders can only be determined once the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           precise nature and location of the activities under each project are identified.

                           Draft ESMF was first circulated among all implementation agencies on July 28, 2014 for review.
                           Subsequent consultations on the Environmental and Social safeguard policies where conducted on
                           August 15, 2014 in Majuro, RMI with representatives from the fisheries agencies of FSM
                           (NORMA), RMI (MIMRA), Solomon Islands (MFMR) and Tuvalu (TFD), as well as the
                           representatives from the FFA, PNAO and SPC. At this meeting, NORMA, MIMRA, MFMR, TFD
                           and FFA (implementing agencies) agreed on the process of preparing and incorporating safeguard
                           instruments in the implementation arrangements. After the consultations, countries worked with
                           the FFA and agreed on the final version of the ESMF, which was formally submitted to the Bank
                           on September 23, 2014 by the FFA on behalf of all IAs. In addition to the regional consultation in
                           RMI, national consultations were held in Tuvalu and Solomon Islands – to ensure stakeholder
                           awareness and feedback in regard to the specific country context within the Component 2 (which
                           is not applicable to FSM). Consultation minutes are attached in the ESMF.

                           ESMF Disclosure: The ESMF was disclosed on October 23, 2014 and is available through the
                           World Bank website (http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/docsearch?query=E4664), as
                           well as through the website of the FFA.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                   23-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                23-Oct-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tuvalu                                                        23-Oct-2014
                           Comments: This refers to the disclosure of program-level ESMF
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                   23-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                23-Oct-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tuvalu                                                        23-Oct-2014
                           Comments: This refers to the disclosure of program-level ESMF
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                   23-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                23-Oct-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tuvalu                                                        23-Oct-2014
                           Comments: This refers to the disclosure of program-level ESMF
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the


                                                                     Page 12 of 14
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies




                                                                    Page 13 of 14
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: John Virdin
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Josefo Tuyor (RSA)                             Date: 19-Nov-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Christophe Crepin (PMGR)                       Date: 19-Nov-2014
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 14 of 14
