                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA7456
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Congo, Democratic Republic                 P145965
                                                                         Project ID:
                                              of
                            Project Name:     Human Development Systems Strengthening (P145965)
                            Task Team       Luc Laviolette
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       07-Feb-2014                         Estimated   06-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTHW                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (34%), General education sector (33%), Health (33%)
                            Theme(s):         Other social protection and risk management (25%), Health system performance
                                              (25%), Education for all (25%), Administrative and civi l service reform (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      15.00           Total Bank Financing:               15.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                  15.00
                              Total                                                                                      15.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project development objective is to strengthen select management systems for
                           education and health services in targeted geographic areas.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 5
                         The project is organized into three components as follows:

                         Component 1: Information Systems (approx. US$7.4 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The overall objective of this component is to enable data-driven decision making, leading to more
                         efficient use of resources and improved human development outcomes. The targeted ministries
                         currently have very limited reliable and timely data on which to base decisions and thus the
                         investments are of less than optimal efficiency. The project will address that situation in the
                         following three ways: i) by enhancing the capacity and decentralizing the information management
                         and mapping system for education; ii) by enhancing the capacity and decentralizing the information
                         management and mapping system for health; and iii) by generating additional information on
                         bottlenecks to service delivery, to complement the systems in i) and ii), through two rounds of
                         Service Delivery Indicator (SDI) surveys.

                         Sub-Component 1.1: Education Program Information Management System and GIS School Mapping
                         (approx. US$2.65 million)

                         The overall goal of this project sub-component is to improve the governance of education
                         information and to initiate education system mapping in DRC at all levels (national, education
                         provinces and sub-provinces). The project will provide technical assistance at the central level as
                         well as in 5-6 provinces, both at the provincial and sub-provincial levels. In selecting the project
                         areas, priority will be given to the two provinces that have been receiving support from the World
                         Bank supervised Global Partnership for Education PROSEB project.

                         Sub-Component 1.2: Health Information Management System (HMIS) and GIS Health Infrastructure
                         Mapping (approx. US$2.35 million)

                         The overall goal of this project sub-component is to improve the management of health information
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and health mapping in DRC at all levels (national, provincial and health zone). The project will
                         provide technical assistance at the central level as well as in 2-3 provinces, both at the provincial
                         level and at the health zone level. In selecting the provinces and health zones, priority will be given
                         the areas that have been receiving support from the World Bank financed health sector project.

                         Sub-Component 1.3: Service Delivery Indicators (approx. US$2.4 million)

                         The project will support the government to carry out two rounds of national SDI surveys (one at the
                         start of the project and another 3 years later). The surveys will complement the information collected
                         through the program management information systems by adopting the perspective of citizens
                         accessing a service. The SDI process will thus provide a periodic service delivery report card on
                         education and health care. Being part of the group of countries in Africa which are participating in
                         the SDI process will also enable DRC to compare itself to benchmarks and to share knowledge on
                         approaches to improve service delivery.

                         Component 2: Systems for Safe Essential Medicines (approx. US$3.25 million)

                         The overall objective of this component is to enhance the capacity of the system that provides safe
                         and effective essential medicines. During project preparation, a few high priority interventions
                         aiming at building strong foundations of a sustainable pharmaceutical system were identified based


                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                         on their fit with the unmet needs of the sector, their expected value for money and their expected
                         contribution to the next World Bank-financed health sector project in DRC and to programs backed
                         by other donors. For instance, instead of unrealistically tackling the unregulated for profit private
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sector the project will act at the central regulatory level. The component is hence divided in three
                         subcomponents targeting specific dimensions of the pharmaceutical system: (i) regulatory system
                         strengthening; (ii) public procurement system strengthening; and (iii) public supply chain
                         management enhancing.

                         Component 3: Analytical Products / Project Management (approx. US$4.35 million)

                         The overall objective of this component is three-fold: i) to ensure that targeted Ministries have access
                         to high quality analytical products to inform decision-making and systems development; ii) to enable
                         DRC to learn from and share its lessons with the global community, particularly from/with other
                         fragile and conflict-affected states; and iii) to ensure good coordination and management of the
                         project. There are currently limited specialized analytical skills in the Ministries and thus a lack of
                         analytical products to inform policies and guide decisions. This project will finance the following
                         two sub-components:

                         Sub-Component 3.1: Analytical Products for Systems Strengthening (approx. US$2.5 million)

                         This will enable the targeted Ministries to build the analytical basis, through a series of studies,
                         required for informed decisions.

                         Sub-component 3.2: Project Monitoring/Evaluation, Management and Communication (approx. US
                         $1.85 million)

                         This will finance the provision of goods, consultant services, training and operating costs to support
                         project monitoring/evaluation and management, with a view to ensure efficient, effective, transparent
                         and accountable project delivery. The project will also finance a communications strategy to i)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         enhance internal communications within Ministries and between participating Ministries; ii) mitigate
                         the risks related to these systems reforms; iii) communicate project results to target audiences.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Institutional capacity building at national, provincial and sub-provincial levels is the focus of the
                         project. No social safeguards policies have been triggered for this project. There will be no civil
                         works, nor investments that would induce social exclusion.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexandra C. Bezeredi (AFTSG)
                         Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         No               The project is not expected to have any
                          BP 4.01                                               environmental impacts.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               The project will not affect natural habitats.




                                                                        Page 3 of 5
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No              The project does not involve forests or forestry.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Pest Management OP 4.09              No              The project does not involve pest management.

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No              The project does not involve physical cultural
                            BP 4.11                                              resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No              There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                                 area. The project is focused on systems building
                                                                                 in several government ministries.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No              The project will not induce land acquisition
                            4.12                                                 leading to involuntary resettlement and/or
                                                                                 restrictions of access to resources and livelihoods.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No              The project does not involve dams.

                            Projects on International        No                  N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Institutional capacity building at national, provincial and sub-provincial levels is the focus of the
                              project. No environmental safeguards policies have been triggered for this project. There will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                              no civil works. Enhanced planning may contribute to enhanced work environment and protection,
                              to the benefits of education, health and social protection service clients.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The expected short term social benefits of the proposed project will be limited to job creation for
                              local consultants and logistics personnel. The long term social benefits are expected to be
                              nationwide. Potential social benefits would include, but are not limited to: enhanced planning and
                              delivery of education, health and social protection services at national level and local level;
                              improved public and private planning of education, health and social protection services; job
                              security; induced development; improvement in the safety and quality of education, health and
                              social protection services. The project will benefit children, women, men and elderly and the
                              physically challenged by responding to their education, health and social protection planning
                              needs.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Not applicable.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              Not applicable.


                                                                         Page 4 of 5
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              Not applicable.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                             Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the             Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                             be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                             issue, been prepared
                             Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the OP?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Luc Laviolette
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                          Date: 05-Feb-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Trina S. Haque (SM)                                Date: 05-Feb-2014


                                                                         Page 5 of 5
