                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                       Report No.: ISDSA7742

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Apr-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Apr-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Ghana                              Project ID:    P146923
                                                         Parent         P115247
                                                         Project ID:
   Project Name:      AF Ghana Social Opportunities Project (P146923)
   Parent Project     Ghana---Social Opportunities Project (P115247)
   Name:
   Task Team          Suleiman Namara
   Leader:
   Estimated          21-Mar-2014                        Estimated   27-May-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
   Managing Unit:     AFTSW                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                         Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (10%), Other social
                     services (80%), Public administration- Other social ser vices (5%), Irrigation and
                     drainage (5%)
   Theme(s):         Social safety nets (10%), Social risk mitigation (70%), Rural services and
                     infrastructure (10%), Rural non-farm income generation (8 %), Natural disaster
                     management (2%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      50.00           Total Bank Financing:                  50.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                         Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                                50.00
     Total                                                                                      50.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:




                                              Page 1 of 12
Is this a           No
Repeater
project?

2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The objectives of the Project are to improve targeting in social protection spending, increase
   access to conditional cash transfers nationwide, increase access to employment and cash-
   earning opportunities for the rural poor during the agricultural off-season, and improve economic
   and social infrastructure in target districts.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   The Project Development Objectives (PDO) of this Additional Financing is to improve targeting
   of social protection programs and provide income support to poor households through LEAP
   grants and LIPW infrastructure in targeted districts.
3. Project Description
Proposed project Development Objectives - Additional financing (AF): The revised objective is
improve targeting of social protection programs and provide income support to poor households
through LEAP grants and LIPW infrastructure in targeted districts.

Component One. Social Protection Policy and Systems Strengthening
This component builds on the findings of the rationalization study that was funded under component
1 of the original project. This component will have two sub-components: sub-component 1A: Social
Protection Policy formulation and sub-component 1B: Social Protection Systems Strengthening.

Sub-component 1A: Social Protection Policy Formulation.
The objective of this sub-component is to strengthen coordination, financing and implementation of
social protection programs through the preparation of a national social protection policy, strategy and
an implementation action plan. This sub-component will finance technical assistance, consultations,
workshops, and policy dissemination. Policy formulation will be done in consultation with other
government agencies involved in Social Protection and donor partners. Additionally, this sub-
component will provide technical assistance to the Ministry of Finance to develop mechanisms
within the current budget framework to allocate and monitor social protection spending more
efficiently. Analytical work to support social protection budget allocation efficiency will also be
supported. The component will further support capacity building for staff of the Ministry of Finance
and the National Development Planning Commission to improve understanding and appreciation of
social protection issues through trainings, study tours and in country field visits.

Sub-component 1B: Social Protection Systems Strengthening.
The objective of this sub-component is to support strengthening of social protection systems through
the establishment of the Ghana National Household Registry (GNHR). The registry is meant as a tool
to improve efficiency, effectiveness, and expand the coverage and scope of social protection
interventions in Ghana. This sub-component will finance electronic data collection and processing on
households using a Proxy Means Test (PMT) that will be reviewed and updated using the 2013


                                             Page 2 of 12
Ghana Living Standards Survey data (GLSS 6) data. This process - the National Targeting System
(NTS) - would be used to build the GNHR on poor households eligible for selection by social
protection programs. The GNHR would be a database of households, their members, basic living
conditions and PMT scores. The GNHR will be used across social protection programs (including
LEAP, LIPW, and NHIS) for targeting beneficiaries, thus removing redundancy across programs in
the targeting processes. Implementation will be sequenced, starting with the Upper West region in
2014, Upper East Region in 2015 and Northern Region in 2016. Geographical maps will be prepared
for the rest of the country. It is expected that the roll out will follow these maps.

Component Two. Labor Intensive Public Works Implementation and Capacity Building.
The objective of this component remains unchanged. The AF will support the scale up of LIPW to
reach more beneficiary households. Innovations, particularly to manage oversubscription, improve
targeting, and enhance delivery and monitoring of payments will be introduced. The implementation
capacity of the local assemblies will continue to be strengthened through capacity building and
training. This component will be reorganized under AF with two sub-components: sub-component
2A: Labor Intensive Public Works and sub-component 2B: Capacity Building.

Sub-component 2A: Labor Intensive Public works (LIPW).
The AF will not only deepen LIPW activities in the existing 49 districts but also scaled up to
additional six new districts. The basic design of the LIPW component and menu of sub-projects
would be maintained. Selection of new districts will be based on the original poverty formula used
under the original project. Labor content of the original project was approximately 50%. The other
50% of the component funds went to contractors and materials. To maximize labor content under
AF, the breakdown of sub-projects would be 20% for feeder roads, 30% for climate change activities
and 50% for small earth dams and dugouts. To manage oversubscription, the AF activities would
support: (i) improved planning to enable site managers to take into account a realistic number of
work days and tools that are available per cycle; and (ii) in addition to self-targeting, use community-
based targeting (CBT) to further narrow down the eligible beneficiary pool; (iii) the computerization
of time sheets to enable faster processing of payroll information as well as introduction of an
electronic payment mechanism to improve efficiency. For sustainability, income generating activities
financed under a US$ 3million Japanese Social Development Grant will complement LIPW
activities. The project will continue to use qualified contractors to ensure that small earth dams and
dugouts are prepared in strict conformity with standard designs and specifications. Details on quality
improvements for sub-projects will be detailed in the revised Operational Manual.

Sub-component 2B: Capacity Building for LIPW.
The original capacity building component was implemented by the MLGRD but some activities
supported by the MoGCSP. Under AF, this component has been restructured to enable each of the
implementing Ministries implement their own capacity building activities. This sub-component will
finance capacity building activities for implementation of LIPW in selected project districts. Several
distinct sets of capacity building activities under the original project will continue to be supported
under AF, specifically: (i) establishing a LIPW supportive policy and institutional framework; (ii)
capacity building to support LIPW implementation aimed at decision-makers, DA technical staff,
relevant line agencies, and contractors; and (iii) ongoing capacity building for DAs in the technical
and management capacities of LIPW target districts. In addition, this sub-component will support the
implementation of social accountability and grievance redress mechanisms, development
communication activities, capacity building for the introduction of ICT-based operational
enhancements (such as electronic registration and electronic timesheets linked to e-payments),
impact evaluation, and other activities to support the overall objective of strengthening LIPW.

                                             Page 3 of 12
Component Three. Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty (LEAP) Implementation and Capacity
Building.
This component will be restructured under AF to have two sub-components: sub-component 2A:
LEAP Grants and sub-component 2B: Capacity Building for LEAP

Sub-component 3A: LEAP Grants
The objective of this sub-component is to support the scale up of the LEAP grants to benefit more
households. Under the original project, the LEAP grants were meant to be conditional, the PAD was
not clear whether these were hard or soft conditions. In practice, soft conditions have been
implemented. Beneficiaries are sensitized about sending children ages 5-15 to school, and ensuring
regular clinical visits and full immunizations for all children in beneficiary households. The
implementation of these soft conditions needs to be better structured through regular workshops
under additional financing. The AF will continue to finance cash grants to additional beneficiary
households. Broadly, the government has increased its allocation to LEAP from GHc 7.5 million in
2010 to GHc 38 million in 2014. Going forward, the financing of this component will be restructured
to utilize regular project investment financing modalities, with periodic payments made directly to
the MoGCSP for the LEAP cash grants.

Sub-component 3b: Capacity Building for LEAP
In order to enhance LEAP implementation, this sub-component would provide financing to
strengthen the program’s operations at the national, regional and district levels. Specifically, the sub-
component would finance the development of a Management Information System for the program (to
be coordinated with the GHR) that will support data entry and analysis at the national and
decentralized levels, delivery charges associated with the new electronic payments mechanism, and
training and capacity building of staff to implement LEAP more effectively. This sub-component
would provide funding for development communication activities, as well as monitoring and
evaluation (i.e. regular spot checks of operation activities and impact evaluation studies), and social
accountability and grievance redress systems for the program. In addition, the sub-component would
also ensure and support the improved implementation of soft conditions through structured
workshops, regular and documented dissemination fora for LEAP beneficiaries.

Component Four. Project Management and Coordination.
The objective of this component remains unchanged. Overall project implementation will be
undertaken by the Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development (Components 2 and 4A)
and the Ministry of Gender Children and Social Protection (Components 1, 3 and 4B). The Chief
Directors of the two ministries will maintain overall financial responsibility of project funds. Policy
implementation guidance will be provided by a project steering committee that will be chaired by the
Honorable Minister of Gender, Children and Social Protection and co-chaired by the Honorable
Minister of Local Government and Rural Development. The committee will comprise of relevant
ministries, departments and agencies of the government and civil society organizations (a full list is
elaborated in Annex 4 under revised implementation arrangements and support). The steering
committee will approve annual work plans, budgets, quarterly and annual progress reports and
mobilize government support (further details are elaborated in the Project Operational Manual). The
committee will also be staffed by 1 technical staff who will consolidate project quarterly and annual
reports for steering committee review and approval, before submission to the relevant accounting
officers of the two ministries and the Bank.

Under the AF, this component will be restructured into two sub-components to reflect the addition of

                                              Page 4 of 12
the MoGCSP as an independent implementing agency: sub-component 4A: Project management and
coordination by the Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development, and sub-component 4B:
Project management and coordination by the Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Protection.

Sub-component 4A: Project management and coordination by the Ministry of Local Government and
Rural Development.
The objective of this sub-component is to support activities related to project management and
coordination, equipment and vehicles, and incremental operating costs under the GSOP National
Coordination Office and Regional Coordination Officers for LIPW sub-projects.

Sub-component 4B: Project management and coordination by the Ministry of Gender, Children and
Social Protection.
The objective of this sub-component is to support activities related to project management and
coordination, equipment and vehicles, and incremental operating costs under the MoGCSP.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The existing parent project was started in 49 districts within three of the administrative regions in the
Northern Savannah Zone: Upper East Region, Upper West Region, and Northern Region and later
extended to cover 20 districts in the Ashanti, Brong-Ahafo, Central, Eastern, Greater Accra, Volta
and Western Regions which lie within transitional, high forest zones and coastal grasslands. The
project has several hundred community level small scale sub-projects, predominantly in rural areas,
situated typically on communal lands. The Additional financing will enable a geographical scaling of
the same subproject activities to cover an additional 6 districts for a total of 55 District Assemblies
within the existing regions. The overall safeguard analysis from the parent project will not
experience a significant change because the geographical characteristics of the receptor
susceptibilities within the regions will not change.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Martin Fodor (AFTN3)
Franklin Kuma Kwasi Gavu (AFTN3)
Felix Nii Tettey Oku (AFTN3)

 6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project triggers OP4.01 due to the planned
 BP 4.01                                              construction activities. The LIPW component of
                                                      the project involves renovation and construction
                                                      activities which could have an adverse impact on
                                                      the general environment. An ESMF and RPF has
                                                      been prepared to address potential environmental/
                                                      social impacts associated with the demand driven
                                                      sub-projects and mitigation measures related to
                                                      the project activities.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

 Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No




                                              Page 5 of 12
Pest Management OP 4.09           No

Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The project may require pieces of land as part of
4.12                                            the rehabilitation of rural roads and community
                                                infrastructure. The proposed activities are not
                                                expected to trigger the involuntary resettlement.
                                                Nonetheless, the project has developed an RPF
                                                which will guide the implementation of its
                                                activities. The RPF will be use d to guide the
                                                process of land acquisition and provision of the
                                                appropriate compensations to affected
                                                individuals, if applicable.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         Yes           The LIPW component of the project will involve
                                                renovation of existing small earth dams and
                                                dugouts which could have adverse impact on the
                                                general environment. The Additional Financing
                                                will finance the rehabilitation of small earth dams
                                                and dugout of mainly 5-6m high. A Dam Safety
                                                Plan has been developed to ensure safety of the
                                                small earth dams and dugouts during and after
                                                rehabilitation. The dam safety plan describes the
                                                types of small earth dams and dugouts to be
                                                rehabilitated and their size and storage capacity.
                                                According to the plan, the rehabilitated small
                                                earth dams may exceed 500m in length because
                                                of the flat topography of the north, but the project
                                                will pre-select small earth dams where the storage
                                                capacity does not exceed 250,000m3 for a 5m
                                                dam. The project will ensure that capacity does
                                                not exceed 500,000m3 for a 6m high small earth
                                                dam; and that selected small earth dams are
                                                generally not located near settlement areas. Only
                                                feasibility studies will be undertaken for small
                                                earth dams of heights 6-10m high. There was a
                                                general low technical capacity regarding local
                                                designers, contractors and supervisors to monitor
                                                and ensure the sound construction of small earth
                                                dams and dugouts in Ghana. To mitigate these
                                                concerns, the project has provided on the job
                                                training for workers, Ghana Irrigation
                                                Development Authority (GIDA) staff and others
                                                associated with the rehabilitation and



                                        Page 6 of 12
                                                       maintenance of the small earth dams and dugouts.
                                                       Water/Dam users associations have also been
                                                       used to perform regular dam maintenance and
                                                       consistent monitoring throughout the project
                                                       period; this mechanism will continue to be
                                                       supported by the project. External expertise will
                                                       be used where necessary and the ESMF will be
                                                       used to ensure adequate and responsive mitigation
                                                       measures are applied.
   Projects on International           Yes             OP/BP 7.50 was triggered because the project
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                involved renovation of between 10- 30 small
                                                       earth dams and dugouts on tributaries of an
                                                       international waterway (Black and White Volta)
                                                       An exemption for the riparian notification was
                                                       granted for the project on the following basis: (i)
                                                       the engineering findings confirmed that the
                                                       incremental water use would be insignificant; (ii)
                                                       the rehabilitation works are to be located in
                                                       tributaries of an international waterway where
                                                       these tributaries run exclusively in one state and
                                                       the state is the lowest downstream riparian.
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     Environment: Potential impacts (minimal and localized) from subprojects such as dust emission,
     noise and vibration, burrow pits, generation of construction waste, small earth dam and dugout
     failures, siltation and modification of flowing waters and health & safety of workers and general
     public have been readily avoided, minimized and/or mitigated through measures which included
     minimizing ground clearance, redesign of roads to ensure flood prevention, provision of settling
     basins to remove silt and debris before discharge to streams, provision of buffer zones of
     undisturbed vegetation between construction sites and water bodies and re-vegetation of dam
     banks. The climate change subprojects have provided positive environmental impacts through
     afforestation of otherwise degraded lands within the beneficiary communities and this positive
     impact will be sustained under the additional financing. No significant and/or irreversible impacts
     are anticipated with any of the associated subproject works.

    The Additional Financing will finance the rehabilitation of small earth dams and dugout of mainly
    3-6m high. A Dam Safety Plan has been developed to ensure safety of the small earth dams and
    dugouts during and after rehabilitation. The dam safety plan describes the types of small earth
    dams and dugouts to be rehabilitated and their size and storage capacity. There was a general low
    technical capacity regarding local designers, contractors and supervisors to monitor and ensure the
    sound construction of small earth dams and dugouts within the beneficiary District Assemblies
    during parent project inception. Safeguard management trainings have been given to key project

                                               Page 7 of 12
 implementing staff since project inception. Water/Dam users associations have also been used to
 perform regular dam maintenance and consistent monitoring throughout the project period; this
 mechanism will continue to be supported by the project. External expertise will be used where
 necessary.

 Social: The potential social and resettlement impacts that may arise as a result of the sub-projects
 include the loss of agricultural lands, residential buildings and structures, livelihood (business
 premises and structures), non-productive fruit and shade trees, access to resources such as grazing
 land, and economic trees such as shea-butter trees. The choice of Sub-projects however will first
 seek to avoid or minimize involuntary resettlement or land acquisition as much as possible.

 Notwithstanding the minimal social impacts from the sub-projects the Government of Ghana has
 prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) with the purpose of clarifying applicable
 resettlement principles, organizational arrangements and design criteria.

 The objectives of the RPF are consistent with avoiding or minimizing involuntary resettlement or
 land acquisition where possible; where unavoidable, ensuring that compensation and resettlement
 are designed and implemented with sustainability as the prime focus; and ensuring that affected
 persons are supported to improve their livelihood or at least restore them to pre-displacement
 levels.

 The RPF sets out the legal and administrative framework, which includes the systems of land
 ownership and tenure as well as the socio-economic characteristics of beneficiary districts. It also
 details the consultation processes, eligibility criteria, and methodology for valuation of assets and
 a clear entitlement policy and compensation payment processes. In order to ensure that
 implementation of the RPF is on course and accountability aligned, the RFP has articulated
 monitoring and evaluation with clear delineations of monitoring indicators and the responsibilities
 of agencies.

 The RPF outlined sections on organizational arrangements for implementation and monitoring and
 a template for the design of a resettlement action plan should that become necessary after
 identification of exact project sites or locations. The project will prepare a resettlement action plan
 or an abbreviated resettlement action plan (given the number of affected people) if land-seizure,
 displacement, or resettlement occurs or when people’s livelihoods are affected due to limited
 access to assets or source of livelihood during implementation. The RPF outlines measures for
 building the capacity of officials responsible for implementing the RPF.

  The additional financing will not trigger any new safeguard policies since it involves the same
  scope of subproject works within similar geographical locations of the parent project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  No potential indirect and/or long-term environmental and social impacts due to future activities in
  the project area are anticipated due to small scale, distributed nature of the sub-projects.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  The alternative of not including renovation of existing small earth dams and dugouts under the
  LIPW component of GSOP was given a serious consideration during the preparation of the parent
  project in 2010. It was thought the local people to be recruited for the works lacked the skills to

                                            Page 8 of 12
  mitigate the potential risks associated works. However, given that these small earth dams and
  dugouts are the life-line of people in the beneficiary regions and the Bank’s overall mission is
  poverty reduction, it was deemed worthwhile to invest in the small earth dams and dugouts if the
  risks could be mitigated effectively. A number of dam engineers were therefore brought into the
  project to make the assessment of the small earth dams and dugouts to be rehabilitated and it was
  determined that the risks were minimal given the height and scale of these small earth dams. The
  environmental categorization for the project remains unchanged (Classified as Category B given
  that that associated subproject works are unlikely to lead to significant adverse environment
  impacts). A dam safety plan has been prepared and implemented since project inception and about
  one hundred and twenty five (125) small earth dams and dugouts have been renovated so far
  without any significant environmental concerns. This additional financing will continue to fund
  the rehabilitation of such small earth dams and dugouts. Participatory planning will be used to
  assess the siting of constructional works under the LIPW components to ensure minimal
  environment social impact and maximum communal benefits.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The Government of Ghana prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework
  (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and a Dam safety plan in compliance with the
  triggered policies. An exemption for the riparian notification was granted for the project on the
  following basis: (i) the engineering findings confirmed that the incremental water use would be
  insignificant; (ii) the rehabilitation works are to be located in tributaries of an international
  waterway where these tributaries run exclusively in one state and the state is the lowest
  downstream riparian. The additional financing will not trigger any new safeguard policies since it
  involves the same scope of subproject works within similar geographical locations (geographical
  up scaling) to that of the parent project. Therefore the existing safeguard due diligence frameworks
  (ESMF, RPF and Dam Safety Plan) for the parent GSOP will be implemented for the proposed
  Additional Financing.

 The Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development (MLGRD) has overall responsibility
 for the project, but the implementation of the component activities will be handled by different
 agencies, including District Assemblies (DAs) and the National Disaster Management
 Organization (NADMO). The implementation of the Community-Based Rural Development
 Project (CBRDP) has given the MLGRD a level of capacity in safeguards as per World Bank
 policy requirements which has been sustained under the GSOP operation. Under the CBRDP and
 in collaboration with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) of Ghana, the MLGRD
 developed a manual to train selected District Assembly officials while processing the
 environmental impact assessment for sub-projects at the community level. This combination of an
 agency well-versed in national and World Bank safeguard policies and requirements (i.e. EPA-
 Ghana) and ministries with on-the ground experience in projects similar to the SOP has fostered a
 solid working relationship since project inception.

 The ESMF and RPF have identified capacity-building activities for the various key stakeholders to
 ensure understanding of safeguards and application of implementation and monitoring measures to
 achieve sustainability and to avoid or reduce negative impacts. For both the RPF and ESMF, a
 budget estimate for the required training and capacity building has been included. Since the
 inception of the parent project in 2010, various trainings sessions have been offered to key
 stakeholders to help with the implementation of the ESMP. At the District Assembly level, GIDA
 key staff and DA works department’s engineers have been trained under an ILO/GSOP Technical


                                            Page 9 of 12
 Assistance. Site supervisors of contractors have also been trained on safeguard issues. The GSOP
 regional engineers have also been trained to offer backup support. Currently it is a pre-contractual
 requirement for contractors to receive training and certification in safeguard awareness training
 through the ILO/GSOP before LIPW renovation works contracts are awarded.

 As part of the project implementation and supervision, the Bank team has visited sampled project
 sites. The objective of the site visits was to assess effectiveness of implementation of safeguard
 due diligence since project inception. The sites visited included those with subproject works on
 small earth dam/dugouts, climate change (afforestation), feeder roads construction and socio
 economic infrastructure (schools). It was noted during the visit that the project has demonstrated
 good environmental and social practice. All the sampled sub-projects have been screened (copies
 inspected at both the GSOP regional office and at beneficiary District Assembly) as per
 requirements of the ESMF to assess potential environmental and social impacts. Screening,
 registration with the National Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and issuance of permits
 (where required) have also been undertaken for the sampled subprojects (copies of the sampled
 subprojects were inspected at both the regional GSOP and EPA offices). Consultation/disclosure
 requirements with beneficiary communities have been met via EPA and ESMF screening
 processes for all the sampled subprojects. Field observations showed renovation works on the
 feeder roads, dugouts and small earth dams were minor and localized which pose no or minimal
 environmental risks (constructional and operational) to potential receptors within their immediate
 environs. The renovation works have strengthened the overall stability of the existing dugouts
 through the placement of ripraps, compaction of locally derived earth material (at optimum
 moisture content) on the surfaces of existing embankments (up and downstream). The construction
 works were undertaken by contractor supervisors who have hitherto received prior training and
 certification by experienced engineers from the Ghana Irrigation Development Authority (GIDA).
 Additionally a dam safety manual is in place to address potential dam safety risks.


  A progress status report has been prepared as an addendum to the ESMF to assess the
  effectiveness of the existing mitigation measures. The report shows an overall satisfactory rating
  for both performance and compliance of the existing environmental management plan. The
  Government of Ghana will use the mitigation measures within the existing safeguard instruments
  (ESMF and RPF) for the continuous management of the potential impacts from the sub project
  works under the Additional financing.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  During the preparation of the parent project's ESMF and RPF, there was extensive consultation
  with stakeholders at community, district and the national level. The stakeholders included the
  project beneficiaries (who are mostly poor and vulnerable), staff of the CBRDP at the national
  level, District Assembly officials, and community opinion leaders, including chiefs and ordinary
  citizens. The process for preparing these safeguards documents requires consultations and
  information disclosure. The required disclosures were completed in-country and at the World
  Bank’s Infoshop respectively on 04/14/2010, 04/13/2010 for the ESMF and 02/10/10, 02/11/10.

 Consultations were undertaken within representative district assemblies (Northern Region- East
 Gonja District, Upper East Region - Nabdam District, Central Region-Assin South District, Upper
 West -Jirapa District, Ashanti Region- Sekyere Kumawu District) within the proposed areas for
 the additional financing from February 10-12, 2014 as done prior to appraisal of the parent project.


                                           Page 10 of 12
  The objective of the consultations was to involve and sensitize project beneficiaries, solicit their
  views and inputs, and identify potential impacts and gauge their understanding of the ESMF. The
  consultations involved group discussions with a number of people, including women and children,
  and interviews with local institutional heads like District Assembly officials and NGOs. Overall,
  the project has been overwhelmingly viewed as beneficial to the poor, vulnerable and socially
  disadvantaged in the community.

  Additionally, the design of the parent project was heavily informed by a Participatory Poverty and
  Vulnerability Assessment (PPVA), supported by DFID, UNICEF, and the World Bank, which was
  commissioned to inform the design of poverty reduction policies in Ghana with a focus on the
  Northern Savannah and other related regions. Results of two rounds of PPVA fieldwork was
  integrated into the project design. Both rounds of work were carried out in twelve communities in
  northern Ghana: three in the Northern Region, three in the Upper West Region, and six in the
  Upper East Region. The PPVA also undertook fieldwork in five communities in the south of
  Ghana, with a focus on northern migrants working outside of their home area.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                        20-Feb-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                     17-Mar-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Ghana                                                              17-Mar-2014
  Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                        20-Feb-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                     17-Mar-2014
"In country" Disclosure

  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 report?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?



                                            Page 11 of 12
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Sector Manager review the plan?
   OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
    Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
    Bank?
    Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
   OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
    Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
    Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
    Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Suleiman Namara
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                       Date: 01-Apr-2014
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Stefano Paternostro (SM)                          Date: 30-Apr-2014




                                              Page 12 of 12
