                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC14789

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Dec-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Feb-2017
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Tanzania                        Project ID:      P150523
                            Project Name:      Tanzania: Resilient Natural Resource Management for Growth (P150523)
                            Task Team          Daniel Mira-Salama,Dinesh Aryal
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          20-Mar-2017                     Estimated        31-Aug-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEN01                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    100.00                    Total Bank Financing:        100.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                      100.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           21.      The Project Development Objective (PDO) and the Global Environment Objective (GEO) of
                           the proposed project are to improve natural resources management in priority areas of Southern
                           Tanzania. By achieving the proposed PDO, the Project will assist the GOT in addressing rural
                           poverty which has been persistent in and around the country’s parks and game reserves, home to
                           globally significant biodiversity. The objective would be achieved through the provision of capital
                           investments, technical assistance and capacity building for communities living in and around the
                           priority areas, and government institutions at the national, sub-national and local levels.
                           C. Project Description
                           The PDO will be achieved through the following four project components:
                         Component 1 - Improving landscape management (Total Cost US$30m). This component will
                         support investments and technical assistance to promote the integrated management of landscapes
                         with an aim to securing environmental services within priority sub-basins in Southern Tanzania.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The expected outcomes for this component are improved land management in watersheds that are
                         critical for agricultural productivity and/or priority tourism assets. Expected outputs include (i)
                         number of watershed management plans prepared, (ii) number of improved soil and water
                         management measures in place; (iii) reforested area; and (iv) number of incentive programs
                         established.

                         Component 2 - Improving management and development of priority tourism assets (Total Cost US
                         $45m). This component will focus on investments that aim at improving the management of natural
                         resources inside priority protected areas in southern Tanzania to increase tourism. The expected
                         outcome of this component is an increased number of tourists and bed nights in priority tourism sites.
                         Expected outputs include (i) an adopted tourism strategy for Southern Tanzania; (ii) an adopted
                         tourism master plan for southern Tanzania; (iii) number of roads, enhanced airstrips, viewing
                         platforms, and visitor centers built; (v) a strengthened monitoring system in place to improve wildlife
                         protection; (vi) number of trainings conducted; and (vii) strengthened policy and institutional
                         framework.

                         Component 3 - Enhancing local economic benefits from tourism (Total Costs US$15m). This
                         component will support investments that ensure local communities in vicinity to the protected areas
                         benefit from tourism. The expected outcomes of this component are increased community
                         employment levels in tourism and wildlife related sectors, while expected outputs include: (i)
                         creation of PPP ventures in priority areas; (ii) number of micro-finance groups operational; (iii)
                         number of tourism infrastructure outputs to promote local benefits built; and (iv) an adopted policy
                         and institutional framework.

                         Component 4: Project management (Total cost: $10m). This Component will focus on project
                         management arrangements and mechanisms including monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation. In addition, funds under this Component will be used to support the procurement of
                         essential goods and equipment such as vehicles, office equipment and furniture, imagery, software
                         and other accessories, etc. To strengthen project management, funds would be available to finance
                         selected technical assistance such as for fiduciary management, and monitoring and evaluation. The
                         expected outcome of this component would be the effective implementation of the project activities
                         with due diligence and efficiency.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Specific priority areas in Southern Tanzania are envisaged as project location, and will be identified
                         during project preparation. The project aims to support the GOT in developing the southern circuit
                         which includes a number of natural parks including for example Ruaha, Katavi, Mahale, and Kitulo,
                         game reserves with Selous being the largest, two Rift Valley lakes (Nyasa and Tanganyika), and
                         other. Therefore, priority areas will most likely be in these areas.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism (MNRT) will implement the project. It will house a
                         Project Support Unit (PSU) which will be headed by a Project Coordinator complemented by
                         technical and administrative staff. A multi-sectoral committee chaired by MNRT and with
                         representatives from key sector ministries and agencies will provide strategic direction to the PSU.
                           Technical guidance to the PSU will be provided by a team of external experts with skills, among
                           others, in watershed management, water resource management, forestry, transportation, tourism, and
                           wildlife management. Sub-national project implementation arrangements will be developed
Public Disclosure Copy




                           following an institutional and policy analysis conducted as part of project preparation.
                           During project preparation the implementing agency’s institutional capacity for safeguard policies
                           will be assessed. The assessment’s outcome will subsequently inform the project’s design.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Jane A. N. Kibbassa (GEN01)
                           Kristine Schwebach (GSU07)
                           Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (GSU07)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment        Yes           The objective of the project is to improve natural
                           OP/BP 4.01                                    resources management which is expected to result in
                                                                         positive environmental and social benefits. However,
                                                                         the EA policy has been triggered as the expected
                                                                         investments in works and infrastructure will likely
                                                                         result in environmental and social risks which will
                                                                         need to be managed. Mitigation measures will be
                                                                         defined during project preparation.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04     Yes           Natural parks and game reserves in southern
                                                                         Tanzania such as RUNAPA or the Selous Game
                                                                         Reserve provide habitat for numerous species of
                                                                         biodiversity of global significance. SNP is most
                                                                         famous for the annual migration of over one million
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         wildebeest, zebras and gazelles, making it one of the
                                                                         most visited and documented sites in the world.
                                                                         RUNAPA, on the other hand, is a lesser-known jewel
                                                                         with different vegetation types – including savanna
                                                                         and miombo forest – and one of Africa’s largest
                                                                         populations of elephants and lions. The potential
                                                                         project impact on natural habitats and biodiversity in
                                                                         the project area will be assessed, and mitigation
                                                                         measures for any potential negative impacts will be
                                                                         identified.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36              Yes           The project may include reforestation activities to
                                                                         improve water quality and flow in the project areas.
                                                                         The potential project impact on forests in the project
                                                                         area will be assessed, and mitigation measures for
                                                                         any potential negative impacts will be identified.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09         TBD           Depending on the scope of project activities,
                                                                         pesticide management could be involved. If
                                                                         triggered, required measures will be identified.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources                                 No                         The policy is not applicable in the project area.
                                 OP/BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    TBD                        Depending on the geographic scope of project
                                 4.10                                                                                   activities, Indigenous Peoples policy could be
                                                                                                                        triggered and required measures will be identified.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        Involuntary physical or economic resettlement of
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                people could potentially be necessary to enforce
                                                                                                                        natural park boundaries and help reducing informal
                                                                                                                        irrigation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The policy is not applicable in the project area.

                                 Projects on International      No                                                      The policy is not applicable in the project area.
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The policy is not applicable in the project area.
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 22-Jun-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      TBD
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Daniel Mira-Salama,Dinesh Aryal
                                 Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                                                                                               Date: 15-Feb-2017
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Magda Lovei (PMGR)                                                                                                     Date: 16-Feb-2017
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
