                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA8725
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Uzbekistan                         Project ID:    P146328
                            Project Name:      Pap-Angren Railway (P146328)
                            Task Team          Jacques Bure
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          30-Sep-2014                        Estimated   27-Jan-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Railways (90%), Other domestic and international trade (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Trade facilitation and market access (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       1709.13                 Total Bank Financing:     195.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 1164.13
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     195.00
                              China Export Import Bank                                                                  350.00
                              Total                                                                                    1709.13
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project development objectives are to reduce transport costs and to increase transport
                           capacity through the construction of a reliable rail link between the Uzbek part of the Ferghana
                           Valley and the rest of Uzbekistan.
                            3. Project Description

                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         The proposed project will support UTY to build a single 124 km track rail link between Angren and
                         Pap including a 19.2 km rail tunnel through the Kamchik Pass. It will also support the reconstruction
                         by UzEnergo (UZE) of Obihayot power substation and the construction of power distribution lines
Public Disclosure Copy




                         from Obi-hayot power substation to traction power substations (TPS) at Koshminar and Pap, and
                         from power transmission line Angren - Obi-hayot to TPS Sardala to secure reliable power supply for
                         the new railway line. The government and UTY will provide the bulk of the financing for the project.
                         The Bank will finance the signaling, electrification of the railway line, electric power distribution
                         line, track maintenance equipment, and technical assistance to UTY.

                         Component 1. Rail Main Infrastructure (estimated total cost US$1,396.77million): UTY is
                         responsible for the construction of the new railway line main infrastructure including ballast, rail,
                         bridges and a 19.2 km long tunnel. The construction work was initiated in June 2013 and
                         commissioning is planned by July 2016. The proposed loan is not financing this portion of the
                         project.

                         Component 2. Rail Electrification, Signaling, Track Maintenance and Railway video surveillance
                         system (estimated total cost US$267.5 million, of which IBRD US$152 million): This component
                         will finance four investments to equip and maintain the new railway line as follows:
                         •        Signaling and Communications (estimated cost US$46 million). The component will finance
                         a microprocessor based train control system with fiber optic-based communications. The system
                         would be controlled from UTY’s existing dispatching center in Tashkent. UTY will carry out the
                         related civil works (buildings, cable ducts and cable laying).
                         •        Electrification (estimated cost US$30 million). The component will finance (a) construction
                         of three traction substations and (b) a SCADA system for optimizing energy use. UTY will construct
                         the catenary structure and install the cabling.
                         •        Track Maintenance Equipment (estimated cost US$36 million). Track maintenance
                         equipment will be used to maintain the new Pap-Angren line and will consist of cranes, rods,
                         emergency and security trucks, and other machinery and maintenance equipment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Railway video surveillance and broadcasting system (estimated cost US$20 million): The
                         component will finance surveillance system, and the broadcasting on any telecommunication
                         channels to inform railway users.
                         A US$20 million contingency is added to this component and embedded in the financing of the
                         project.

                         Component 3. Power Distribution Line (estimated total cost US$36.86million of which IBRD US$35
                         million): This component will finance three investments to bring energy to the new railway line as
                         follows:
                         •       Dismantling of overhead power lines: (estimated IBRD financing US$2.6 million), including
                         the removal of Angren-Obihayot 220kV power line of total 8.8 km length, of which 6 km in
                         Tashkent region and 2.8 km in Namangan region.
                         •       Equipment for the installation of new power lines (estimated IBRD financing US$13.3
                         million), including the procurement of concrete structures for 110-220kV power lines, respective
                         materials and communication equipment, protection relay, metering and controlling instruments,
                         general power equipment and others.
                         •       Construction works and commissioning of new power lines (estimated IBRD financing US
                         $17.6 million). The sub-component will finance the reconstruction of the 220 kV substation Obi-
                         hayot and the construction of 15 km and 48.8 km of 110kV power distribution lines to connect Obi-
                         hoyot power substation with TPSs Koshminar and Pap, and 5 km of 220kV power distribution line to


                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                         connect 220 kV power transmission line Angren - Obi-hayot with TPS Sardala
                         •       Other capital costs associated with construction works (estimated IBRD financing US 1.5
                         million).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 4. Technical Assistance to UTY for railway construction and long-term plan (estimated
                         total cost US$6.7 million, which will be financed by IBRD): This component will finance technical
                         assistance to be provided to UTY. It will provide UTY with options on how to better meet current
                         and future transportation needs, maintain its market share in freight and passenger transportation and
                         increase efficiency of its operations during the period of 20-25 years.

                         Component 5. Technical Assistance to UTY for improving railway logistics in the Ferghana Valley
                         and Angren region (estimated total cost US$1.00 million, which will be financed by IBRD): This
                         component will finance technical assistance to be provided to UTY. It will support UTY in
                         introducing sound logistics arrangements to allow the Pap-Angren railway link to reach its full
                         operational potential.

                         Component 6. Implementation support (estimated total cost US$0.3 million, which will be financed
                         by IBRD): This component will finance implementation support to UTY and UZE.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The railway start/end points are cities of Angren and Pap. Angren is located in Tashkent oblast and
                         has population of 127 thousand people. The city used to be a center of Uzbek coal industry. Pap is a
                         rayon center with population of 25 thousand people, located inthe North-West of Fergana Valley.
                         Within Angren, the project will use the right of way of the existing railroad and new construction
                         “greenfield” section of the project will start from the coal mining area to the East of Angren. The
                         Northern section of the railway (i.e. section between Angren and tunnel portal at km 36) will go
                         along Akhangaran water reservoir and will cross/overpass (bridge or embankment) at least one of the
                         reservoir's small bays. The alignment runs through Akhangaran river canyon/ravine with very diverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and rough topographic profile. The tunnel will start at km 36 and end at km 57 nearby the river
                         Sansalak-Sai. Between km 63 and km 85 the road will go along Gulistan, Altynkan and Chadak
                         villages and the territory of Almalyk ore mining works (non-ferrous metals). Within the Southern
                         section (i.e. section between Chadak and Pap) the railroad will go through agricultural land. Starting
                         km 95, the rail road will enter agricultural non-arable (currently classified as pastures). The last 20
                         km of the railroad alignment before entering Pap will be through agricultural arable land.

                         The primary assessment of PAP assets was carried out in December 2013- May 2014 and in
                         Akhangaran raion in January – August 2014 in Pap raion. The available data suggests that
                         approximately 270 households including farms plots and a few commercial entities are affected. The
                         Resettlement Action Plan was developed to clearly identify existing gaps between proposed social
                         impact mitigation measures, including ongoing resettlement and land acquisition and the gap with the
                         Bank's safeguards policies.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexei Slenzak (GENDR)
                         Nicolas Perrin (GSURR)
                         Lola Ibragimova (GSURR)




                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes           The EIA (Statement on Environmental Impacts in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                      Uzbekistan) for railway and tunnel was prepared
                                                                      by the Design institute Boshtransloiha. Following
                                                                      the recommendations of the State Expert Review
                                                                      and the Bank, the EIA was updated. The Client
                                                                      has also prepared the EMF: independent
                                                                      consulting company "AL MAR CONSULTING"
                                                                      LLC was hired. The advanced draft of the EIA
                                                                      and EMF acceptable to the Government of
                                                                      Uzbekistan and the World Bank were publicly
                                                                      disclosed and consulted upon with interested
                                                                      stakeholders. The EIA and EMF cover the
                                                                      following issues: (a) management of radioactivity
                                                                      risk, (b) mitigation of negative environmental
                                                                      impacts in sensitive areas (i.e. pollution of rivers
                                                                      and streams, water protection zones), (c)
                                                                      management of borrow pits and sites for waste
                                                                      material, (d) management of geological risks and
                                                                      emergency situations. Site-specific EIAs and
                                                                      EMPs are being and will be prepared by the
                                                                      contractors for specific sections of the alignment.
                                                                      These EMPs will be disclosed at specific project
                                                                      locations and public consultations organized (for
                                                                      sites in the proximity of villages) prior to works
                                                                      start. The EIA for transmission line will be
                                                                      prepared by Boshtransloiha. Based on this EIA,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      the EMP for transmission line will be prepared,
                                                                      disclosed and consulted upon. An Environmental
                                                                      Audit of works carried out previously is being
                                                                      undertaken. Previous visits to ongoing
                                                                      construction sites by the team’s environmental
                                                                      specialist indicated that there were no significant/
                                                                      irreversible impacts that would require a
                                                                      suspension of the works, but did identify some
                                                                      needed improvements. The Environmental Audit
                                                                      will review progress in these areas and provide
                                                                      specific recommendations for remedial measures
                                                                      in an Environmental Action Plan. Both
                                                                      Environmental Audit and Environmental Action
                                                                      Plan will be included in the final EMF and
                                                                      disclosed by the Client.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No




                                                              Page 4 of 10
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           OP 4.11 was triggered. The alignment goes
                         BP 4.11                                         through the historic/cultural heritage site
                                                                         “Settlement Chilhudzhra” (IV century BC – IV
                                                                         century AC) nearby Pap. This historic site was
                                                                         identified during archaeological surveys in 2012.
                                                                         Limited archaeological works on this site were
                                                                         done in 2013 and the site was registered in the
                                                                         National Registry of Historic Monuments. The
                                                                         works on the alignment in the fall of 2013
                                                                         resulted in some damage to the site. The
                                                                         alignment makes a cut through the central section
                                                                         of the historic site.The dimensions of the cut are
                                                                         50 m (width) x 120 m (length). Approximately 10
                                                                         % of the historic area was damaged. When this
                                                                         became known, UTY was required The Bank
                                                                         required from the UTY to stop the works to
                                                                         prevent further damage and prepare the Action
                                                                         Plan for Physical Cultural Resources. Such Plan
                                                                         was prepared and consulted upon/agreed with
                                                                         authorities responsible for protection of historic
                                                                         and cultural heritage. The site Chilkhudzhra will
                                                                         be surveyed by specialists in archeology
                                                                         according to legislation of Uzbekistan. If the
                                                                         survey indicates the need for any additional
                                                                         protection measures for other historic sites, these
                                                                         will be put in place before any additional works
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         are carried out that could impact these sites. The
                                                                         Action Plan requires that the alignment should
                                                                         avoid going through historic and cultural sites as
                                                                         much as possible.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The project requires land acquisition (both
                         4.12                                            residential and agricultural land) and resettlement.
                                                                         UTY finalized a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                         (RPF) following the review by the Bank. Prior to
                                                                         the preparation of the RAP some land acquisition/
                                                                         resettlement was carried out by the Borrower and
                                                                         the Resettlement audit was carried out to identify
                                                                         retroactive compensation. In cases of
                                                                         discrepancies between the national legislation and
                                                                         the World Bank safeguard policies regarding
                                                                         compensations in general, and those to be paid
                                                                         retroactively to the affected people, the RAP



                                                                 Page 5 of 10
                                                                          includes provisions which obligate that the World
                                                                          Bank safeguard policies will prevail.
                                                                           A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), for areas
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          where the design of the railway line and
                                                                          structures is sufficiently advanced, was completed
                                                                          on August 29, 2014. The RPF and RAP were
                                                                          disclosed and consulted upon with the project
                                                                          affected people, local administration, local
                                                                          makhalla representatives and community
                                                                          associations on September 14-15, 2014. An
                                                                          updated RAP and minutes of the consultations
                                                                          were finalized on September 24, 2014.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37       No

                            Projects on International       No            The team has extensively discussed with the
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                          Uzbekistan Railway Company (UTY) the
                                                                          applicability of OP 7.50 for the Project regarding
                                                                          (i) water abstraction from a tributary of an
                                                                          international waterway being planned and/or
                                                                          occurred, and (ii) pollution or other downstream
                                                                          impacts on a tributary of an international
                                                                          waterway due to river channelization/
                                                                          straightening associated with the project
                                                                          activities. The UTY formally confirmed that no
                                                                          abstraction of water from the Akhangaran and
                                                                          Chadak Rivers (tributaries of Syrdarya River that
                                                                          has a status of international waterway) is planned
                                                                          or necessary. The sources of water supply for all
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          proposed construction activities of the Project are
                                                                          reported to be existing wells (stations Sardala,
                                                                          Razezd 2, Razezd 3 and Razezd 4), water tanks
                                                                          (stations Razezd 1 and Temirjulobod), and
                                                                          existing piped town water supply (stations
                                                                          Angren, Uglesborochnaja and Pap). With this
                                                                          information provided, it is concluded that the
                                                                          policy on international waterways OP7.50 is not
                                                                          triggered. Also, the channelization/straightening
                                                                          activities envisaged under the Project would not
                                                                          trigger OP 7.50. The EMF and project documents
                                                                          reflect this accordingly. The team will work
                                                                          closely with the Client to monitor and supervise
                                                                          the issue.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues


                                                                  Page 6 of 10
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           The proposed alignment of the railway goes through diverse plain and mountainous terrain and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           both environmental (Environmental Assessment, OP 4.01) and social (Involuntary Resettlement,
                           OP 4.12) safeguard policies will be triggered. Scale of potential environmental and social
                           (resettlement) impacts is significant and this project should be classified as Environmental
                           Category A.
                           The alignment goes through the historic/cultural heritage site “Settlement Chilhudzhra” (IV
                           century BC – IV century AC) nearby Pap and OP 4.11 will be triggered. This historic site was
                           identified during archaeological surveys. Limited archaeological works on this site were done in
                           2013 and the site was registered in the National Registry of Historic Monuments. The works on
                           the alignment in the fall of 2013 resulted in some damage to the site. The alignment makes a cut
                           through the central section of the historic site. The dimensions of the cut are 50 m (width) x 120 m
                           (length). Approximately 10 % of the historic area was damaged.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Long-term impacts associated with future activities include potential pollution from railway,
                           tunnel, and associated infrastructure operation and maintenance. Also, pollution due to
                           emergencies and/or accidents on the railroad may cause spills of oil and oil products, chemicals or
                           other types of negative impacts. Potential radioactive hazard in the area of the tunnel has been
                           identified during project preparation, but sampling suggests that there is no excess of radiation
                           levels in the tunnel/shafts so far.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Four alternative alignments were considered at initial stage of alignment identification and two
                           alignments were considered at pre-feasibility stage. The tunnel fall/decline in both options is
                           20/1000. Option A (preferred option) is 123 km long and has two tunnels (19.1 km and 0.2 km)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           with the range of tunnel altitudes between 1320 m and 1485 m. Option B is 146 km long, has 14
                           tunnels with total length of 19.5 km with the range of tunnel altitudes between 1799 m and 1895
                           m. Option A was selected to minimize overall project costs and environmental and social risks
                           associated with project activities.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for construction of the railway line and the tunnel
                           was prepared by the Borrower. There were 18 agencies/institutes/organizations that contributed to
                           preparation of the EIA. The EIA was updated taking into account comments from both the State
                           Expert Review and the Bank. The Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was prepared
                           by an independent entity ("AL MAR CONSULTING" LLC) and covers other components and
                           activities in the project not included in the EIA for the railway line and tunnel (e.g. borrow pits,
                           river channeling works, bridges and overpasses, power supply). All of these works will require
                           preparation of stand-alone EIAs under Uzbekistan law, and the EMF provides further guidance for
                           ensuring that these EIAs and site-specific EMPs also fulfill the requirements of OP 4.01. An
                           Environmental Audit and Environmental Action Plan covering works undertaken previously will
                           be included in the final version of the EMF. Supervision engineering company (Deutsche Bahn
                           International) was mobilized and checks environmental performance of the tunnel contractor and
                           compliance with the action plan for radioactivity control on a regular basis.
                           The Action Plan for Physical Cultural Resources was prepared and consulted upon/agreed with


                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                           authorities responsible for protection of historic and cultural heritage. In order to document the
                           historic and cultural assets the site will be surveyed by specialists in archeology according to
                           legislation of Uzbekistan (the UTY will contract an organization with appropriate archaeological
Public Disclosure Copy




                           expertize).
                           The Borrower has established the PIU within the UTY. The PIU will have designated safeguards
                           specialist to monitor the environmental performance of the project. Also, the UTY hired external
                           experts to help monitor environmental performance of the contractors.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key project stakeholders are the population of Uzbekistan broadly, who will benefit from the
                           railway, residents of the areas nearby the railway,
                           The EIA and EMF were disclosed on September 15, 2014 and will be consulted upon with
                           interested stakeholders. Site-specific EIAs and EMPs will be disclosed and consulted upon with
                           potentially affected communities.
                           The Action Plan for Physical Cultural Resources was prepared by the Institute of Archeology of
                           the National Academy of Science.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           11-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        08-Sep-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive           29-Sep-2014
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uzbekistan                                                            05-Sep-2014
                           Comments: Tentative
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           20-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        15-Sep-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uzbekistan                                                            15-Sep-2014
                           Comments: The copy of Resettlement Policy Framework report was published on the web site of
                                         SJSRWC «Uzbekiston Temir Yullari» on September 15, 2014. Public meetings and
                                         consultations with the affected HHs were conducted in the project raions
                                         (Akhangaran and Pap) on September 15-16. The main principles and provisions of
                                         the resettlement policy in accordance with the laws of the Republic of Uzbekistan
                                         and the WB OP 4.12 were presented during the meetings. These activities were
                                         aimed at increasing the legal literacy on ongoing resettlement activities.
                                         Representatives of relevant state organizations, khokimiyats, makhalla committees,
                                         cadastral service and other local authorities, and also the persons, affected by the
                                         project implementation took part in these consultations. The mechanism for
                                         complaints was once more explained in details during the consultations.
                                         Upon the consultations all the participants were provided with handouts and
                                         brochures in Russian and Uzbek languages with details of the issues raised during
                                         the consultations


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS


                                                                        Page 9 of 10
                         Task Team Leader: Name: Jacques Bure
                         Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)      Date: 29-Sep-2014
                         Advisor:
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)      Date: 29-Sep-2014
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            Page 10 of 10
