                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC8844

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mexico                          Project ID:      P147185
                            Project Name:      Mexico School Based Management Project (P147185)
                            Task Team          Rafael E. De Hoyos Navarr
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          23-Jun-2014                     Estimated        22-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEDDR                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Primary education (90%), Public administration- Education (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Education for all (40%), Participation and civic engagement (40%), Managing
                                               for development results (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    785.00                     Total Bank Financing:       300.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    485.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       300.00
                              Total                                                                       785.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the Project is to strengthen school based management, schools' managerial capacity
                           and parental participation to increase retention and reduce repetition rates in PEC schools.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed Project would consist of three Components: i) School grants to eligible schools to
                           support the implementation of school improvement plans that have been agreed with parents
                         association; ii) Technical assistance to improve schools’ managerial capacity, and iii) Project
                         monitoring, management, and evaluation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1 (US$250 million) School Grants. Support to PEC through the provision of school
                         grants to eligible schools to implement school improvement plans that have been previously
                         discussed and agreed with parents association.

                         Component 2 (US$40 million) Technical Assistance to Improve Managerial Capacity. Component 2
                         would include activities to improve schools’ managerial capacities. The school supervisor will be
                         responsible for providing schools the necessary tools, technical assistance and advice to improve
                         management practices. The supervisor's diagnosis will be based on a newly developed instrument to
                         measure school director's managerial capacity. The instrument will identify the most important
                         deficits in school directors’ managerial capacity vis-à-vis a set of standards defined by the Secretariat
                         of Education (Secretaría de Educación Pública, SEP). The intervention to schools will focus on
                         challenging areas of managerial skills that are highly correlated with the quality of education services
                         in a context of school autonomy. The following two new subcomponents will be supported:

                         (i)     Subcomponent 2.1: Design of the toolkit for supervisors and school directors to improve
                         schools’ management practices.

                         (ii)    Subcomponent 2.2: Technical support and training in the use of toolkits to improve school
                         management practices and, in general, the functioning of the system of technical assistance to the
                         school “SATE” (for its acronym in Spanish).

                         Component 3 (US$10 million) Monitoring, Management and Evaluation. This subcomponent would
                         make the Project's structure easier to monitor while giving monitoring and evaluation a prominent
                         role. The following two subcomponents will continue to be supported:

                         (i)      Subcomponent 3.1: Technical assistance to States to improve adherence to PEC’s Operating
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Rules. The activities carried out under the umbrella of technical assistance to the States include
                         supervision visits, national and regional meetings, training and workshops, intended to support States
                         implementing units’ understandings of the operating, financial and implementation rules of the
                         Program.

                         (ii)     Subcomponent 3.2: A new impact evaluation, using randomized control trials, will be
                         implemented in selected States to estimate and quantify the effect of the intervention supported by
                         the Project. The outcome variables will include intermediate results, or indicators directly linked with
                         the intervention, such as school directors’ managerial capacity and, long term indicators measuring
                         the quality of education services: efficiency rates, dropouts, repetition and learning outcomes of a
                         standardized test.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project focuses on strengthening schools' managerial capacity and promoting parent
                         participation in school activities. To support this effort, the Project would provide grants to support
                         schools' improvements plans, offer technical assistance, and would support the Project's monitoring
                         system. None of the Project's activities are likely to cause adverse environmental impacts. Grants
                         would support minor works (such as maintenance and repairs of schools’ existing facilities) that
                         would not cause any adverse environmental impact. These minor works would be conducted
                           according to environmental, health, and safety guidelines included within the Operational Rules of
                           PEC. Therefore, the Project has been categorized as Category C and OP/BP 4.01 Environmental
                           Assessment is not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Project would have a national coverage with a focus on marginal and poor rural localities and in
                           selected poor urban areas. Because of this targeting, the Project includes as potential beneficiaries
                           indigenous communities that represent around 10% of the national population and are among the
                           poorest in the country. Hence, OP/BP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples applies to the Project; accordingly,
                           an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) is being prepared. A consultation process of the IPP will be
                           conducted and completed before Appraisal following this safeguard's principles, as well as national
                           regulations established by the National Indigenous Commission (CDI) in charge of indigenous affairs
                           in Mexico. After consultation, the final IPP will be disclosed following the Bank's Disclosure Policy.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           PEC Coordination, the executing agency, has the institutional capacity to manage OP/BP 4.10
                           triggered by the Project. Through the implementation of Indigenous Peoples Plan under the previous
                           operations, PEC Coordination has been able to develop its own capacity to comply with the
                           Indigenous Peoples safeguard. PEC staff is directly updating the IPP and defining its participation
                           strategy and will conduct its consultation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        No               None of the Project's activities is likely to cause
                           BP 4.01                                              any adverse environmental impacts. However,
                                                                                minor works financed by the Project would be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                implemented according to the environmental,
                                                                                health and safety guidelines included within the
                                                                                PEC operational rules, which are mandatory for
                                                                                all participating agencies.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes              The Project has a national coverage focusing on
                                                                                marginal poor areas in which indigenous
                                                                                communities are usually located. Therefore, the
                                                                                Project triggers this safeguard policy. An
                                                                                Indigenous Peoples Plan is under preparation.
                                                                                Consultation of the IPP will be conducted
                                                                                before Appraisal. The final IPP will be
                                                                                                                                 disclosed according to the Bank's Disclosure
                                                                                                                                 Policy.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The Project does not include any activity that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 4.12                                                                                            may cause involuntary resettlement.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 18-Jun-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The IPP is currently under preparation, including the design of the consultation process that has
                                      been scheduled to be conducted in the following weeks. Both activities will be completed and the
                                      IPP will be published before Appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Rafael E. De Hoyos Navarr

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                                                Date: 17-Jun-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Reema Nayar (SM)                                                                                                     Date: 17-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
