                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC7679

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Kyrgyz Republic                    Project ID:       P146970
                            Project Name:       Third Village Investment Project (P146970)
                            Task Team           Asli Gurkan
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                              Estimated         26-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSSO                              Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Public administration- Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Participation and civic engagement (60%), Rural services and infrastructure
                                                (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     12.00                        Total Bank Financing:          12.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                      12.00
                              Total                                                                            12.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           12.      The higher order objective of the project is to alleviate rural poverty. This is to be addressed
                           through the project development objective (PDO) of strengthening the institutional capacity of local
                           self-government bodies and communities supported by the project to deliver social and economic
                           infrastructure.
                           C. Project Description
                         The project would include the following four inter-linked components:
                         Component 1: Capacity Building and Empowerment
                         This component will support capacity building of local communities and local government bodies in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         participatory local governance and development planning. The following activities will be carried out
                         under this component:
                         (i) Social Mobilization. The project will support the sustainable development of participating
                         communities by promoting social mobilization, and encouraging the mobilization of internal
                         resources for planning and investment activities. Local governments will play a key role in
                         mobilization, design, and implementation of projects under VIP-3. Close collaboration will be
                         encouraged with institutional mechanisms that played this role in previous phases of the project.
                         (ii) Trainings. The training activities under VIP3 will be closely linked to what is taking place under
                         the JSDF-funded Building Demand-Side Capacity for Effective Local Governance Project
                         (P126873), and the proposed SPF-funded project on scaling up participatory development training in
                         the country. Training will be provided to community members and local government bodies on
                         participatory local governance and participatory development planning and implementation.
                          (iii) Peer-to-peer Learning: Exchange visits among communities in different parts of the country,
                         and among local councils and local government administrations will be supported to learn good
                         practices in participatory governance and local development.

                         Component 2: Village Investments
                         Targeted villages will be supported in developing local investment plans through a participatory
                         process in which local stakeholders collect basic data, assess local needs and funding sources, and
                         carry out participatory identification of priorities. Projects for financing under VIP-3 will be selected
                         through a competitive process. This is a significant shift from the VIP 1 and 2 approach, in which
                         block grants were provided to participating communities on a per capita basis, based on population
                         size. While this approach was successful in addressing certain needs and teaching people how to
                         collaborate for local development, it did not allow for the funding of larger projects. Under the
                         proposed competitive process under VIP 3, strategic development plans will be judged against a set
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of criteria, and those ranked highest will have their priorities funded. A comprehensive selection
                         process will be developed and agreed upon during project preparation, with special attention paid to
                         criteria that will engage and strengthen weaker municipalities in the competition. Activities that may
                         be identified for financing include construction/rehabilitation works for community halls, clinics,
                         schools, water supply systems, bridges etc.
                         VIP 3 will pay special attention to ensuring the technical quality of community-based infrastructure
                         from the outset. VIP 1 and 2, as well as other donor-funded projects, have experienced a number of
                         poorly constructed works as a result of poor design and supervision. VIP 2 required additional
                         financing to retrofit poorly designed and constructed works. To mitigate this risk, community-level
                         monitoring will be coupled with rigorous technical monitoring by specialists.

                         Component 3: Project Management
                         This component will finance incremental costs of the implementing agency for grant management,
                         specifically coordination and supervision of implementation activities, financial management, annual
                         grant audit, and monitoring and evaluation.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is nationwide in scope and will be undertaken in all 475 aiyl okrugs (local municipalities)
                         in the country.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Over the last decade the implementing agency - ARIS - has implemented the first and second phases
                           of the Village Investment Project. In addition, since 2011 ARIS has managed five Bank-funded
Public Disclosure Copy




                           projects. ARIS has strong capacity to implement projects in compliance with Bank safeguards
                           policies. ARIS has also enhanced its capacity to manage environmental and social safeguards issues.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (ECSSO)
                           Cesar Niculescu (ECSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The Project will have limited negative
                           BP 4.01                                            environmental and social impacts, as physical
                                                                              works will be undertaken to only construct/
                                                                              rehabilitate local facilities. The expected
                                                                              temporary environmental impacts and
                                                                              inconvenience to the surrounding areas during
                                                                              construction are limited and typical to small/
                                                                              medium scale construction works, such as
                                                                              generation of dust, noise and vibration;
                                                                              movement of the construction vehicles and
                                                                              machinery; piling of construction materials; and
                                                                              accumulation of demolition/construction waste.
                                                                              Some associated risks include improper disposal
                                                                              of construction
                                                                              waste, asbestos, minor operational or accidental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              spills of fuel and lubricants from the
                                                                              construction
                                                                              machinery, and improper reinstatement of
                                                                              construction sites upon completion of works.
                                                                              A general EMP including the mitigation
                                                                              measures for most type of construction works
                                                                              will be prepared at the project level, and will be
                                                                              followed by derived site-specific EMPs that will
                                                                              be prepared for each sub-project that will be
                                                                              implemented.
                                                                              Very effective measures have been put in place
                                                                              under the VIP2 to address safeguards issues,
                                                                              and they are being applied and closely
                                                                              monitored under VIP2 Additional Financing.
                                                                              They are laid out in detailed Guidelines for
                                                                              Environmental Review of Micro-Projects,
                                                                              which will also be part of the Operational
                                                                              Manual of VIP3 and will be provided to all
                                                                              participating ayil aimaks. Each sub-project will
                                                                                                                                 be reviewed for environmental and social risks
                                                                                                                                 in line with the OP4.01. Implementation of
                                                                                                                                 environmental mitigation and compliance
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 measures during under the VIP2 Additional
                                                                                                                                 Financing was carried out by the contractors
                                                                                                                                 (construction firms) and monitored by ARIS
                                                                                                                                 PIU staff (engineers). This practice will
                                                                                                                                 continue under VIP3. Appropriate training on
                                                                                                                                 WB safeguards will continue to be provided
                                                                                                                                 under VIP3 to local officials and community
                                                                                                                                 safeguards volunteers.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            The environmental screening process will
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         screen for the presence of physical cultural
                                                                                                                                 resources. In addition, chance find procedures
                                                                                                                                 will be included in all works contracts.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            Indigenous Peoples' as per OP 4.10 are not
                                                                                                                                 present in the project area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           Under Component Two, the project will finance
                                 4.12                                                                                            grants for community level investments such as
                                                                                                                                 clinics, social halls, and bridges. The
                                                                                                                                 implementation of these investments may result
                                                                                                                                 in the involuntary acquisition of land and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 impacts detailed in OP 4.12. The investments
                                                                                                                                 will be identified during project implementation
                                                                                                                                 based on community demand, consequently the
                                                                                                                                 specific impacts will not be known prior to
                                                                                                                                 project appraisal. A Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                                 Framework will be prepared prior to project
                                                                                                                                 appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 28-Nov-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             The EMP will be prepared, disclosed in the country and in info-shop and consulted prior to the
                             project appraisal scheduled for November 2014.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             During project preparation, the VIP 2 Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be revised and
                             updated based on a review of its' previous implementation. A revised RPF will be disclosed prior
                             to project appraisal which is scheduled for November 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Asli Gurkan

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                               Date: 26-Jun-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Elisabeth Huybens (SM)                            Date: 26-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
