                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC7771

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Albania                         Project ID:     P132982
                            Project Name:     Results-based Road Maintenance and Safety Project (P132982)
                            Task Team         Artan Guxho
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         08-Dec-2014                     Estimated       26-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GTIDR                           Lending         Specific Investment Loan
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (70%), Public administration-
                                              Transportation (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Regional integration (30%), Injuries and non-communicable diseases (25%),
                                              Administrative and civil service reform (25%), Infrastruct ure services for
                                              private sector development (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    175.00                   Total Bank Financing:        75.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                  100.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      75.00
                              Total                                                                     175.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed PDO of the RRMSP is to enhance the sustainability, help preserve the condition, and
                           improve the safety of the National Road Network for road users by supporting the government in
                           implementing the Albania National Transport Plan, introducing an effective road asset management
                           system, and following sound road safety practices.
                         C. Project Description
                         1.        The proposed operation will support the implementation of the Government's Program to
                         improve National Road maintenance standards, introduce sustainable asset management system and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         enhance road safety. Extended to the entire 3,700 km of national roads, the program is expected to
                         address operation & maintenance needs, including the maintenance backlog, and is estimated at
                         about €45-50 million (US$ 60-70 million), annually. Building upon the recommendations and
                         prioritization results of the preparatory activities funded under ECPDEV TF the maintenance
                         standards will be defined and maintenance needs will be developed. Some rehabilitation of road
                         sections is also foreseen. The Bank-funded RRMSP is expected to finance about US$ 175 million
                         for the maintenance and rehabilitation of the Primary and Secondary National Roads using
                         performance-based maintenance contracting, over a 5-year period. The total financing of the GoA to
                         the project is likely to be US$ 100 million. Other development partners, such as the EU, EBRD and
                         EIB have expressed interest in participation.
                         2.       The Preferred Implementation Concept for the Rehabilitation Program: MTI and ARA have
                         confirmed their preference for an Investment Project Financing (IPF). This will be a results-based
                         lending operation following the WB's guidelines. Under such an approach, the Bank will not finance
                         pre-identified sections but a certain percentage of the overall maintenance program.
                         3.       Disbursement basis: Disbursement will be linked to specific and agreed indicators
                         (disbursement-linked indicators). These indicators will be scalable whenever possible to allow for the
                         flexibility in disbursement to match implementation progress of the agreed annual plans whether
                         faster or slower. Implementation will be based on agreed eligible expenditure programs. Since the
                         Borrower and the Bank are envisioned to pool their resources, the Bank will not monitor each single
                         maintenance contract, but will carry out periodical audits (once or twice a year) of a certain
                         percentage of the contracts. The audit will cover all aspects – design (including road safety aspects),
                         construction, procurement, supervision, financial management, environment and social. The use of
                         rolling advance loan proceeds to finance implementation will be considered, in order to make the
                         results-based approach consistent with the Borrower's budgetary process and its limited resources.
                         4.       Potential disbursement-linked indicators include: (i) the number of km under performance-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         based maintenance contracts; (ii) institutionalizing the incorporation of road safety standards in road
                         design, construction and maintenance; (iii) signing of Service Level Agreement between ARA and
                         MTI; and (iv) establishment and effective use of road asset management system.
                         5.       Preparation of Environmental and Social/Resettlement Documentation: ARA and the
                         consultant for preparatory works will develop a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), an
                         Environmental Policy Framework (EPF); and Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for a few
                         representative road sections to guide program implementation. It is proposed that the review of
                         EMPs will initially be on a prior approval basis, until the Bank team confirms the acceptable quality
                         of the plans, and after that a certain percentage of the plans will be subject to a post review serving as
                         a basis for disbursement (as discussed in paragraph 22 above). While the Project is not envisioned to
                         entail land acquisition, or resettlement, an RPF will be prepared to serve as guide, in the event that
                         some land acquisition appears necessary, and to complete site-specific RAPs, which will be subject
                         to prior approval.

                         Two potential components have been identified for support under this project:
                         6.     Component 1: Road Maintenance and Safety (IBRD financing: US$65 million). The
                         component will finance a portion of the government's National Road Network Program of
                         Maintenance. S pecifically, it will finance the (i) design and works for periodic/routine
                         maintenance (with some rehabilitation where necessary), works concerning traffic signalization
                         improvement and structure renewal as well ancillary road connections (crossroads, access roads,
                           drainage systems, etc.), (ii) supervision, quality control and monitoring of environmental protection.
                           The length of sections for each contract is expected to vary between 50 km and 100 km, depending
                           on their location, terrain, and category. This component will support integration of road safety
Public Disclosure Copy




                           practices into the design and implementation of maintenance in the project's road sections and the
                           institutionalizing of these practices in all road designs and construction.
                           7.        The Consultant for preparation will assess the existing National Roads inventory and develop
                           optimal arrangements for contracting out maintenance activities on a performance basis. Planning of
                           the first phase maintenance contracts will be based on the actual physical conditions, social-
                           economic criteria and balanced geographical distribution. They will be confirmed through an
                           analysis being carried out by the consultant and the final list of the road sections for inclusion in the
                           first phase program would be finalized before project appraisal.
                           8.        Component 2: Institutional Strengthening Component (IBRD financing US$10.0 million).
                           This component is envisioned to: (i) strengthen the capacity of MTI, Albanian Road Authority and
                           the Secretariat of the Inter-ministerial Road Safety Council (IRSC) in road safety aspects,
                           establishing the road asset management, carry out monitoring and evaluation, coordination, funding
                           and resource allocation - building on the previous TA of the Bank, EU and other IFIs; (ii) strengthen
                           the capacity of ARA through the implementation of the Reform Action Plan developed under the EU
                           TA, including the Service Level Agreement; (iii) support the government in strengthening its project
                           preparation, and implementation of regulatory framework and procedures; (iv) provide project
                           implementation support that would include an integrated performance audit, and support as may be
                           necessary in procurement, financial management, environmental and social safeguards; (v) support
                           ARA in scaling up the use of performance-based maintenance contracting; (vi) strengthen the
                           capacity of ARA in using road asset management system, and training.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Throughout Albania.

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project will be implemented through the existing Project Implementation Team (PIT) within the
                           Albanian Roads Authority (ARA) – formerly General Roads Directorate. The PIT has been
                           implementing Bank-funded projects since 1998, the most recent of which was the Albania Transport
                           Project, Category A construction of a section of the motor-way to the North of the Country. During
                           implementation of the Transport Project, the PIT fully and satisfactorily implemented requirements
                           of the Environmental Assessment and EMPs, with no significant issues or deviations with excellent
                           staff support from the in-house Environmental department and adequate reporting.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Bekim Imeri (GURDR)
                           Esma Kreso (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Since the pertinent road sections have yet to be
                           BP 4.01                                               defined for the first year of the Project, with an
                                                                                 Action Plan to be developed, an Environmental
                                                                                 Management Framework document (EMF) is
                                                                 under preparation financed from the preparation
                                                                 Grant. The EMF will set forth the guidelines for
                                                                 site-specific EMPs and will help formulate
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 sound environmental performance into the
                                                                 planning and design stages ofthe activity. The
                                                                 EMF will include EMPs for the first-year
                                                                 priority projects, that would also serve as
                                                                 guidance on subsequent EMP development.
                                                                 Furthermore, implementation of the EMP will
                                                                 also feed into the results-based approach for the
                                                                 issued maintenance contracts.
                                                                 Major anticipated environmental issues include
                                                                 dust and noise generation from machinery,
                                                                 adequate site organization, storage of paints,
                                                                 equipment and machines, waste separation and
                                                                 management, chance findings, use of salt and/or
                                                                 materials in winter maintenance, and possible
                                                                 small construction interventions in order to
                                                                 improve road safety.
                                                                 It is proposed that the review of
                                                                 implementation-developed EMPs by the WB
                                                                 initially be on a prior approval basis until the
                                                                 WB team confirms the acceptable quality of the
                                                                 plans, after which a certain percentage of the
                                                                 plans will be subject to a post review which will
                                                                 serve as a basis for disbursement.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   The ToR for the EMF provides precautionary
                                                                 measures for the road maintenance activities in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 the proximity of, or within protected areas or
                                                                 otherwise sensitive natural habitats including
                                                                 forested areas. This provision is mostly due to
                                                                 the fact that the specific road sections to be
                                                                 included under the project are not known at this
                                                                 stage.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project will not finance any roads in
                                                                 forested areas, while provisions on possible
                                                                 roads maintenance in forested areas under
                                                                 protection regimes will be handled in the EMF
                                                                 under the natural habitats screening procedure.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The EMF will include guidance on
                                                                 environmentally sound road-side vegetation
                                                                 clearing.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    The EMF and site-specific EMPs will have
                         BP 4.11                                 provisions in case of chance findings on site,
                                                                 while precautionary section in the EMF will be
                                                                 included for works that may deal with
                                                                                                                                 maintenance of specific bridges, which may,
                                                                                                                                 due to their historical value or age be a cultural
                                                                                                                                 monument. All works on such sites will include
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 direct involvement of the monument and
                                                                                                                                 heritage protection authorities.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           A precautionary Resettlement Policy
                                 4.12                                                                                            Framework is going to be drafted as financed by
                                                                                                                                 the preparation grant. As the Program is not
                                                                                                                                 envisioned to entail land acquisition or
                                                                                                                                 resettlement, no RAPs will be prepared during
                                                                                                                                 project preparation. In the event that some land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition appears necessary, a RAP will be
                                                                                                                                 prepared and will be subject to prior approval.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The safeguard studies, EMF with sample first-year EMPs, and an RPF will be launched in March
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      2014 and expected to be completed by September 2014
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Artan Guxho

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (RSA)                                                                                           Date: 11-Jun-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Juan Gaviria (SM)                                                                                                    Date: 13-Jun-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
