                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSA8107
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Congo, Republic of                  Project ID:    P133731
                            Project Name:       Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)
                            Task Team           Franck M. Adoho
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           11-Apr-2014                         Estimated   09-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                         Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTP5                               Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                    Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Central government administration (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Economic statistics, modeling and forecasting (60%), Macroeconomic
                                              management (25%), Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      33.00           Total Bank Financing:                      5.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                             28.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                     5.00
                              Total                                                                                          33.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objectives of the project are (i) to strengthen the National Statistical System in the production,
                           dissemination of timely and robust statistics relevant for policies and decision making and (ii) to
                           promote the demand for statistical information.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                         Page 1 of 10
                         18.     The project is structured in three components.

                         19.      Component 1- Institutional Development: Human Resources, Organizational structure and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Infrastructure (US$6.6 million). The project will work to ensure that reliable and timely statistics are
                         delivered sustainably by building HR capacity, improving the capacity of the NSS to attract and
                         retain qualified and motivated staff, streamlining its institutional organization, and building up
                         adequate infrastructure, especially ICT solutions, to produce and disseminate statistical information.

                         20.      Subcomponent 1.1. Improving the organization: The goal here is to better harmonize the
                         NSS organizational structure to support its mandate. An institutional assessment and
                         recommendation plan (see Annex 6) will analyze the necessary span of control required for
                         management positions with detailed terms of reference, clear accountability, and a decision- making
                         framework for management with results-based objectives, supported by annual performance
                         evaluations. Subcomponent activities include (1) reviewing and improving the current framework so
                         that dialogue between NSS and ministry statistical departments is streamlined; (2) drafting protocols,
                         guidelines, and standard methodologies to enhance quality and efficiency in the management of data
                         production and dissemination; and (3) design and actualize clear organization charts.

                         21.      Subcomponent 1.2. Human resources development: This subcomponent will help the NSS to
                         attract, motivate, and retain qualified staff. Subcomponent activities will include


                         (a) Staffing and HR policies: This activity will review and establish strategic staffing plans to enable
                         NSS to attract and retain qualified statisticians and provide the necessary support to ministry
                         statistics departments. Policies and guidelines will be elaborated to cover recruitment, career
                         management, job mobility in a decentralized environment, and processes rewards and recognitions.
                         The emphasis will be on output-based work programs and performance-based career management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (b) Management and incentive structures: Here the focus will be on the quality of leadership as a
                         driver of success in implementing reforms. The project will support development of management and
                         leadership skills programs across NSS with special attention to values and ethical behavior.

                         (c) Knowledge and learning: These activities will produce a training program linked to career
                         development throughout NSS employment. The objective is to accelerate and facilitate the transfer of
                         knowledge to both new and current staff within and across the decentralized departments through:
                         •        Formal pre-service training that will prepare Congolese for the competitive examination for
                         admission to regional statistical schools. Successful candidates will be awarded scholarships and
                         stipends and will sign binding contracts committing them to work in the NSS for five years after
                         graduation. A specific addendum to these employment contracts will be an obligation to gradually
                         reimburse the NSS for the scholarship and stipends.
                         •        On-the-job and thematic training: Eligible NSS staff will be offered training to build skills in
                         collection of survey data, data quality control and analysis, data entry design, elaboration of national
                         accounts, poverty analysis, elaboration of sector statistics, and any other training needed. Also, on-
                         the-job acquisition of skills through face-to-face and hands-on approaches will be encouraged.
                         •        Technical mentorship program: This will train “end of career” qualified statisticians as
                         mentors for more junior and high potential staff. The objective will be to ensure the transfer of
                         knowledge that has been accumulated for decades, particularly during the recruitment freeze period.
                         Both mentor and mentees will be enrolled in this program for a limited time.


                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                         .
                         (d)       Support for development of the National Statistics School: The project will support the
                         founding of activities to strengthen the CASP to respond to current needs for deep technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                         statistical skills. The intent is for local institutions to offer formal degrees in statistics, applied
                         economics, demography, and related information technology., In addition to reviewing the training
                         capacity of the CASP, the project will look into partnerships with countries in Africa that have
                         already invested in building statistical capacity. These partnerships will be based on south-south
                         knowledge exchange but will also leverage basic technical curricula, particularly in French-speaking
                         countries. Among activities to be supported are
                         •         Institutional assessment of the CASP and statistics-related departments in local universities
                         in terms of how they reflect current and future and where innovative learning techniques and
                         methodology can be introduced.
                         •         Review of the statistical training curricula and drafting of syllabi and training material for
                         teaching applied statistics.
                         •         Creation of an internship program for Congolese graduate students from regional or local
                         statistics schools to accelerate the availability of technical skills, particularly to respond to the needs
                         of the various decentralized departments.

                         (e) Drafting of a Strategic HR plan that will include:
                         •       A revised Collective Labor Agreement: Technical assistance and management advice will be
                         provided to NSS representatives on revision of the Collective Labor Agreement and priorities for
                         implementing the chapters.
                         •       Labor market competitiveness approach: Technical assistance will ensure the long-term
                         efficiency of employment practices and can serve as a pilot for future best practices for the Ministry
                         of Planning.

                         22.      Subcomponent 1.3: Upgrading infrastructure and equipment: This subcomponent will build
                         up NSS statistical and IT infrastructure and data management systems. The project will support
                         acquisition and maintenance of computer hardware, data management systems, and other equipment
Public Disclosure Copy




                         needed for data collection, analysis and dissemination. Subsequent consultancy services will also be
                         supported for (1) development of a web-based data portal for access to NSS data for policy making,
                         commercial, or research purposes and (2) establishment of an electronic archive to allow users to
                         access micro-data while safeguarding the confidentiality of survey respondents.

                         23.       Design and implementation of an information system strategic plan (ISSP): If the planned
                         revisions to the National Statistical System are not guided by a detailed and well-defined strategic
                         plan, the system could well be over budget, unsustainable, and incompatible with current or planned
                         IT infrastructure and would in future be costly to use and maintain. Related difficulties are staff
                         training, integration, and scalability across the NSS program and related initiatives. That is why one
                         of the first steps in this project must be the drafting of an ISSP. The plan will define long-term
                         statistical requirements for economic analysis and policy making, recommend options for technology
                         architecture, and prepare long-term plans for system implementation, equipment acquisition, and
                         staff training. With markets changing dynamically and increased opportunities for outsourcing
                         business processes, the flexibility of the ISSP to rapidly adapt to and even exploit these changes is
                         crucial to sustained success. The ISSP will be the foundation upon which the new NSS will be built
                         in an integrated, orderly manner to support RoC sectoral and national priorities.

                         24.     Component 2. Data production, dissemination and use of statistics (US$21.4 million)



                                                                        Page 3 of 10
                         25.       Subcomponent 2.1: Data production and management: This subcomponent will support
                         activities to improve the quality of NSS statistics and support development of new statistical products
                         and services. Activities to be supported include production of: (a) demographic and social sector
Public Disclosure Copy




                         statistics, (b) statistics on economic and financial activities, and (c) statistics on household living
                         conditions. The subcomponent will also support study tours for the exchange of experience and
                         training and a continuous survey program with a permanent team to design, implement, and process
                         surveys to satisfy priority data needs.

                         (a) Demographic and social sectors statistics: Demand is growing in the RoC for a diversity of
                         statistical information related to demographic and social issues; for instance:

                         •        Censuses: Congo has had four general censuses, in 1974, 1984, 1996, and 2007. Because the
                         government invalidated the 1996 census, the master sampling frame from the 1984 census was used
                         for household surveys until 2010. The 2007 census data was barely analyzed, very few of the main
                         results were reported, the cartographic dataset is not available, and a post-census survey found that
                         births and deaths were underestimated. The next general population and housing census is scheduled
                         for 2017. For this the project will support (a) constitution of a sample frame for household surveys
                         using the 2007 census, (b) analysis of the 2007 census data, and (c) preparation, implementation, and
                         the analysis of the 2017 general census.

                         •        Administrative records of population dynamics (vital statistics): Vital statistics are those
                         related to births, marriages, death, and migrations. If well-recorded, these data are used for
                         population projections. In Brazzaville and Pointe Noire but not elsewhere, civil registrations are
                         updated electronically. Activities supported will include (a) generalization and improvement of life
                         events records using modern technology, (b) centralization of life events data, and (c) building up
                         NIS capacity for compilation and dissemination of this statistical information.

                         Human Development (HD) statistics: HD statistics include education, health and social protection
                         statistics.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •       Education statistics: These statistics should be produced by the Directorate of Studies and
                         Planning (DEP) of the Ministries of Education which are : Ministère de l’enseignement primaire,
                         secondaire et de l’alphabétisation (MEPSA); Ministère de l’enseignement supérieur (MES); and
                         Ministère de l’enseignement technique, professionnel, de la formation qualifiante et de l’emploi
                         (METPFQE). Unfortunately, only MEPSA publishes annual statistical yearbooks. The project will
                         support the drafting and realization of a national plan for production of NIS statistics yearbooks
                         according to international standards in cooperation with all ministries in charge of education and the
                         universities.


                         •       Health statistics: These are the responsibility of the DEP of the Ministry of Health. The DEP
                         resumed production of health statistics yearbooks in 2013 after an eight-year lapse. Data in previous
                         yearbooks were incomplete because they covered the public sector only partially and the private
                         health sector not at all. Here the project will support (a) use of the 2010 International Classification
                         of Diseases (ICD), (b) assessment of the DEP of the Ministry of Health (MSP), (c) drafting of an
                         operational manual for production and dissemination of health statistics, and (iv) elaboration and
                         diffusion of health statistics.

                         •       Employment statistics: Three government agencies are responsible for employment statistics:

                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                         the National Office of Employment (ONEMO), the Department of Employment Statistics, and the
                         DEP of the Ministry of Employment (METPFQE). Only the ONEMO publishes employment
                         statistics, though these are incomplete; they do not reflect the actual unemployment situation in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         RoC and do not comply with international standards. The project will therefore support (a) adoption
                         of the 2008 International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO-08), (b) assessment of
                         ONEMO, the Department of Employment Statistics, and METPFQE, (c) publication of an
                         operational manual for the production and dissemination of employment statistics, and (d) support
                         the drafting and implementation of, a national plan for building up employment statistics.

                         (b) Household living conditions statistics: Poverty and inequality: The project will support
                         elaboration of a continuous survey program by a team that will design, conduct, and process priority
                         surveys to satisfy data needs. The National Institute of Statistic, with the assistance of AFRISTAT,
                         has conducted two national Household Budget Consumption surveys (ECOM2005 and ECOM2011)
                         which were used to establish poverty profiles without deep analysis of the data. The continuous
                         survey program will collect regular consumption and wellbeing data for monitoring and assessing
                         poverty and progress toward the MDGs. The continuous household survey, will adopt a practice of
                         rotating modules to collect different types of data depending on the specific needs at any given time.

                         (b) Economic and financial statistics: The production of national accounts statistics (NAS) was
                         transferred from the CNSEE, the current National Institute of Statistics, to the DGE in 2002. The
                         NAS currently available to the public are based on the 1968 System of National Accounts (SNA68).
                         In 2004, DGE started producing of NAS following the System of National Accounts (SNA93), using
                         international nomenclature with 2005 as the base year. Though NAS have been completed for 2005,
                         2006, and 2007 they have not been published. Only about 250 out of 2,000 enterprises provide fiscal
                         information to DGE. As a consequence, national outputs by activity and sector are biased because
                         huge extrapolations are made. Further, there are considerable divergences between balance of
                         payment (BoP) statistics and the external trade statistics produced by the Direction Generale des
                         Douanes et Droits Indirects (DGDDI). In 2012 activities related to national account statistics were
                         returned to the National Institute of Statistics, but only one of the 16 staff who had been trained for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         five years and worked on national accounts at the DGE moved to the Economic Synthesis Unit
                         (ESU) at the NIS. The ESU has only four computers, which are shared by 17 staff. The government
                         provides US$100 000 every year for national account statistics. There are methodological
                         weaknesses related to estimates of production volume and values, taxes, margins by item, insurance
                         sector data, and mining and oil investment and production cost and outputs. The project will support
                         (a) an enterprise census, (b) an enterprise sample frame, (c) an agricultural survey, (d) an informal
                         sector survey, (e) harmonization of BoP and external trade statistics from DGDDI, (f) rebasing of
                         national accounts using 2011 and later 2016 as base years, (g) the drafting of a plan for adoption of
                         the 2008 SNA, and (h) publication of the 2005–07 national accounts series.

                         (c) Price statistics: The main price statistics are the consumer price index (CPI), producer price index
                         (PPI), import price index (IPI), export price index (EPI) and wholesale price index (WAPI). Of these,
                         in RoC, the National Institute of Statistics produces only monthly CPIs and CPI data cover only
                         Brazzaville and Pointe Noire. Until July 2010, the CPI was computed using 1977 as the base year for
                         Brazzaville and 1996 for Pointe-Noire. Since then, 2005 has been the base year for both cities and a
                         harmonized CPI is published using foods basket and weights from the 2005 household survey
                         (Ecom2005). Activities supported under this project will be (a) extension of the CPI to cover all the
                         major cities (chefs-lieux) of the provinces; (b) updating of the food basket, weights, and the CPI base
                         year using the 2011 household budget consumption survey (Ecom2011); and (c) production of the
                         PPI, IPI, EPI, and a WAPI

                                                                      Page 5 of 10
                         (d) External trade statistics: These are not reliable. The NIS reproduces and relies solely on poor-
                         quality data collected by DGDDI that diverge considerably from export data collected from
Public Disclosure Copy




                         businesses. Collecting and harmonizing data from different sources is recommended for external
                         trade statistics. The project will support (a) drafting and implementation of a plan to improve external
                         trade statistics, and (b) production of informal external trade statistics.

                         (e) Balance of payments (BoP) data: The BEAC produces BoP data, which is usually published with
                         two or three years delay. The project will support drafting and adoption of a plan to improve BoP
                         statistics and publish them more promptly.

                         (f) Government finances and public sector debt statistics are reliable, produced regularly, and made
                         widely available.

                         (g) Agriculture statistics, including livestock, fisheries, aquaculture, and forestry: With technical
                         assistance from the Food and Agriculture Organization, the RoC is preparing a second agricultural
                         census. Since the first was in 1985, the master sample frame has become obsolete, rendering
                         agricultural production estimates unreliable. In fact, agricultural statistics are not produced. The
                         project will support (a) a needs assessment of departments that produce agricultural statistics, and (b)
                         drafting and implementation of an action plan to improve the production of agricultural statistics
                         according to international standards.

                         (h) Forestry statistics: These are produced by the Ministry of Water and Forests and were last
                         published in 2008. Informal forestry activities are partially covered. The project will support the
                         drafting and the implementation of a national plan for the development of forestry statistics.

                         (i)      Mining, gas, and oil statistics: The project will finance a diagnostic study, draw up an action
                         plan to promote the production and dissemination of reliable statistical information on mining, gas,
                         and oil activities in RoC, and support implementation of the action plan.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         26.      Subcomponent 2.2. Dissemination and use of statistical information: Here the project will
                         support activities that promote the use of statistics to support policy decision. National statistical
                         agencies tend to give more priority to the supply side of statistics than the demand. This approach
                         posits that supply creates its own demand in the sense that the availability of reliable statistics reveals
                         important issues that public debates and policies focus on. While supply of good-quality statistics is a
                         major aspect of this project, the demand side of statistics will also have high priority. There are five
                         design aspects to promote demand for statistics:
                         (a) Linking statistical output to the Development Programs Monitoring Systems. Objectives and
                         outcomes that appear in policy documents will be examined carefully to identify monitoring needs
                         and the statistics needed to address them.
                         (b) Promoting the use of data through knowledge products. The project will support the NIS Poverty
                         Observatory and economic monitoring activities by publishing collaborative analytical works on
                         many thematic topics for greater public scrutiny. Technical discussions, forums and workshops will
                         be delivered to stimulate open debate on development issues.
                         (c) Development and activation of a comprehensive information dissemination and micro-data access
                         policy. The project will also support activities that encourage use the NSS data by students for their
                         thesis and dissertations
                         (d) Creation of an open data portal for diffusion of statistical products and services and a platform for
                         users to provide feedback on the quality of NSS statistical products and services.

                                                                       Page 6 of 10
                         (e) Statistics literacy: The project will promote the importance of statistics to the scientific
                         community, business and government data users, the media, policy makers, employers, students, and
                         the general public.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         27.      Archiving: Most data producers in RoC still use archaic means to store data. The project will
                         promote data archiving using modern techniques.


                         28.      Component 3: Project management (US$5 million)
                         This component will support the project operations costs to ensure that the Project Coordination Unit
                         (PCU) in the National Institute of Statistics implements the project effectively. The NIS is the main
                         executing agency of the NSDS and is responsible for coordination. The PCU will be responsible for
                         day-to-day management of the project; it will (a) prepare annual work plans and budgets; (b) carry
                         out all disbursements and any financial management and procurement-related activities in
                         accordance with World Bank–approved procedures; (c) prepare and consolidate periodic progress
                         reports; (d) monitor and evaluate project activities; (e) liaise with other stakeholders on issues related
                         to the project; and (f) provide administrative support to beneficiary institutions, in accordance with
                         the Project Implementation Manual. The PCU will report directly to the Director General of NIS. It
                         will consist of a PCU coordinator, an IT specialist, an HR specialist, a number of technical staff
                         (including monitoring and evaluation and sectoral focal points), a procurement specialist, and a
                         financial management specialist, all full-time. It will ensure that progress is reported quarterly to the
                         Project Steering Committee and High Commission of Statistics, the World Bank, and other relevant
                         authorities. The coordinator is responsible for signing contracts and managing all aspects of project
                         implementation. The component will finance (a) equipment and operating costs related to the project;
                         (b) M&E; (c) activities to strengthen the NIS coordination team and selected ministry project
                         beneficiaries; (d) technical assistance, training (including training for PCU staff), and research
                         studies; and (e) external audit.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This project is classified as Category C. No civil works or activities will be undertaken with adverse
                         environmental or direct social impacts in terms of safeguards. The project does not require any land
                         acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement nor does it provide financing for activities that result
                         in restriction of access to resources or livelihoods.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Abdoulaye Gadiere (AFTN1)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         No              Activities that will be financed under the project
                          BP 4.01                                              consists of building human resources capacity,
                                                                               creating good career management conditions to
                                                                               make NSS a more attractive institution.
                                                                               Production of relevant data in sectors such as
                                                                               health, education, demographic, Human
                                                                               development and employment for decision-
                                                                               making constitutes another activity of the project.
                                                                               It is also expected from the project to facilitate the
                                                                               acquisition of computer hardware and data



                                                                       Page 7 of 10
                                                                                management system. So. Any civil work will be
                                                                                supported by the project. Taking into account this
                                                                                aspect no environmental or social safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                instrument is required because no adverse impacts
                                                                                are expected. Only best practices will have to be
                                                                                applied during the project implementation.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No              Not relevant

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              Not relevant

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No              The project does not include any activity that
                                                                                necessitates the use of pesticides. Thus the policy
                                                                                is not triggered.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No              No civil works will be undertaken under the
                            BP 4.11                                             project that will induce excavations with
                                                                                probability to undercover physical cultural
                                                                                resources
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No              Not relevant

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No              There is no need of land acquisition that could
                            4.12                                                involve displacement of populations or
                                                                                restrictions of access to resources or livelihoods.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              Not relevant

                            Projects on International        No                 Not relevant
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 Not relevant
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The activities to be funded by the project are limited mainly to building human resources capacity,
                              creating career development conditions, making NSS more attractive institution. The project will
                              also support the production of relevant data in sectors as health, education, demographic, Human
                              development and employment for decision-making. Equipment like computer hardware and data
                              management system are also expected to be financed under the project. However, the PSTAT will
                              not fund any civil works that could involve environmental or social adverse impacts. In
                              conclusion, there will be no adverse environmental and social impacts associated with this project.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              NA
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse


                                                                        Page 8 of 10
                              impacts.
                              NA
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The recipient is familiar with the Bank’s safeguard policies as mentioned previously and has
                              implemented projects financed by the Bank in the past. In addition, the project is not expected to
                              support directly or indirectly any civil works that might generate environmental and/or social
                              potential adverse impacts.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              NA
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Franck M. Adoho
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                      Date: 01-May-2014
                            Advisor:


                                                                        Page 9 of 10
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Albert G. Zeufack (SM)    Date: 01-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           Page 10 of 10
