INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
6                                              Report No.: JSDSC552O
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Feb-2015
0   Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Kazakhstan                 Project ID:  P114830
Project Name:   Hazardous and Persistent Organic Pollutants Waste Management Project
(P114830)
Task Team       Katelijn Van den Berg
Leader(s):
Estimated       06-Apr-2015                Estimated    08-Jul-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR                       Lending       Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
GEF Focal       Persistent Organic Pollutants
Area:
Sector(s):      Solid waste management (100%)
Theme(s):       Pollution management and environmental health (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:     92.45            Total Bank Financing:   34.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                             Amount
Borrower                                                       48.10
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          34.00
Global Environment Facility (GEF)                              10.35
Total                                                          92.45
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)
1. Project Development Objective(s)
The proposed Development Objective is to create a hazardous and POPs waste treatment facility


﻿with appropriate environmental controls and to remediate selected PCB contaminated sites, reduce
public and environmental exposure to these now contaminated lands
The Project will achieve its objective through: (i) creation of a facility to treat hazardous and POPs
U         waste with appropriate environmental controls; (ii) remediation of selected historic PCBs
contaminated waste disposal sites; and (iii) disposing the PCBs waste, PCBs equipment and PCBs
contaminated soil with hazardous waste classification from these sites, remediated under the
Project, in the constructed facility in line with the Stockholm Convention.
2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
The overall Global Environment Objective of the proposed project is to reduce the environmental
and health hazards associated with stockpiles of PCB-containing materials and waste and POPs-
based pesticides, by eliminating stockpiles, establishing a treatment facility and safeguarding sites
contaminated with these materials consistent with the country's obligations under the Stockholm
Convention. For this purpose, the Global Environment Facility has in principle approved a US
$10.35 million Grant.
C. Project Description
The proposed project will have four components: (1) development of a treatment/destruction facility;
(2) remediation of selected historic PCB contaminated sites, including treatment of present PCB
waste/equipment and PCB contaminated soil; (3) Strengthening Institutional and Regulatory
Industrial Hazardous Waste Management Capacities; and (4) project management.
Component 1 - Creation of a Treatment/Destruction Facility
This component aims to create a facility for treatment and destruction through incineration of
hazardous waste and POPs and PCBs in line with Kazakhstan's obligations under the Stockholm
convention. The siting process for this facility will be concluded during project preparation.
Site suitability for such central facility is based on an analysis of sites which had been identified by
the Ministry of Environment and Water Resources (now Ministry of Energy) on the basis of
technical site suitability criteria and based on support of local authorities. The technical site
suitability selection criteria consist of: (i) possibilities for regular maintenance and servicing
requirements, and intensive control procedures, including analytical facilities (PCB testing capacity);
(ii) a continuous supply of fresh water, large quantities of chemicals for the scrubber and a reliable
supply of electricity and fuel as well as an analytical facility to monitor and demonstrate
environmental compliance; (iii) requirements for highly trained personnel. One of the possible sites
is located in one of Kazakhstan's industrial zones (Pavlodar), and all are relatively far removed from
population centers. The finalization of site selection will further be based on Kazakhstan legislation,
the quantities and location of POP-containing wastes at the priority sites and the quantities, types and
origin of other industrial hazardous waste suitable for co-incineration/destruction in the same facility
as well as the Environmental Impact Assessment and public consultations.
Suitable fixed (non-mobile) incineration/treatment technologies are determined in the feasibility
study currently ongoing during project preparation (funded by a Project Preparation Grant from the
Global Environmental Facility and the Kazakhstan Republican Budget) and will also include a
landfill cell or cells, possibly with some basic pre-treatment possibilities (e.g. for stabilization and/or
dewatering). These technologies will be based on commercial availability of the technology, as
technologies which still contain technological or scape-up risk cannot be considered for financing,


﻿and taking into account that the disposal/destruction facility should be designed to handle solids and
liquids as well as contaminated soil, materials, containers and packed waste with high levels of PCB
contamination (> 50 mg/kg).
O
Q)      Based on the selected site for the treatment facility and the functional design for the facility, an
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment will be prepared, including the Environmental
Management Plan to define the environmental technologies and performances for the proper
operation, pre-treatment, advanced treatment, treatment of exit gases and removal of ashes etc as
well as the corresponding monitoring requirements in line with international standards. These
measures will consist of the specifications of post treatment such as gas scrubbing and air pollution
control requirements, waste water treatment, treatment and/or disposal of ashes, slag and other
residues and specifications for environmental monitoring of air emissions (carbon monoxide/dioxide,
hydrogen chloride, particulates, PCBs, HCB, dioxins and furans etc), wastewater discharges and
waste.
A detailed stakeholder and public engagement and consultation document will also be prepared as
part of preparation which will include a citizen engagement and grievance system as well as the
establishment of a transparent monitoring and disclosure of the works progress and environmental
controls in place. It will also be explored if external public monitoring groups, journalist or NGOs
could be involved with coverage in local media to stimulate transparency of monitoring results of the
facility.
Component 2: Remediation of selected historic PCB contaminated sites, including treatment of
present PCB waste/equipment and PCB contaminated soil
Based on the executed pre-feasibility study for remediation of POPs contaminated sites was with
detailed site investigations, sampling and laboratory analysis to investigate the extent of PCBs and
POPs contamination in the soil, the proposed project will focus on environmental remediation of a
selection of priority sites for historic PCB contamination that urgently need remediation measures.
The priority of sites was determined based on the detailed site investigations and risk assessment
which were executed for the sites identified as priority sites. All the sites to be included in the
remediation component will be sites for which the clean-up is the responsibility of the Government.
These priority sites are:
1.           Ust-Kamenogorsk Capacitor Plant (estimated amount of waste that would require off-site
treatment between 50,000-150,000 cubic meter, to be determined based on the remediation plan)
2.     Ust-Kamenogorsk Capacitor Sludge Pond (estimated amount of waste requiring off-site
treatment: 21,000 cubic meter).
A third priority site will be included during execution of the Feasibility Study. The Feasibility Study
will also prepare the full remediation plan for the priority sites before appraisal which will also
define in more detail the amounts of soil which should be excavated and brought to the treatment
facility. As there is no further PCB production on any of the sites, the Project will only focus on the
historic legacies which are a government responsibility and no solution has to be found for ongoing
PCB production from these sites.
Component 3 - Strengthening Institutional and Regulatory Industrial Hazardous Waste Management
Capacities
This component will strengthen institutional and regulatory capacities in the field of industrial


﻿hazardous waste management and support improvements to the regulatory framework to establish
adequate and sustainable management of these industrial hazardous waste categories in Kazakhstan.
The component will support development of the establishment of a hazardous waste registry in the
O
)       Ministry and strengthen the institutional and regulatory capacity in the following areas: (i) hazardous
waste producers' responsibility to classify, store and transport hazardous waste; (ii) how companies
would be obliged to use the hazardous waste treatment facility; (iii) control of hazardous waste
producers' compliance with the hazardous waste management legislation and their responsibility to
report to the environmental authorities regarding hazardous waste generation; and (iv) penalty system
for hazardous waste producers in case of violation of the legislation.
Component 4 - Project Management
The objective of this component is to manage project resources in accordance with the Project's
objectives and procedures as outlined in the Project Operations Manual (POM) which will be
developed during project preparation.
This component will finance the operating costs of a Project Implementation Unit within the Ministry
of Energy to carry out project management functions for Components 1, 2, and 3. Support will be
provided for procurement, financial management, coordination, reporting, and monitoring and
evaluation. It will also be explored if a communication officer could be part of the PMU to work with
the communities and stakeholder engagement plan.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The location of the treatment/destruction facility is being determined as part of preparation under the
Feasibility Study financed by the Project Preparation Grant from the GEF and counterpart financing
from the Republican Budget of Kazakhstan. Site suitability will be based on a site suitability analysis
for identified suitable sites. Site suitability election criteria will consist of, amongst others: regular
maintenance and servicing requirements, and intensive control procedures, including analytical
facilities (assessment of in-country PCB testing capacity), are also necessary. A continuous supply of
fresh water, large quantities of chemicals for the scrubber and a reliable supply of electricity and fuel
are needed as well as an analytical facility to monitor and demonstrate environmental compliance.
There are also requirements for highly trained personnel. It is therefore expected that the site will be
located in one of Kazakhstan's industrial zones. The site identification will further be based on the
legislation in Kazakhstan, the quantities and location of POP containing wastes at the priority sites
and the quantities, types and origin of other industrial hazardous waste suitable for co-incineration/
destruction in the same facility.
The proposed Project will also focus on environmental remediation of a selection of priority sites for
historic PCB contamination that urgently need remediation measures. These priority sites are:
1.     Ust-Kamenogorsk Capacitor Plant
2.     Ust-Kamenogorsk Capacitator Sludge Pond.
A third priority site will be added during execution of the Feasibility Study
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Environmental Impact Assessment and Environmental Management Plan will be prepared as
part of the Feasibility Study. The implementing agency is the Ministry of Energy under which the


﻿Department of Environment is located.
Kazakhstan law requires the EIA to be prepared by the same company that prepares the detailed
design for such a facility, which is contrary to WB requirement for an independent EIA for a
O
U       Category A project. Therefore, it may be necessary for two separate documents to be prepared by
two different parties, despite the fact that they will draw upon the same database (any differences in
analysis and conclusions between the two EIAs will warrant particular attention). It will be important
to ensure there are no substantive inconsistencies in the EMP aspect of the two documents.
Alternatively, the Borrower could opt for an independent review of the EIA prepared by the Design
firm, but this would require prior approval by the WB Board. EIA will be updated at the detailed
design stage.
The PMU has sufficient capacity for safeguards during project preparation; it will be assessed as part
of preparation if further strengthening is needed for project implementation.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Frank Van Woerden (GENDR)
Lola Ibragimova (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment     Yes         Yes. Site remediation has very positive impacts, but
OP/BP 4.01                               disposal site for haz/POPs waste and the handling
and transport of these materials to the disposal site
will need crucial controls to prevent or mitigate
environmental risks. A hazardous waste treatment
facility is a polluting enterprise, but with proper
environmental controls (such as flue gas treatment)
and operated properly air pollution is minimal.
To address potential environmental and social
impacts, the borrower will conduct a full ESIA
which will contain, in particular, the analysis of
alternatives carried out at the pre-feasibility study
stage, which explanation for rejecting alternative
approaches examined at that stage (e.g. use of
cement kiln for destruction of hazardous waste)
The ESIA will also cover component 2 of the
remediation of sites and component 3 which will
provide TA to strengthen institutional and regulatory
capacities relating to industrial hazardous waste
management.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No          All construction and project activities will be within
existing sites. These Project sites are industrial
(brownfield) sites.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           All construction and project activities will be within


﻿existing sites. These Project sites are industrial
(brownfield) sites.
Pest Management OP 4.09       No            There will be no procurement of pesticides or
fertilizers, or any works within the project which
would lead to the use or the increased use of
pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources   No           All construction and project activities will be within
OP/BP 4.11                                  existing sites. These Project sites are industrial
(brownfield) sites.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No            It is very unlikely that there any of the potential
4.10                                        disposal or remediation sites identified by the Govt
are within areas where indigenous people are found;
this will be double checked during preparation.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  TBD           This will be defined as part of the Feasibility Study,
BP 4.12                                    but as part of the preliminary site identification
which the Ministry has undertaken, possible sites are
at industrial zones and without population present.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No           The Project will not finance construction or
rehabilitation of any dams, nor will it rely on the
performance of an existing dam or a dam under
construction, as defined in this Policy.
Projects on International     TBD           Whether there is the possibility to impact
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        international waterways will be determined as part of
the ESIA.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No           The project sites are not in a disputed area.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Mar-2015
O
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
ESIA preparation started October 2014 and completion is planned in March 2015.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Katelijn Van den Berg
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards     Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                        Date: 09-Feb-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/       Name: Kulsum Ahmed (PMGR)                        Date: 09-Feb-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


