INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA12359
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Mar-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Nigeria                   Project ID:  P154660
Parent       P130865
Project ID:
Project Name: NG-Polio Eradication Support - Additional Financing (P154660)
Parent Project NG-Polio Eradication Support (FY13) (P130865)
Name:
Task Team       Ayodeji Oluwole Odutolu,Ana Besarabic Bennett,Shunsuke Mabuchi
Leader(s):
Estimated       02-Mar-2015               Estimated    10-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GHNDR                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Health (90%), Other social services (10%)
Theme(s):       Child health (90%), Social Inclusion (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    200.00            Total Bank Financing:  200.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                       Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                        0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                             200.00
Total                                                                   200.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
Page 1 of 5


﻿A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The development objective of the proposed Project is to assist, as part of a global polio
eradication effort, the Government of Nigeria to achieve and sustain at least 80% coverage with
OPV immunization in every state in the country
B. Current Project Development Objectives - Parent
C. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
To assist the Recipient, as part of a global polio eradication effort, to achieve and sustain at least
80% coverage with oral polio vaccine immunization in every state in the Recipient's territory, and
sustain national routine immunization coverage.
3. Project Description
The revised Project Development Objective (PDO) is to assist the Government of Nigeria, as part of
a global polio eradication effort, to achieve and sustain at least 80% coverage with oral polio vaccine
immunization in every state in the country, and to sustain national coverage for routine
immunization.
The Federal Government of Nigeria (FGON) made an urgent request to the Bank for the proposed
additional financing (AF) which will provide critically needed funds to: (i) avoid any disruption in
polio eradication activities; (ii) prevent a deterioration in routine immunization (RI); and (iii) take
advantage of opportunities to introduce new vaccines that will have a large impact on under-5
mortality. The FGON made the request because it has previously made large investments in polio
eradication, RI, and new vaccines but is facing a critical shortfall in revenues due to declining oil
prices.
The activities under the AF build on a very strong network of development partners (DPs) that have
helped Nigeria make progress. All of the funds under the AF will be coursed through WHO and
UNICEF who have a large and well-functioning presence on the ground. These are the arrangements
that the FGON itself has used and which have been successfully used during the original project.
The Bank has provided about $300 million to support the polio eradication program in Nigeria over
the last 12 years through the previous project (which also included 3 additional financings) and the
current project. Now that Nigeria is on the cusp of interrupting wild polio transmission, there is an
opportunity to ensure that an acute financing gap does not derail hard earned gains.
The original project was approved on July 12, 2012, for an amount of US$95 million, and has a
closing date of July 31, 2015. The proposed additional financing would extend the closing date to
July 31, 2017.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will take in all 36states of the federation including the Federal Capital Territory (FCT).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Edda Mwakaselo Ivan Smith (GSURR)
Page 2 of 5


﻿6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The EA is upgraded to B. There is effective provision in
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                the National Health Care Waste Management Plan but
the government will develop protocols during
implementation for health care waste management at the
health facility level.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           The project does not affect or involve natural habitats.
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The project does not involve forests or forestry.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project does not involve pest management.
Physical Cultural       No           The project does not affect or involve physical cultural
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No          The Project does not involve nor will it finance land
OP/BP 4.12                           acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement or
restrictions of access to resources or livelihoods.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           N/A
4.37
Projects on International  No        N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No           N/A
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Project is not envisaged to cause an potential large scale, significant and /or irreversible
impacts. The environmental risks and the environmental category of additional financing will be
upgraded to B.
There is no construction financed under the project. Overall environmental impact of the Project is
likely to be positive with potentially significant environmental benefits with medical waste
disposal as the main risk. Vaccination is potentially a significant source of waste generation,
especially through expired vaccines due to poor stock management and cold chain. However in the
context of Nigeria this is of modest environmental concern since the volume of waste from wasted
vaccine vials is small and because they are sterilized vaccines which do not present a public health
or environmental risk. The overall social impacts of the Project are likely to be positive with
main issue being utilization of services. No land requirements or restriction of access to sources of
livelihoods or involuntary resettlement of any kind under the Project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Page 3 of 5


﻿There is no potential indirect or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project
area.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Nigeria has demonstrated its commitment to mitigating adverse social and environmental impacts
in the implementation of a range of World Bank projects. There are adequate legal and
institutional frameworks in the country to ensure compliance with World Bank safeguards
policies. On September 4, 2013, the Nigerian Federal Executive Council (FEC) approved a new
National Strategic Healthcare Waste Management policy, including National Strategic Healthcare
Waste Management Plan and Guideline for the country. The fact that Ministers of Environment
and Health jointly presented the memo seeking Council's approval for the adoption of the National
Healthcare Waste Management policy, underscores the high level of the commitment of the
Government toward improving the situation of the sector. Annex 3 presents a summary of the new
policy context, including applicable plans and guidelines.
Generally, Nigeria is considered to have a fairly complete set of regulations and legal instruments
however consistent implementation of monitoring and enforcement measures remain a challenge.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include: (i) poor and vulnerable groups, including populations in the three states
affected by the state of emergency, Yobe, Borno, and Adamawa, and vulnerable groups such as
women and children who face a disproportionate risk of mortality and morbidity due to avertable
causes; (ii) state and local governments; (iii) the government at the federal level, including the
National Primary Healthcare Development Agency (NPHCDA); and (iv) the development partner
community, including UNICEF and WHO who will implement the project as well as the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation and JICA.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to InfoShop                           ////
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Nigeria                                                   04-Sep-2013
Comments: Federal Executive Council approval and disclosure
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Not applicable.
C Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Page 4 of 5


﻿OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]     NA[
report?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ayodeji Oluwole Odutolu,Ana Besarabic Bennett,Shunsuke
Mabuchi
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Trina S. Haque (PMGR)                Date: 18-Mar-2015
Manager:
Page 5 of 5


