                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                         APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSA2799
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Nigeria                             Project ID:     P123513
                            Project Name:       Third National Urban Water Sector Reform Project (P123513)
                            Task Team           Miguel Vargas-Ramirez
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           17-Feb-2014                         Estimated   18-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                         Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTU2                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                    Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Water supply (100%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       310.00                 Total Bank Financing: 250.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                              60.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                    250.00
                              Total                                                                                          310.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objectives (PDO) are: a) to increase access to improved water supply
                           service in selected States of Nigeria; and to improve the financial viability of existing water utilities
                           in those States, and b) to increase the investment planning capacity of participating States
                            3. Project Description
                           Component 1: Sector Reforms and Water Supply Investments

                                                                          Page 1 of 9
                         This component will finance sector reforms, capacity building and operational development
                         activities, and large strategic investments in Bauchi, Ekiti, and Rivers States. Specific sub-
                         components in these States are as follows:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 1.1 - Rehabilitation and Expansion of Water Production and Distribution Facilities.
                         The project will support Rivers, Bauchi and Ekiti States with resources to implement large
                         investments to rehabilitate water production and expand distribution facilities to increase access to
                         water supply services in the States’ capital areas and immediate environs; and to advance
                         implementation of needed reforms and capacity building in their water sectors to increase the
                         sustainability of those services. The component may also finance identified operational development
                         activities in the States to improve performance, such as strategic metering, marketing communication
                         programs, review of technical and commercial cadastral information databases, and office facilities
                         and equipment.

                         Subcomponent 1.2 - Secondary Towns Water Supply Improvement. (This sub-component will
                         support the implementation of pilot sub-projects (based on appropriate models such as public private
                         partnerships (PPP) and output-based payments) in the provision of secondary towns water services,
                         focusing on a few large towns in Rivers, Bauchi and Ekiti States. These pilots could then be scaled
                         up later by the States to other areas. Inclusion of this sub-component is to be re-confirmed at
                         appraisal.

                         Component 2: Capacity Building for Reform and System Improvements This component will
                         support the design and implementation of reforms in nine States as well as minor but urgently needed
                         water supply infrastructure investments for quick improvements in service provision. States to be
                         included under this Component include: Kano, Gombe, Benue, Jigawa, Ondo, Abia, Bayelsa,
                         Anambra, and Plateau. The component will work on making these States “finance-ready” (The
                         project will support these States Water Agencies in preparation of investment and business plans,
                         including needed technical studies and design work that would enable them to access financing from
                         other financiers at a later date) for larger sector investments.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Institutional Strengthening at the Federal Level and Project Management This
                         component will strengthen the capacity of the Federal Government to, inter-alia, identify an
                         appropriate financing model for the sector, and to support and monitor the reform process, utility
                         performance, and hydrological data collection. It will include:

                         a)        A study to support the Federal Government in identification of a suitable sector financing
                         model that will allow for more transparent and efficient transfer of resources from the Federal level
                         to the State level, including possibly a Water Fund or similar financing mechanism for the sector,
                         with the participation of Donor partners and the private sector;
                         b) Performance monitoring support to FMWR to allow it to maintain and update its monitoring
                         database on States’ sector performance to track provision of WSS services nationwide, including the
                         promotion of monitoring tools to track the impact of secto r interventions on the poor, vulnerable
                         populations, and impacts by gender;
                         c)       Support to the National Hydrological Information Service Agency to provide timely data for
                         water source monitoring (to be confirmed at appraisal); and
                         d) Project Management to cover additional fiduciary, safeguards and technical expenditures borne by
                         FMWR associated with the implementation of this project.




                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in about 12 states across Nigeria. The project will finance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Rehabilitation and Expansion of Water Production and Distribution Facilities and associated reform
                         studies in Ekiti, Bauchi and Rivers. The project will also finance studies, training, goods, urgent and
                         minor rehabilitation works and services in Kano, Gombe, Benue, Bayelsa, Anambra, Jigawa, Ondo,
                         Abia and Plateau. With the exception of activities in Rivers State, for which preliminary designs
                         have been prepared, specific locations for most investments are not known in sufficient details at the
                         pre-design stage, hence salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguards analysis will be
                         assessed in more detail once the locations of the subprojects are identified. For activities in Rivers
                         State, the potential impacts are likely to be small scale and site specific, typical of category B
                         projects.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Joseph Ese Akpokodje (AFTN1)
                         Michael Gboyega Ilesanmi (AFTCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              In component 1, the project will finance the
                          BP 4.01                                              rehabilitation and expansion of water production
                                                                               and distribution facilities and related investments
                                                                               in the selected states. However, the exact
                                                                               locations and sites could only be ascertained at
                                                                               the time of project preparation for one State
                                                                               (Rivers State). The potential impacts are likely to
                                                                               be small-scale and site specific, typical of
                                                                               category B projects. To successfully identify and
                                                                               manage potential adverse impacts on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               environment from project funded activities such
                                                                               as those enumerated above, the borrower has
                                                                               prepared an Environmental and Social
                                                                               Management Framework (ESMF) and a site
                                                                               specific Environmental and Social Impact
                                                                               Assessments (ESIA) for works in Rivers State to
                                                                               better identify the environmental and social
                                                                               challenges and the means to effectively address
                                                                               them in a participatory manner. Safeguards
                                                                               documents have been consulted upon and cleared
                                                                               by the Bank. These documents have been
                                                                               disclosed in-country and at the Banks Info shop .
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               The project will not affect or involve natural
                                                                               habitats.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               The project will not envision any significant
                                                                               conversion or degradation of forests, nor does it
                                                                               involve forestry.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No               Not applicable.



                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            Not applicable.
                         BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            Not applicable.

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The project interventions will avoid, where
                         4.12                                            possible, adverse impacts on people, land and
                                                                         other economic resources and livelihoods. The
                                                                         borrower has prepared and disclosed a
                                                                         Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF); once the
                                                                         location of the subprojects are identified; the
                                                                         borrower will prepare site specific Resettlement
                                                                         Action Plans (RAPs) to address the needs of
                                                                         persons who will be affected by loss of economic
                                                                         activities, land acquisition and/or relocation.
                                                                         However, The RPF and the site specific RAP for
                                                                         Port Harcourt have been prepared, consulted upon
                                                                         and cleared by the Bank. The documents were
                                                                         disclosed on 09/12/13 in Country and 09/13/13 on
                                                                         the Bank's InfoShop
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         Yes           Water supply in some of the States, such as Ekiti
                                                                         and Bauchi depends on sources, including
                                                                         existing multi-purpose reservoirs. The project
                                                                         involves works on rehabilitation, upgrade, and
                                                                         expansion of water distribution networks in these
                                                                         two States where the primary water source is an
                                                                         existing multi-purpose dam or reservoir. These
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         multipurpose dams are also used for agricultural
                                                                         uses. There may be a marginal additional water
                                                                         withdrawal from the dams for project purposes,
                                                                         however most of the works will involve the
                                                                         rehabilitation, upgrade and expansion of the
                                                                         distribution network. In view of the project’s
                                                                         reliance on the safe and reliable water supply of
                                                                         dams, namely Ero, Ureje and Gubi Dams, OP
                                                                         4.37 on Dam Safety is triggered. As per the
                                                                         policy, an independent dam safety expert has
                                                                         conducted an inspection of those dams and
                                                                         prepared a dam safety report including
                                                                         recommendations for dam safety related remedial
                                                                         measures and instruments preparation, which will
                                                                         be financed and undertaken during project
                                                                         implementation. This report has been cleared by
                                                                         the Bank.
                         Projects on International         Yes           The Government of Nigeria has notified the Lake
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            Chad Basin Authority and an exemption to



                                                                 Page 4 of 9
                                                                                notification for minimal impact will be sought for
                                                                                the Niger River Basin, in accordance with OP
                                                                                7.50.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 Not applicable.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is categorized as a B implying that most of the potential environmental and social
                              impacts will be minor, site-specific and manageable to a reasonable level. Based on the
                              information provided until this stage, the Project triggers four World Bank safeguard policies,
                              namely, Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Safety
                              of Dams OP/BP 4.37 and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50).

                             A. Environmental Assessment (World Bank OP 4.01)
                             The project falls into Category B for Environmental Assessment (EA). The actual application of
                             the Environmental Safeguard Policies will vary depending on the proposed locations for, and
                             nature of, works in each State. Once operational, most of the impacts of the Project are linked to
                             the improved access to safe water and are expected to be positive in terms of generation of
                             economic, social and public health. Specific impacts are outlined below:

                             Potential Positive Impacts may include but not be limited to:

                             a)      Improved WSS Services: Upgrade and rehabilitation of water distribution systems will
                             provide high quality potable water to a larger population. Improved WSS is also expected to result
Public Disclosure Copy




                             in reduced operation and maintenance (O&M) costs to the utilities and higher efficiency through
                             decreased water losses and pumping costs.
                             b)      Additional economic benefits: As a result of the project, economic benefits will occur in
                             terms of increased water volume of good quality and lower medical costs associated with treating
                             water-borne diseases.

                             Potential Negative Impacts may include but not be limited to:

                             a)       Negative environmental impacts during the construction phase may entail temporary loss
                             of access during physical works, however they are only temporary. Typical impacts include:
                             •        Dust raised from the roads in the construction sites and from material carrying trucks
                             •        Waste water from construction/renovation sites
                             •        Disposal of solid wastes
                             •        Use of materials that may damage health (i.e. heavy-metal (lead) containing paints,
                             asbestos-cement tiles, pipes, copper pipes, inflammable and toxic materials etc.)
                             •        Noise generated by the construction machinery
                             •        Traffic disruption and disturbance to the residents of the area. Impacts associated with
                             increased traffic concern issues such as public safety, congestion of roads and disruption of regular
                             traffic.
                             •        Contamination/pollution of resource by construction, human wastes, including fuel & oil,


                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                          hazardous wastes, wastewater, etc. Soils and Water Resources
                          •       Business activity might suffer during construction from loss of pedestrian and vehicular
                          access. Interference with water, cable, telephone and electrical power supplies might occur in
Public Disclosure Copy




                          some urban areas, inconveniencing the public.
                          •       Loss of visual amenities as construction materials are stockpiled and trees and natural
                          vegetation cut down.

                          B. International Waterways (World Bank OP 7.50)
                          The project triggers OP 7.50 given the location of some project areas in the Lake Chad River
                          Basin and the Niger River Delta. The FMWR sent an official letter to the Lake Chad basin riparian
                          countries, through the Lake Chad Basin Commission, notifying them of the project, in accordance
                          with OP 7.50, with a June 15, 2013 deadline for receiving responses. No response was received by
                          the set deadline. An exception to the notification requirement is being considered in respect to the
                          River Niger riparian countries, concerning project activities in Ekiti and Rivers States, whose
                          water schemes receive water from dams constructed on tributaries or aquifers of the River Niger,
                          because the project is not expected to significantly impact water quantity or quality in the River.

                          C. Involuntary Resettlement (World Bank OP 4.12)
                          The project interventions will avoid where possible adverse impacts on people, land and other
                          economic resources and livelihoods. However, the Borrower has prepared a Resettlement Policy
                          Framework (RPF) and site specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) to address the needs of
                          persons who will be affected by loss of economic activities, land acquisition and/or relocation. The
                          preparation of these safeguards documents has been inclusive and participatory, promoting
                          community ownership and social accountability. The final RPF has been reviewed and disclosed
                          in-country and InfoShop. The site specific Port Harcourt ARAPs has been reviewed and cleared
                          by both the project safeguards team and the Regional Safeguards Advisor.

                           D. Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37
                           Finally, the issue of safety of dams is considered to be of relevance for the project due to its
Public Disclosure Copy




                           linkage to water supply. Due diligence of analyzing the current situation and establishing the
                           current operation and maintenance r egime has been undertaken by a Dam Specialist consultant
                           engaged by the Borrower in coordination with a Bank’s Dam Specialist. The draft report covered
                           his findings and recommendations for required dam safety remedial works and instruments
                           preparation. The draft final report has been finalized and it is available in the project’s files.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Please see positive impacts outlined in Section 1 above. As mentioned, most of the negative
                           impacts would be during the construction phase, while the long term impacts are largely expected
                           to be positive, as explained.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The ‘no project’ alternative which would maintain the status quo with respect to poor WSS
                           systems and associated conditions, was considered an option. It would however result in a
                           worsening situation in terms of not only the quality of service delivery, but also additional
                           operations and maintenance (O&M) costs to the utilities and States. Implementing the project,
                           through the combination of rehabilitation and reconstruction of WSS infrastructure and reforms
                           aimed at strengthening the WSS sector’s capacity to manage services in an efficient, effective, and
                           sustainable manner, was found to be the best alternative. The project will explore maximizing the

                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                           potential of the water source and treatment through enhanced distribution before considering
                           exploring new water sources or abstractions. Additionally, newer technologies such as trenchless
                           piping and re-lining instead of replacing would be considered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Two types of safeguard documents/instruments have been prepared, discussed and publicly
                           disclosed, including in the project areas, before the appraisal of the Project. The Environmental
                           and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the Project has been prepared to provide a
                           framework for how environmental and social safeguards are to be addressed as specific project
                           sites have not been yet clearly identified and have a detailed technical feasibility study during the
                           Project preparation. Second, an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and
                           including an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and Social Management Plan (SMP)
                           including an Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) have been prepared for investments
                           in the city of Port Harcourt and have been finalized, since the specific project location have been
                           identified.

                           (a) Environmental Assessment: Because specific details of site selection and technology to be
                           used will be determined during project implementation, an Environmental and Social Management
                           Framework (ESMF) has been prepared. The ESMF details the procedure, form, and contents for
                           specific ESIAs and EMPs to be prepared and approved for investments in each State.
                           Implementation of activities carried out under the project will conform to relevant laws in Nigeria
                           and sound environmental and construction management principles. The short-term negative
                           environmental impacts, which are mostly expected to occur during construction or rehabilitation
                           works will be minimized by proper planning and application of preventive measures, as outlined in
                           the EMP, and will be mitigated by restorative actions after the civil works are completed.

                           Overall, mitigation of any environmental effects will be the responsibility of the PIUs in the
                           States. In addition, it will be the responsibility of the contractors to ensure that mitigation is
Public Disclosure Copy




                           carried out successfully during construction/renovation works as required in the EMP. The
                           provisions described in this EMP will be incorporated in the contract with construction companies
                           selected to perform the works. The cost of mitigation measures will be included in the cost of the
                           contracts and will be borne by contractors, who will make the necessary provisions for
                           implementation of mitigation measures as part of their contractual obligations.

                           b)      Resettlement Policy Framework: A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been
                           prepared for this project. The RPF sets out the policies, principles, institutional arrangements,
                           schedules, and funding mechanisms for any land acquisitions that may occur in the project areas as
                           the result of the project. The RPF also provides guidelines to stakeholder participating in the
                           mitigation of adverse social impacts of the project, in order to ensure that the social and economic
                           well-being of project affected persons (PAPs) will not be worsened as a result of the project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Public consultations with regard to EA were held with local stakeholders in all participating States
                           in accordance with Bank Guidelines for EA. The draft Final ESIA report for investments in Port
                           Harcourt and the RAP were disclosed publicly in country on September 12, 2013, and at the
                           Bank’s Infoshop on September 13, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   13-Sep-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nigeria                                                          12-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   13-Sep-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nigeria                                                          12-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         Not applicable.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]


                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Miguel Vargas-Ramirez
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                     Date: 25-Feb-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Alexander E. Bakalian (SM)                      Date: 03-Mar-2014




                                                                       Page 9 of 9
