                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC7966

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Fiji                             Project ID:      P150028
                            Project Name:      Transport Infrastructure Investment Project (P150028)
                            Task Team          James A. Reichert
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Oct-2014                      Estimated        22-Jan-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Trade facilitation
                                               and market access (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    222.22                     Total Bank Financing:        100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      22.22
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        100.00
                              Asian Development Bank                                                       100.00
                              Total                                                                        222.22
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project’s development objective (PDO) is to increase the resilience and safety of land and
                           maritime transport infrastructure for users of roads, bridges and jetties.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Transport Infrastructure Investment Project (TIIP), which will be jointly financed with ADB, is
                         expected to consist of two components.

                         Component 1: Improvement of Existing Road and Maritime Sector Assets (est. US$194.22 million).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component would fund works to repair, rehabilitate, reconstruct or upgrade, as appropriate,
                         existing roads, bridges and jetties. It would also repair and replace existing and/or install new
                         streetlights on selected roads, bridges and jetties. Where possible and appropriate, road, bridge and/or
                         jetty sub-projects would be geographically packaged to streamline costs and maximize local impact

                         Component 2: Technical Assistance (est. US$28.00). Technical assistance would consist of
                         consultancy services to help implement the project, carry out the prioritization processes for selection
                         of sub-projects under Component 1 and design and supervision of the selected works, conduct road
                         safety audits, and upgrade design and construction standards and specifications to be more climate
                         resilient.

                         The project will be co-financed by ADB and a common framework and instruments for
                         environmental and social safeguards is proposed. The safeguards arrangements will comply with the
                         environmental and social safeguards policies of both institutions and apply to both components of the
                         proposed project. Review and clearance procedures during preparation and implementation and
                         arrangements for safeguard supervision and monitoring during implementation will be the joint
                         responsibility of both institutions. An MoU that will detail responsibilities during preparation and
                         implementation, is being drafted for approval by both institutions.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Located in the South Pacific, Fiji has 333 islands, a one-third of which are inhabited. However,
                         nearly 90 percent live on the three main islands of Viti Levu (10,429 sq. km), Vanua Levu (5,556 sq.
                         km), and Taveuni (470 sq. km). Principal urban centers on Viti Levu include Suva, the capital of Fiji,
                         Nadi, an important center of tourism and location of Fiji’s international airport, and Lautoka, Fiji’s
                         second largest city. Labasa is the largest town on Vanua Levu and is the location of Fiji Sugar
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Corporation’s only sugar mill (Viti Levu has three mills).

                         The Fijian Islands are characterized by diverse ecosystems that include significant areas of natural
                         forest. Wide ranges of coastal and marine ecosystems exist, ranging from extensive areas of
                         mangroves to various coral formations.

                         Fiji’s total land mass is 1.8 million hectares, and almost all forest cover is on communally-owned
                         native land, with 13,960 hectares on private freehold, and 5,600 hectares on government lease land.
                         Freshwater wetlands occupy 0.3 percent of Fiji’s land area.

                         Approximately 70 percent of the main island of Viti Levu is drained by three large river systems, one
                         of which has the largest catchment area covering one-third of the island. There are a total of ten
                         rivers with distances ranging from 21 miles to 73 miles (the longest).

                         Fiji has one of the most developed economies in the Pacific due to an abundance of forest, mineral
                         and fish resources. The main sources of GDP are its tourist industry and sugar exports.

                         The project will rehabilitate and upgrade selected roads, bridges and jetties at locations to be
                         identified in coordination with the Government. Improving road sector assets will support the
                         sustain the development of Fiji’s key economic sectors, including tourism, the sugar industry, and
                         agriculture, which combined employ 70 percent of the country’s labor force, by providing improved,
                         sustained and safe access to tourist areas, markets and agricultural inputs. It will also contribute to
                         the functioning of the country’s large subsistence sector and help link villages and communities to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         essential services, such as health care facilities and schools in Fiji.

                         Fiji’s main environmental challenges include the degradation of land resources, climate change,
                         increasing risk of flooding and inundation of coastal settlements, unsustainable exploitation of
                         marine resources, waste management problems, air and water pollution.

                         The majority of the intended beneficiary communities for the rehabilitated road sector assets will
                         likely be Indigenous People (IP). Fijans (Fijans and Rotumans), the indigenous people of the Fijian
                         Islands, known as ‘iTaukei’ represent 57 percent of the population (2007 census). Indo-Fijians,
                         whose ancestors migrated to the Fijian Islands in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, make up 38
                         percent of the population. The remaining 5 percent consist of other minority communities, including
                         people from various Pacific Island countries, Australia, New Zealand, the People’s Republic of
                         China, and Europe.

                         iTaukei culture places considerable emphasis on communal values, respect for the authority of
                         chiefs, who are predominantly male, and the precedence of men before women. Gender dynamics are
                         influenced by these traditional values that allow women few, if any, rights to inherit land or formally
                         own property, or to take part in public decision-making.

                         However, there has been progress in improving women’s rights across Fijian society as a result of the
                         Government’s many international and regional gender equality commitments. Education and
                         employment for women have become increasingly valued, especially in socially acceptable
                         occupations, such as professional and clerical work. In February 2014, the Government approved the
                         National Gender Policy, which seeks to promote gender equity and equality by removing all forms of
                         gender discrimination and inequalities to attain sustainable development.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Land in Fiji is managed through three complementary systems: (i) native land; (ii) freehold land; and
                         (iii) crown land. Native land, which is owned by iTaukei people, accounts for about 84 percent of all
                         land, with freehold and crown land accounting for around 8 percent each. Native and crown land
                         cannot be bought or sold, but each is available on a leasehold basis, with leases often lasting up to 99
                         years, while freehold land can be bought and sold on the open market.

                         While minor widening or realignment of road sector assets might take place to accommodate
                         drainage systems and/or sidewalks and to ensure safer conditions, the sub-projects are not expected
                         to involve any significant land acquisition or resettlement. Working within the existing alignment
                         and road reserve means very minimal impact to mangroves, forests and natural habitats.

                         The sub-projects will be designed in a way that is culturally appropriate and based on public
                         consultations with communities from the area(s) where improvements will occur, and to ensure broad
                         community support and that there are no issues or disputes with families affected by current
                         alignments or rights-of-way.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The implementing agency for this project is the Fiji Roads Authority (FRA). This is the first time
                         FRA has engaged with the World Bank, but it does have experience in implementing projects
                         financed by the Asian Development Bank (ADB), including safeguards. FRA has hired a consulting
                         firm specialized in road management, to support its program of road sector maintenance. The firm is
                         familiar with internationally accepted tendering practices and requirements for environmental impact
                         assessments (EIA) and land acquisition and resettlement plans. The 2005 Environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Management Act requires that any proposal to be financed by any international or local development
                         finance institution be supplemented by an EIA as a condition of finance.

                         To support implementation, a project management unit (PMU) would be established within FRA.
                         Key staff of the PMU are expected to include a qualified project manager, road and bridge engineers,
                         a procurement specialist, an accountant, and safeguards specialists. In addition, a project operations
                         manual with clearly defined procedures for implementing the TIIP will be developed.

                         The 2005 Environmental Management Act requires the screening of all developmental projects for
                         environmental and social impacts, while the 2007 Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Process
                         Regulations requires that projects with significant impacts undergo an Environmental Impact
                         Assessment (EIA) process. The EIA requirements are regulated and monitored by Fiji’s Department
                         of Environment (DoE). Since the EMA was passed, DoE has imposed the EIA process to many
                         projects, including large tourism developments in Fiji. In 2011 alone, 73 projects/developments were
                         underwent the EIA process. EIA Reports and EMPs are publicly available through the DoE website.
                         The EIA process in Fiji is fairly robust and effective. This was also validated when the team did on
                         site visits to possible road and bridge projects. Persons met at the various possible project sites
                         confirmed that DoE is actively implementing the requirements of the Environmental Management
                         Act, e.g. EIA and EMP was required for a quarry site, consultations were carried out.

                         DoE requires the completion of an EIA Screening Application form (EMA/EIAP1). The
                         Environment Act schedule states that any proposal financed by international or local development
                         institution and which requires an EIA as a condition of finance is subject to the process. In this case,
                         DoE will be the processing authority for the EIA. In addition, the EMA requires the preparer of the
                         assessment to be accredited and registered with DoE. The DoE accreditation process for EIA
                         preparers has clear guidelines and procedures. A total of 23 accredited individuals from academe,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         consultancy firms and government are listed in the DoE website, which includes their fields of
                         expertise.

                         The likely scale and design of the project indicate that the environmental and social impacts can be
                         managed successfully, provided appropriate plans and implementation arrangements are put in place.
                         The environmental and social impacts of road, small sized bridges and jetty reconstruction are
                         predictable and can be effectively mitigated through careful design and project supervision.

                         The project will be designed to minimize social risks by rehabilitating existing roads, small sized
                         bridges and jetties within existing rights-of-way and within the formation width, with adequate
                         provisions for traffic safety measures, such as signs and speed bumps. This will be confirmed during
                         public consultations that will take place during project preparation.

                         Fiji has legislation in place that seeks to restore people’s livelihoods when they are adversely
                         impacted by a project and provides compensation in line with World Bank and ADB applicable
                         policies. iTaukei land (also known as native land) falls under communal tenure relationships and can
                         be reserved for special use by its owners. Some Native land can be purchased by the Government
                         related to public infrastructure investments through a customary acquisition process that involves the
                         Ministry of Lands and Mineral Resources, as well as the iTaukei Land Trust Board (TLTB.) TLTB
                         is the statutory body responsible for managing native land, including leases. TLTB seeks to protect
                           land ownership rights assigned to iTaukei landowners and to help facilitate any commercial
                           transactions that revolve around its use. TLTB negotiates leases and licenses and provides related
                           administrative functions. TLTB is well positioned to assist with any land issues that may arise in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           context of the project, and to administer the Native Land Register, which helps register from birth all
                           indigenous Fijians as native landowners of communally owned land.

                           A poverty and social assessment (PSA), as required by ADB, will be prepared and outline poverty,
                           social, and gender issues for the overall project and for any subsequent subproject(s)/area(s). The
                           PSA will also follow WB's requirements for a social assessment (SA) and gender analysis, such as
                           socio-economic characteristics that serve as baselines (e.g., population, land tenure, gender issues,
                           vulnerable persons, poverty etc.), and include a review of relevant laws and regulation for social
                           management (cultural resources, land and resettlement, gender, IPs, disability, poverty reduction
                           etc.). The PSA will be integrated into the Environmental Assessment and relevant measures
                           integrated into the Environmental and Social Management Plan.

                           Specific HIV/AIDS clauses will be included in works contracts that are consistent with the Banks
                           Standard Bidding Document clauses on HIV/AIDS awareness and Toolkit for HIV/AIDS education
                           in transport projects.

                           A consultant was selected to prepare the relevant safeguards documents in preparation for project
                           appraisal and is assisting the Government with the disclosures and consultations with key
                           stakeholders on the draft safeguard documents to project beneficiaries in the area of the WB's Year 1
                           project/ADB’s sample project in order to meet relevant requirements of ADB and WB.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Julie Babinard (GTIDR)
                           Gerardo F. Parco (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Both Component 1 (Improvement of Existing
                           BP 4.01                                               Road and Maritime Sector Assets) and
                                                                                 Component 2 (Technical Assistance) will
                                                                                 trigger OP 4.01. Component 1 will rehabilitate
                                                                                 selected roads, bridges and rural jetties.
                                                                                 Prioritization of these subprojects will be done
                                                                                 by the Government of Fiji in consultation with
                                                                                 the World Bank and ADB. The assets on the
                                                                                 long list would typically have proper reserves/
                                                                                 rights of way, and repairs and rehabilitation
                                                                                 works are expected to be carried out within
                                                                                 existing alignments and reserves. The
                                                                                 environment and social safeguards specialist
                                                                                 have visited hundreds of kilometers of roads and
                                                                                 dozens of possible bridge locations on the
                                                                                 islands of Viti Letu, Vanua Letu, and Taveuni to
                                                                                 gauge conditions on the ground. The project is
                         not expected to have significant impacts on
                         natural habitats or forests (mangroves and
                         terrestrial forests). This is because road and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         bridge works will be limited to existing road
                         reserves, while jetties to be rehabilitated exist
                         and are clear of mangroves and not located
                         within coral reef areas. No PCR was observed
                         near the proposed roads, bridges or jetties.
                         Nevertheless, further screening will be done
                         during project preparation to determine likely
                         impacts to natural habitats, forests and PCR.
                         Sites of quarries and material sources were also
                         visited. However, it is worth noting that
                         specific quarries to be used as materials sources
                         for the project have not yet been identified.
                         Year 1 project/s are still being discussed and
                         agreed with the GoF. Nevertheless, sand and
                         gravel sources in Fiji are sufficient. Substantial
                         volcanic deposits are found on all islands.
                         Proper quarry operations will be made part of
                         the safeguards requirements. Other impacts of
                         the proposed activities are the typical
                         construction related impacts, including dust,
                         noise, and traffic due to temporary road
                         closures/diversions.

                         Potential impacts of rehabilitation works on
                         rural jetties will also be limited. The rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         jetties are generally not close to major reefs or
                         sensitive marine habitats. These are also clear
                         of mangroves. Designs to upgrade rural jetties
                         will incorporate adequate reception facilities to
                         treat waste from ships (bilge water, toilet
                         wastes). Dredging of navigation channels will
                         not be financed under the project.

                         Component 2 consists of consultancy services
                         to help implement the project, carry out the
                         prioritization processes for selection of sub-
                         projects under Component 1 and design and
                         supervision of the selected works, conduct road
                         safety audits, and upgrade design and
                         construction standards and specifications to be
                         more climate resilient. The TA will lead to the
                         completion of technical or engineering designs,
                         or other outputs in preparation for the
                         construction of physical infrastructure with
                         potential physical impacts. The TA activities
                         may have environmental and social concerns
                         which are mostly associated with specific
Public Disclosure Copy




                         subsequent physical investments. It was agreed
                         with FRA that there is a need to address
                         environmental or social issues associated with
                         the results of the TA through the application of
                         the ESMF designed for the project. Good
                         environmental design will also be incorporated
                         into the detailed plans, and include proper
                         drainage, improved access for persons with
                         disabilities, etc.

                         The team proposes the project be assigned as
                         Category B.

                         This project is co-financed with ADB. All
                         proposed safeguard instruments (ESMF/EMP,
                         LARF/LARP, IPPF/IPP) will be drafted based
                         on the Pacific Island Countries WB safeguard
                         templates and guidelines. More detailed
                         instrument requirements are described for each
                         policy below.

                         The overarching safeguard instrument will be an
                         Environmental and Social Development
                         Framework (ESMF), which will be prepared in
                         order to establish key environmental and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                         principles and standards for the sub-projects. It
                         will also include a risk screening tool, a
                         description of the legal framework, a gap
                         analysis between donor safeguard requirements
                         and the country’s systems, as well as
                         institutional arrangements for implementation.
                         The ESMF will follow the general process for
                         an environmental assessment and review
                         framework (EARF) as set out in ADB
                         Safeguard Policy Statement 2009, as well as
                         those elements required by WB’s OP 4.01 in
                         respect of ESMF. The result will be a blended
                         document suitable for meeting the policy
                         requirements of both ADB and WB. An EMP
                         will also be drafted for what is anticipated to be
                         Year 1 project activities and for what constitutes
                         ADB’s sample project and for subsequent sub-
                         projects.
                                                             The WB requirement for social assessments will
                                                             be met in parallel with ADB’s requirement for
                                                             poverty and social assessments (PSA).
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Environmental assessments are a separate
                                                             requirement and will be done independently of
                                                             PSAs. Environmental assessments will be done
                                                             for Year 1 projects prior to Appraisal.

                                                             A land acquisition and resettlement framework
                                                             (LARF) will serve as the umbrella safeguard
                                                             document for mitigating any potential impact
                                                             linked to land and acquisition and resettlement,
                                                             following ADB and WB requirements. A land
                                                             acquisition and resettlement plan (LARP) will
                                                             also be prepared for WB Year 1 project/ADB’s
                                                             core sector project. The LARF will guide the
                                                             preparation of LARPs for sub-project
                                                             preparation when land acquisition or
                                                             resettlement impacts are identified. Government
                                                             will be responsible for preparing the required
                                                             documents and ensuring proper consultation,
                                                             while WB will help guide the implementation
                                                             process.

                                                             Material sources and quarries will be
                                                             determined once the subprojects are identified.
                                                             These material sources and quarries will be
                                                             included as part of the scope of the EIA.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Free, prior and informed consultations with
                                                             project communities and key stakeholders on
                                                             project design and related arrangements will be
                                                             organized during project preparation to confirm
                                                             broad community support, and during
                                                             implementation, as required, in compliance with
                                                             safeguard policy. All required environmental
                                                             and social safeguard documents will be
                                                             disclosed (ESMF, EA, ESMP, PARF, IPP) in-
                                                             country in both English and Fijian. A formal
                                                             grievance mechanism, as well as a monitoring
                                                             framework, will also be established.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   The Fijian Islands are characterized by diverse
                                                             ecosystems, including significant areas of
                                                             natural forest. Screening for impacts to Natural
                                                             habitats will be done as part of the project
                                                             preparation.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                TBD   Screening for impacts on forests will be done as
                                                                 part of the project preparation. Fiji has many
                                                                 areas with good forest cover. Road
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 rehabilitation, which might involve minor road
                                                                 widening, will consider impacts to forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not procure pesticides or
                                                                 pesticide application equipment. The project
                                                                 will also not lead to a potential increase in
                                                                 pesticide usage.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Further screening for PCR will be done as part
                         BP 4.11                                 of project preparation.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   An Indigenous Peoples Framework (IPFF) for
                                                                 Year 1 projects and all subsequent sub-projects
                                                                 will be prepared. Indigenous Peoples Plans
                                                                 (IPP) will be prepared for sub-project that are
                                                                 known by appraisal and which have the
                                                                 presence of IPs. The Government will organize
                                                                 free, prior and informed consultations with the
                                                                 affected IP communities and ensuring that there
                                                                 is broad community support for the proposed
                                                                 sub-project(s). The WB requirement for the
                                                                 Social Assessment will be met in parallel with
                                                                 ADB’s requirement for the poverty and social
                                                                 assessment (PSA). The SA will evaluate sub-
                                                                 projects’ potential positive and adverse effects
                                                                 on IPs, and where adverse effects may be
                                                                 significant, to examine project alternatives.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 This will be part of the PSA and will be
                                                                 integrated into the IPPs to be prepared both
                                                                 prior to Appraisal and during project
                                                                 implementation.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   While land acquisition or resettlement is not
                         4.12                                    expected, a Land Acquisition and Resettlement
                                                                 Policy Framework (LARF) will be prepared to
                                                                 address any potential adverse social impacts that
                                                                 may result due to involuntary acquisition of
                                                                 assets and/or changes in land use, and include
                                                                 provision for compensation and rehabilitation
                                                                 assistance. For sub-project preparation that
                                                                 involves land acquisition or resettlement, the
                                                                 Government will be responsible for preparing a
                                                                 land acquisition and resettlement plan (LARP)
                                                                 to help guide the implementation process and
                                                                 serve as documentation for compensation.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No
                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Sep-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      July 15 to September 15, 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: James A. Reichert

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Surhid P. Gautam (RSA)                                                                                               Date: 08-Aug-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager:   Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)                                                                                                   Date: 10-Aug-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
