                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA1212
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Senegal                            Project ID:    P124018
                            Project Name:      Senegal Sustainable and Inclusive Agribusiness Project (P124018)
                            Task Team          Jean-Philippe Tre
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          05-Oct-2012                        Estimated   10-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTA1                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            GEF Focal          Multi-focal area
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Irrigation and drainage (50%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
                                              (25%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (25%), Export
                                              development and competitiveness (20%), Trade facilitation and m arket access
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              (25%), Rural services and infrastructure (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      86.02           Total Bank Financing:                  80.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               80.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                          6.02
                              Total                                                                                     86.02
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?



                                                                       Page 1 of 11
                          2. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)
                            A. Project Development Objective(s)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The Project Development Objective is to develop inclusive commercial agriculture and
                            sustainable land management in project areas
                            B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                            N/A

                          3. Project Description
                         This will be done through investments in infrastructure (irrigation in particular), technical assistance
                         to key public institutions (Rural communities in particular) and support to the private sector
                         (including smallholders) all along the agribusiness value chains.

                         The project will develop and implement inclusive and sustainable solutions, in particular with respect
                         to community-driven land and water and forest management systems, which will be scalable and
                         replicable in other regions of Senegal.

                         The definition of Sustainable Land and Water Management (SLWM) adopted in this project is based
                         on TerrAfrica’s definition: the adoption of land use systems that, through appropriate management
                         practices, enables land users to maximize the economic and social benefits from land while
                         maintaining or enhancing the ecological support functions of the land resources. SLWM includes the
                         sustainable management of soil, water, vegetation and animal resources. It involves a holistic
                         approach that integrates social, economic, physical and biological assets.
                         produces as well as the development of other industries such as tourism) and the construction of an
                         agribusiness terminal at the St Louis port.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         St. Louis Region around the Ngalam Valley and Lac de Guiers. Precise locations of project activities
                         unknown at this stage
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Robert A. Robelus (AFTA1)
                         Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               As the exact location, scale and substance of
                          BP 4.01                                              sub-projects envisioned in this project are
                                                                               unknown at this stage, the Borrower has prepared
                                                                               an Environmental and Social Management
                                                                               Framework (ESMF) setting forth the
                                                                               mechanisms, procedures and institutional
                                                                               arrangements for screening – including standard
                                                                               methods for preparing, reviewing, approving and
                                                                               disclosing specific Environmental and Social
                                                                               Impact Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental and
                                                                               Social Management Plans (ESMPs) –



                                                                       Page 2 of 11
                                                                     implementing and monitoring sub-projects. The
                                                                     ESMF discusses potential impacts, including the
                                                                     cumulative effects of project activities in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     intervention areas (the Lac de Guiers and the
                                                                     Ngalam Catchments and on downstream
                                                                     resources), when added to other past, present and
                                                                     reasonably foreseeable future actions. These may
                                                                     include, but not be limited to: (i) physical
                                                                     resources (hydrology) and terrestrial and aquatic
                                                                     biological resources (both fauna and flora) and
                                                                     their ecological functions/services; (ii) fisheries;
                                                                     (iii) land use patterns and management in the
                                                                     intervention areas; (iv) population dynamics in
                                                                     and around project intervention area; (v) water
                                                                     use patterns, quality and management; and (vi)
                                                                     waterborne diseases, etc. The ESMF has been be
                                                                     disclosed in-country and at Bank InfoShop prior
                                                                     to appraisal (on August 10, 2012), upon review
                                                                     and clearance by the Bank.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes             The project will support activities near natural
                                                                     habitats, classified forests and other natural
                                                                     reserves, and agricultural activities may affect or
                                                                     be close to natural habitats. There is a potential
                                                                     that pastoralists will move away from the project
                                                                     zones and invade the nearby protected wetland
                                                                     areas (Ndiael, a Ramsar site with significant
                                                                     migratory bird populations). While the project is
                                                                     not expected to affect critical natural habitats,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     ESIAs/ESMPs prepared during implementation
                                                                     will address any impacts to natural habitats. The
                                                                     project will avoid adverse impacts on natural
                                                                     habitats and, where necessary, appropriate plans
                                                                     will be prepared to avoid or adequately mitigate
                                                                     these impacts, especially on neighboring
                                                                     communities
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes             Under component 2.3, the project supports
                                                                     activities in classified forests surrounding
                                                                     agricultural intervention sites. The project will
                                                                     support the participatory diagnostic of
                                                                     management issues, the mapping and delineation
                                                                     of the forest boundaries and assist with
                                                                     development of management plans. These
                                                                     measures are expected to enhance the status of
                                                                     these protected areas. In addition, there is
                                                                     potential risk that the expansion of agricultural
                                                                     areas leads to encroachment on surrounding
                                                                     forest areas. The agricultural intervention area


                                                             Page 3 of 11
                                                                         still has some floodplain forests (gonakiers or
                                                                         Acacia nilotica), which are under threat of
                                                                         changes in hydrology and irrigation development.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Should forests be threatened by project
                                                                         developments, the project will prepare a forest
                                                                         management plan.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes             Though procurement of pesticides is not
                                                                         envisaged under the project, planned agricultural
                                                                         intensification activities, through irrigation and
                                                                         horticulture development, will likely result in an
                                                                         increased use – and potentially improper
                                                                         management – of pesticides and other
                                                                         agrochemicals on the part of local farming
                                                                         communities. The borrower has prepared a Pest
                                                                         Management Plan (PMP), derived from existing
                                                                         PMPs (and in particular, those prepared under
                                                                         PDMAS, PASAOP and WAAPP 1-A). The PMP
                                                                         discusses vector management issues and includes
                                                                         a mitigation plan and the requisite institutional
                                                                         arrangements to implement and monitor the plan.
                                                                         The Bank has reviewed and cleared the PMP /
                                                                         VMP (Vector Management Plan). The PMP/VMP
                                                                         has been disclosed in-country and at Bank
                                                                         InfoShop prior to appraisal (date: August 10,
                                                                         2012)
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             Civil works for the construction of canals and
                         BP 4.11                                         land preparation may lead to land excavation
                                                                         activities in the region and to chance finds, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         requirement to take appropriate measures will be
                                                                         included in the TORs. The ESMF includes
                                                                         guidance on managing physical cultural
                                                                         resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes            Though the specific sites and social impacts of
                         4.12                                            envisioned physical investments are not yet
                                                                         known, investments in irrigation development,
                                                                         rehabilitation of access roads and other critical
                                                                         infrastructure impacting land ownership, land use,
                                                                         and livelihoods may require the involuntary
                                                                         acquisition of land for civil works.. The project
                                                                         will not rely on the assembling of land for
                                                                         agricultural investment through compulsory
                                                                         acquisition by the state, but rely instead on land
                                                                         that has been voluntarily allocated for those
                                                                         purposes by communities. Nevertheless, the
                                                                         project may lead to land use changes, and affect


                                                                 Page 4 of 11
                                                                   user rights, if community lands are reorganized to
                                                                   facilitate land allocation agreements with
                                                                   investors or the reconfiguration and improvement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   of plots in connection with the project. The
                                                                   Borrower has prepared a Resettlement Policy
                                                                   Framework (RPF), setting forth the mechanisms
                                                                   and procedures for compensating for any land
                                                                   acquisition, impacts on economic activities and/or
                                                                   livelihoods on the part of Project Affected People
                                                                   (PAPs) that may occur as a direct result of project
                                                                   activities. The RPF has also detailed the
                                                                   institutional arrangements for implementing and
                                                                   monitoring the Framework, including a grievance
                                                                   mechanism for the proper recording and
                                                                   addressing of any claims or disputes that may
                                                                   occur with regard to persons directly affected by
                                                                   the project. The RPF has been disclosed in-
                                                                   country and at InfoShop prior to Appraisal, after
                                                                   it was reviewed and cleared by the Bank (date:
                                                                   ….). Resettlement Action Plans will be prepared
                                                                   as necessary during project implementation. The
                                                                   RPF and PAD include an analysis of land tenure
                                                                   issues in Senegal (annex 6) and how such issues
                                                                   will need to be addressed and managed in the
                                                                   context of the project.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   Yes             The safety of the existing Diama and Manantali
                                                                   Dams may influence the performance of the
                                                                   project. The OMVS, which has the final
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   responsibility for the operation of the Diama and
                                                                   Manantali dams, has carried out dam safety
                                                                   assessments for both dams in 2001 and 2011
                                                                   respectively. The Borrower will be required to
                                                                   develop an emergency preparedness plan for each
                                                                   dam, and to carry out periodic inspections of the
                                                                   dam at least every 5 years through independent
                                                                   experts including a civil structure and dam safety
                                                                   expert.
                         Projects on International   Yes             Project activities will involve investments to
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      secure waters from the Ngalam. These waters are
                                                                   tributaries of the Senegal River, a shared
                                                                   international waterway that runs through several
                                                                   countries in the region. On November 2012, the
                                                                   Government sent a Notification Letter of the
                                                                   proposed Project activities and their impact on
                                                                   water use to the High Commissioner of the
                                                                   OMVS The Government received a response
                                                                   from the OMVS High Commissioner dated


                                                           Page 5 of 11
                                                                                February 5, 2013, indicating that the OMVS will
                                                                                take all necessary actions with the Commission
                                                                                Permanente des Eaux in order to make available
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                the amount of water required for the project
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Social:
                              The project is expected to have impacts on land ownership, land use, and livelihoods. Specifically,
                              the project may require the involuntary acquisition of land for civil works (e.g., the construction,
                              rehabilitation and maintenance of irrigation canals, extension of power lines, etc.). Although the
                              project will not rely on the assembling of land for agricultural investment through compulsory
                              acquisition by the state, but rely instead on land that has been voluntarily allocated for those
                              purposes by communities, it may nevertheless lead to land use changes, and affect user rights, if
                              community lands are reorganized to facilitate lease agreements with investors or the
                              reconfiguration and improvement of plots in connection with envisaged investments. Such actions
                              may result in the moving of land users, which in turn might negatively impact their livelihoods
                              and/or restrict access to fuel sources, medicinal plants, etc.
                              Although it is unlikely that significant resettlement of existing farmers will occur in order for
                              communities to assemble contiguous plots of sufficient size to be attractive to investors, cases of
                              physical resettlement will be possible in parcels affected by infrastructure construction.
                              Given the common presence of many land users and land rights holders on a given piece of land, it
                              will be difficult for the project to ascertain that what the landowner characterizes as a voluntary
Public Disclosure Copy




                              transaction truly represents an informed and voluntary choice on the part of the community as a
                              whole. There exists in such situations the risk of elite capture and coercion over choices, hence the
                              RPF’s importance as a tool to ensure that the procedural and substantive rights of local people are
                              appropriately addressed.
                              Additional resettlement-related issues include passageway rights for livestock.

                              Environment:
                              The project is rated a category A project. It is expected to have positive environmental impacts
                              through its support for inclusive commercial agriculture investment schemes that promote the
                              better use of land and water resources. Potential environmental risks could include: i) point and
                              nonpoint pollution of water sources, especially water pollution and bank erosion in Lac de Guiers,
                              which is the main drinking water source for Dakar; (ii) issues associated with the improper use,
                              handling and storage of agricultural chemicals; iii) negative environmental impacts associated with
                              the rehabilitation of irrigation or small-scale civil works and water stations and/or warehouse for
                              food processing or storages; (iv) construction, rehabilitation and maintenance of irrigation canals,
                              access roads, extension of power lines to connect commercial farmers and agro-processing
                              facilities; (v) agricultural development and commercialization which will lead to increased
                              production volumes and value added processing and marketing capacity of agribusiness involved
                              in commodity chains and warehousing facilities; (vi) increase in waterborne diseases, such as
                              malaria, intestinal and urinary bilharzia and increase in HIV/Aids and other sexually transmitted


                                                                        Page 6 of 11
                          diseases; (vii) expansion of invasive plant species, such a Typha australis and water hyacinth and
                          others; (viii) the risks of potential transgenic crops; (ix) reduction in grazing areas and risks of
                          impacts on wetlands (Ndiael, a Ramsar site: migratory birds) through the invasion of pastoralists
Public Disclosure Copy




                          and impacts on transhumance corridors, which could lead to increased conflicts between farmers
                          and pastoralists; (x) potential impacts on the remaining forests in the area, which could result a
                          decrease of biodiversity in the area and an increase in the scarcity of fuel wood resources; and (xi)
                          risk of soil degradation and fertility loss (increased loss of organic matter).

                          An irreversible environmental and social impact could occur in case the introduction of transgenic
                          crops is not thoroughly assessed before introduction.

                           Another almost irreversible environmental impact would be the significant eutrophication of Lac
                           de Guiers and its impacts on drinking water quality for Dakar.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Not applicable.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           There are no viable alternatives to the present project design.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Social

                          As specific sites for sub-project areas are currently unknown , the Borrower has prepared a
                          Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to establish and describe the principles and procedures to
                          follow for the screening of sites, as specific sub-project sites are identified for potential
                          resettlement-related issues due to: (i) involuntary land acquisition (under eminent domain) for
Public Disclosure Copy




                          public infrastructure; and (ii) reorganization of community lands to facilitate lease agreements
                          with investors or the reconfiguration and improvement of plots in connection with envisaged
                          investments; such actions may result in the moving of land users, which in turn might negatively
                          impact their livelihoods and/or restrict access to fuel sources, medicinal plants, etc. The latter has
                          been included in the scope of the RPF, as much of the land on which investments may be
                          supported is held under customary tenure, and there is often a complex – and generally
                          undocumented – array of subsidiary interests present on the land. These might include, among
                          others: (i) long-term customary rights derived from membership in the community; (ii) tenancies
                          of varying durations, including migrants (“etrangers?) from outside the community, who may have
                          been present for generations or of recent origin; (iii) sharecropping arrangements; and (iv) pastoral
                          and other rights over common property. Where such impacts are found by initial screening, the
                          RPF provides guidance for the preparation of specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs).

                          To the extent that any reallocation of individual plots is required, the Rural Communities will
                          provide comprehensive support to assist both investors and smallholders in securing land rights,
                          through the establishment of a local land management office in each targeted Rural Community
                          and the providing of land mapping and registration tools, training and land use certificates.

                          The RPF includes a social screening form and associated procedures, for each candidate sub-
                          project for project financing to undertake prior to Bank approval of the associated subproject, to


                                                                     Page 7 of 11
                          avoid the possibility of elite capture and coercion in “voluntary? donations of land. The project
                          will also support the carrying out of land use rights inventories and participatory community
                          decision-making to help obviate the risk of unintentional displacement of rights or livelihood
Public Disclosure Copy




                          activities.

                          The project will not support (nor are private sector investors likely to be interested in) investments
                          in land over which there are significant ambiguities of legal status (including disputes within
                          communities or between different claimants, boundary disputes, disputes between customary
                          owners and the state, or persisting complaints stemming from prior state land acquisitions).

                          The norms and standards of OP 4.12, as set out in the RPF, will apply to both agribusiness and
                          smallholder farmers, as well as impacts on inhabitants and users of state-owned land. A minimum
                          principle will be that no person will be required or asked to relinquish land that they are currently
                          using to accommodate an investment or associated activities (such as the establishment of
                          associated infrastructure or land development for preparation of smallholder plots) without being
                          provided secure tenure over alternative land of at least equivalent quality and without appropriate
                          support for restoring or improving any negatively affected livelihoods activities or access to
                          resources.

                          Environment

                          The Borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), since
                          the exact project areas are not yet known, as well as Pest Management Plan (PMP) to fulfill OP
                          4.09 requirements. Both the ESMF and the PMP have been publicly disclosed in-country and at
                          the World Bank InfoShop on August 10, 2012. Based on the screening outcomes Environmental
                          and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) will be prepared and disclosed in-country and in the
                          Bank’s Infoshop for sub-projects.

                          The Borrower’s capacity to implement the safeguard instruments (ESMF, RPF, ESIAs and RAPs)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          has been strengthened over the last years through the PDMAS project. It could be said that
                          borrower capacity is adequate at present. Further capacity building will be financed under the
                          project.

                           Considerable development activities have taken place in the Senegal River Delta since 1972. The
                           projec t itself will have limited cumulative impacts, as described in the ESMF, but the project will
                           finance an Environmental Audit to identify cumulative impacts over the last decades and identify
                           issues how to improve: (i) environmental and social management of the Delta’s resources, e.g.
                           optimize water resources use, management of water quality, re-flooding of areas for economic
                           development and biodiversity conservation, management of saline intrusion, etc.; (ii) improve
                           planning of irrigation development and management and other economic development activities in
                           the Delta in order to achieve a more sustainable development outcome.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The RPF identifies groups that are susceptible to marginalization from the process of decision-
                           making on land use, including women, migrant farmers and pastoralists. It also identifies groups
                           vulnerable to negative impacts related to displacement, including elderly or sick people, and
                           orphaned children.
                           Women in particular may be disproportionately impacted under this project, as they may be


                                                                     Page 8 of 11
                           susceptible to losing access to medicinal plants and water sources, or face increasing time burdens
                           associated with domestic responsibilities – such as fuel collection – if their land use rights are
                           changed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Among the corresponding mitigation measures included in the RPF are: (i) the use of a checklist to
                           ensure inclusion of vulnerable groups during sub-project screening,(ii) organization of
                           consultation meetings at local level during preparation and implementation of RAPs, and and(iii)
                           focus group meetings and inclusive consultations with land users and landowners on sub-projects,
                           especially during negotiations between investors and communities. Consultation will also be
                           adapted to accommodate power differentials according to gender, age sets, and other key vectors.

                           As the risk of elite capture has been identified, as well as the possibility that local communities
                           may be marginalized from discussions on land use (e.g., negotiations over rents, lease periods,
                           etc.), as well as monetary and nonmonetary benefits from investors to communities, the RPF
                           includes appropriately a consultation plan and grievance mechanisms to complement other tools
                           designed to mitigate these risks (such the embedding of clear principles for community-investor
                           engagement in the model lease and the guidelines for participating communities).
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01-Aug-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   01-Aug-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Senegal                                                          10-Aug-2012
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   30-Oct-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Senegal                                                          04-Nov-2013
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01-Apr-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   01-Apr-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Senegal                                                          10-Aug-2012
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                                                                      Page 9 of 11
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]




                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                             Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Bank?
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Jean-Philippe Tre
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                     Date: 06-Nov-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Martien Van Nieuwkoop (SM)                      Date: 07-Nov-2013




                                                                      Page 11 of 11
