                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA6056
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Belarus                            Project ID:    P146194
                            Project Name:      Belarus Biomass District Heating Project (P146194)
                            Task Team          Fan Zhang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          29-Jan-2014                        Estimated   15-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSEG                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other Renewable Energy (80%), Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (18%),
                                               Public administration- Energy and mining (2%)
                            Theme(s):          City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (80%), Climate change (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        90.00           Total Bank Financing:  90.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       90.00
                              Total                                                                                       90.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to scale up the efficient use of renewable biomass in heat and
                           electricity generation in selected towns of Belarus.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project is expected to improve the energy efficiency of district heating and increase the

                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         use of local wood biomass (replacing natural gas for base-load heat generation) in 13 district heating
                         systems (towns) in Brest, Gomel, Grodno, Minsk, and Mogilev oblasts. The selection of participating
                         district heating utilities is based on the following criteria: (i) consumer demand for heat is densely
Public Disclosure Copy




                         concentrated and is stable or growing; (ii) there is sufficient wood biomass within a reasonable
                         distance from the heat sources; (iii) wood biomass is supplied by certified forestry enterprises from
                         sustainably managed forests; and (iv) biomass will replace imported fuel (gas or oil) for base-load
                         heat generation. Table 1 lists the participating utilities.

                         Table 1 List of Participating District Heating Utilities
                         Oblast City/Settlement Utility ( Site Owner)
                         Grodno           Volkovysk        Unitary Utility ‘Volkovysskoe Kommunalnoe Hozyaistvo’
                         Brest Ivanovo            Communal Unitary Diversified Industrial Enterprise ‘Ivanovskoe Zhkh’
                                 Baranovichi      Unitary Industrial Utility ‘BaranovichiKommunteploset’
                                 Bereza Brest Oblast Unitary Enterprise ‘Upravlenie Zhkh’
                         Gomel
                                 Zarechie         Unitary Utility ‘Rechitskii Raizhilkomkhoz’
                                 Kalinkovichi Unitary Utility ‘Kommunalnik Kalinkovichskii’
                                 Zyabrovka        Unitary Utility ‘Gomelskii Raizhilkomkhoz’
                         Minsk
                                 Starye Dorogi Unitary Utility ‘Starodorozhskoe Zhkh’
                                 Kholopenichi Unitary Utility ‘Zhilteploservis’
                                 Cherven          Republic Unitary Enterprise ‘Chervenskoe Zhkh’
                         Mogilov
                                 Kadino Unitary Utility ‘Zhilkomkhoz’
                                 Cherikov         Unitary Industrial Utility ‘Cherikovskii Zhilkommunkhoz’
                                 Veremeiki        Unitary Industrial Utility ‘Cherikovskii Zhilkommunkhoz’

                         The project has the following three components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: District Heating Energy Efficiency (estimated cost: US$23.4 million)

                         This component would include the following energy efficiency investments in the selected district
                         heating systems:

                         (a)      Modernization and/or construction of heat substations by installing individual building-level
                         heat substations with temperature controls. Historically, most Belarusian district heating companies
                         have delivered heat using centralized heat substations. With a centralized heat substation, the supply
                         of heat to each building depends on the average demand of the buildings connected to the substation.
                         Converting to individual building-level heat substations with temperature controls would allow the
                         delivery of heat to each building in accordance with its heat demand. Experience in neighboring
                         countries shows that investing in individual building-level heat substations would significantly
                         improve heat supply efficiency and would reduce building-level heat consumption by 15–25 percent.
                         By better matching heat supply to demand at the building level, individual building-level heat
                         substations would also improve the quality of heat service.

                         (b)     Reconstruction and/or construction of district heating networks and upgrading of peak-load
                         gas boilers. The reconstruction of heat networks would include replacing obsolete heat pipes that
                         have large heat and water leaks with preinsulated heat pipes and constructing new heat networks.
                         This would significantly reduce losses in heat transmission, which currently amount to up to 50

                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         percent of heat generation for the selected district heating utilities. And installing new peak-load gas
                         boilers to replace outdated ones would increase generation efficiency from the current 75–85 percent
                         to more than 90 percent.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Biomass Heat Generation (estimated cost: US$64.9 million)

                         This component would include investment in base-load biomass boilers, biomass-based small
                         combined heat and power (CHP) plants, and in some towns also wood chipping equipment.

                         (a)     Biomass boilers and CHP plants. This component would support investments in base-load
                         biomass boilers or small CHP plants using wood chips or wood wastes as the main fuel, to replace
                         existing base-load gas or oil boilers. The investments would cover the design and construction of
                         boiler houses, boilers, and ancillary equipment.

                         (b)     Wood chipping equipment and biomass fuel storage facilities. Wood biomass would be
                         harvested by certified forestry enterprises. If forestry enterprises supply only wood logs, the project
                         would finance the purchase of wood chippers. The project would also finance the construction of
                         biomass storage facilities near the boiler houses.

                         Component 3: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (estimated cost: US$1.5 million)

                         This component would finance capacity building for the participating district heating utilities and
                         implementation support to the Project Management Unit (PMU), including the following:

                         (a)      Improvement of existing social accountability mechanisms.          The proposed project
                         would support participating utilities to communicate more proactively with their customers. Support
                         in developing proactive communication plans will be provided to the utilities through a series of
                         training events developed for the deputy directors of the utilities and through expert support in
                         developing communication materials.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               For small towns, social accountability efforts would focus on improving the access to and the
                         availability of information for consumers and civil society organizations on district heating services,
                         the structure of bills, benefits of energy efficiency, project design and implementation, and the like.
                         For large towns, the project would support efforts led by the Energy Efficiency Department to review
                         and improve the efficiency of existing grievance redress mechanisms and feedback analysis to
                         enhance service delivery. An expert would analyze the grievances coming to the utilities and
                         reactions provided to them and provide recommendations on how to increase the efficiency of the
                         handling of grievances.

                               In addition, the project would support the monitoring by consumer groups on continuous
                         information provision on all aspects of service delivery. The consumer groups will be engaged in
                         regular monitoring of proactive information sharing by the participating utilities in accordance with
                         the project results framework. The project would also support utilities to develop websites or
                         improve the content of existing websites and citizen charters based on the recommendations from the
                         consumer groups in order to facilitate better information sharing.

                         (b)      Support for a shift to energy-content-based biomass pricing. In Belarus, wood biomass
                         pricing is based largely on volume—solid cubic meters of raw material. The project would provide
                         technical assistance to support a government effort to move toward pricing based on the energy
                         content of the timber (that is, a unit price per gigajoule or MWh of delivered biomass), including

                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                         financing the purchase of equipment to measure the energy content of biomass. This would
                         acknowledge the direct correlation between energy, moisture content, and other parameters of the
                         fuel; encourage greater focus on t he quality of the fuel; and increase efficiency in the use of biomass
Public Disclosure Copy




                         resources.

                         (c)      Other project implementation support. This would include (i) implementation support
                         consultancy to support the PMU and the district heating utilities in the implementation
                         andsupervision of the project; (ii) training and capacity building for the utilities based on
                         international best practices for energy efficiency improvements in district heating and proven
                         biomass technologies; (iii) annual financial audits of the project accounts; and (iv) other consultancy
                         services.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will finance investments in district heating and biomass heat generation systems at 13
                         locations in Brest, Gomel, Grodno, Minsk, and Mogilev oblasts of Belarus. Physical works on most
                         of the project sites will take place at existing industrial/district heating footprint. Few sites will
                         involve small-scale greenfield construction. Based on previous experience with similar investments,
                         the rehabilitation/replacement works are not expected to generate any hazardous materials that will
                         require special disposal.
                         The locations where boilers will be converted to use biomass fuels (wood chips and shavings;
                         sawdust) are known, so the basic issue of sustainability of the biomass production is addressed
                         during project design rather than being included in the EMP to be addressed during project
                         implementation.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexei Slenzak (ECSEN)
                         Klavdiya Maksymenko (ECSSO)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               The project has been classified as Category 'B'
                          BP 4.01                                              for the purposes of OP 4.01 on Environmental
                                                                               Assessment. The types of activities to be
                                                                               implemented will have either minor or no adverse
                                                                               environmental impacts and provide significant
                                                                               environmental benefits (reductions in local
                                                                               pollution such as dust and sulfur dioxide
                                                                               emissions and reductions in emissions of
                                                                               greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide).
                                                                               Negative environmental impacts are primarily
                                                                               associated with construction activities (e.g. dust,
                                                                               noise, disposal of non-hazardous waste) and they
                                                                               will be mitigated through good construction and
                                                                               housekeeping practices. The EMP was prepared
                                                                               as part of design documentation. In every project
                                                                               location there will be public consultations held
                                                                               with prior announcement in the local press and by
                                                                               posting information on the theme, time and place



                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                                                                         of the consultation in the publicly attended places
                                                                         (office of the utility, local authorities’ office,
                                                                         web-site of the utility). The information on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         project with EMP will also be placed on the
                                                                         websites of the PMU
                                                                         “Belcomenergosberezhenie” and the Energy
                                                                         Efficiency Department. In every place the public
                                                                         consultation will start with a presentation by the
                                                                         Utility and the PMU on the current state of affairs
                                                                         and the project main activities and expected
                                                                         results as related to the locality. The minutes of
                                                                         public consultations for every locality will
                                                                         contain copies of announcements, presentations
                                                                         made, summary of comments received and list of
                                                                         participants. Summaries of the public
                                                                         consultations will be disclosed in the same way as
                                                                         invitation to participate. To ensure that the
                                                                         biomass comes from sustainable sources, the
                                                                         Client would require for each selected site that:
                                                                         (i) wood chips or wood for production of wood
                                                                         chips by district heating utilities are supplied by
                                                                         certified forestry enterprises in Belarus (as
                                                                         opposed to uncertified enterprises or through self-
                                                                         collection of local wood resources); (ii)
                                                                         confirmation that there is adequate excess
                                                                         material available from existing forest enterprise
                                                                         activities so that the increased demand for them
                                                                         will not lead to changes in forest management or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         utilization practices (if project-related increased
                                                                         demand could lead to such changes).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No             The project will not have influence on physical
                         BP 4.11                                         cultural resources. Standard requirements
                                                                         regarding chance finds will be included in
                                                                         contracts for earth works.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes            Most of Tthe specific project sites and
                         4.12                                            investments determined during preparation did
                                                                         not require land acquisition. However in
                                                                         Kalinkovichi, Gomel oblast there is a need to



                                                                 Page 5 of 8
                                                                                 acquire the land from the private enterprise. The
                                                                                 land is being used as storage place. Therefore the
                                                                                 OP4.12 is triggered by the project. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan will be
                                                                                 prepared and duly disclosed in the town of
                                                                                 Kalinkovichi in local language (Russian) and in
                                                                                 Bank’s Inforshop.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project will have positive environmental impact generally. No serious irreversible
                              environmental impacts were identified. Negative environmental impacts are local and are
                              primarily associated with construction activities (e.g. dust, noise, disposal of non-hazardous waste)
                              and they will be mitigated through good construction and housekeeping practices. Biomass boilers
                              will use wood chips as a principal fuel. The Client will ensure that sustainability of forest use is
                              not undermined by the project. To ensure that the biomass comes from sustainable sources, the
                              Client would require for each selected site that: (i) wood chips or wood material for production of
                              wood chips by district heating utilities are supplied from certified forest enterprises in Belarus (as
                              opposed to uncertified enterprises or through self-collection of local wood resources); (ii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                              confirmation that there is adequate material available from existing forest enterprise activities so
                              that the increased demand for them will not lead to changes in forest management or utilization
                              practices (if project-related increased demand could lead to such changes).
                              In accordance with the technical design for Kalinkovichi, Gomel oblast the land plot will need to
                              be acquired from private enterprise. The land is being used by the enterprise as storage place.
                              Relevant resettlement instrument will be prepared and PIU will be in charge of monitoring of its
                              implementation by the utility.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The EMP was prepared by the Client. The EMP contains description of potential environmental
                              impacts and mitigation measures to address those impacts and monitoring plan to oversee the
                              implementation of the proposed mitigation measures. The project implementation unit (PIU)


                                                                         Page 6 of 8
                           "Belinvestenergosberezhenie" will be in charge of project implementation. The PIU has prior
                           experience of implementation of Bank-financed projects (e.g. Energy Efficiency, Post-Chernobyl
                           Recovery). A designated environmental specialist will supervise implementation of the EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Abbreviated RAP was prepared by the borrower for Kalinkovichi. The plan was duly
                           disclosed in the town of Kalinkovichi in local language (Russian) and in Bank’s Inforshop. The
                           PMU and the staff of the utilities in charge of the project will be trained in Bank’s safeguards
                           policies.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Local communities, local authorities, and forestry enterprises are key project stakeholders. The
                           EMP was prepared and disclosed by the client in all project locations.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      28-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Belarus                                                          28-Nov-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   04-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Belarus                                                          23-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information



                                                                    Page 7 of 8
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Fan Zhang
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                            Date: 26-Dec-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (SM)                          Date: 26-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
