                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC8207

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Solomon Islands                 Project ID:      P149282
                            Project Name:     Solomon Islands Rural Development Program II (P149282)
                            Task Team         Erik Caldwell Johnson
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         18-Aug-2014                     Estimated        20-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    EASNS                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (40%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
                                              (25%), General public administration sector (20%), Agr icultural extension and
                                              research (15%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural markets (30%), Rural policies
                                              and institutions (20%), Participation and civic engagem ent (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     35.00                   Total Bank Financing:          5.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         5.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                2.50
                              IDA Grant                                                                  2.50
                              AUSTRALIA Australian Agency for International
                                                                                                          12.00
                              Development
                              EC European Development Fund (EDF)                                           9.00
                              International Fund for Agriculture Development                               4.00
                              Total                                                                       35.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?
                         B. Project Objectives
                         The proposed development objective for the project is to improve access to basic services in rural
                         areas and the production and productivity of farmers.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Project Description
                         Component 1 – Community Infrastructure and Services (US$20.7 million). The first phase of RDP
                         (2008-2014) developed and established an effective mechanism for delivering priority social and
                         economic infrastructure to improve rural communities’ access to small-scale infrastructure and basic
                         services. The Project was progressively scaled up to cover eight of nine provinces. RDP II would be
                         further expanded to reach all rural wards in the country, including in Renbell Province (the one
                         province not covered by RDP I), and consolidate and institutionalize the CDD approach. The Project
                         would retain the mechanisms developed and refined under RDP I, and introduce design changes
                         based on implementation lessons and evaluation findings. The following would be the key features of
                         RDP II, including modifications:

                         •        Two grant cycles of 24 months each to allow for longer sub-project completion periods than
                         under the current phase of RDP. Adjustments to grant size to ensure that each ward receives a
                         sufficient allocation, while adjusting for population size and remoteness.
                         •        New output-based approach to grant disbursement to eliminate the need for the costly and
                         time-consuming transport of all sub-project documentation to Honiara.
                         •        A smaller number of more highly trained and incentivized Community Helpers (CHs),
                         including a new cadre of Technical CHs that will be recruited and trained in the design and
                         construction of small-scale infrastructure, closely based on a curriculum and approach successfully
                         applied in CDD programs in Indonesia and Timor Leste.
                         •        CHs to collect and help to collate village and ward level data to support the integration of
                         planning for the use of Provincial Capacity Development Funds and Constituency Development
                         Funds.
                         •        A Social Accountability Pilot to test a participatory tool that would assess the quality of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         service delivery, focusing initially on health and early childhood facilities. Depending upon the
                         results of this pilot, use of the tool may be scaled up over the course of the project.
                         •        A new, web-based Management Information System (MIS) to collect data from the field and
                         upload it into a central database where it can be monitored by provincial and national project
                         management and viewed publically to enhance awareness of project activities.

                         Component 2 – Agriculture Partnerships and Support (US$ 10.0 million). This component would aim
                         to increase household income through increases in production and productivity in cocoa, coconut and
                         other agriculture enterprises. The design of this component is entirely different from the agriculture
                         activities under RDP, except for the use of supplemental equity funds which would be restricted to
                         agriculture under RDP II. It will include two linked sub-components.

                         Agriculture Partnership Financing would comprise an “Agriculture Partnership Grants Facility
                         (APGF)” that will provide grants to enterprises that partner with smallholders, processors and/or
                         traders; and an “Agriculture Supplemental Equity Facility (ASEF)” that will provide equity to
                         enterprises that partner with commercial banks to improve production in a value chain. This Grants
                         Facility will co-finance activities with the private sector which benefit smallholder farmers such as
                         training in improved farming techniques, processing and business management and investments in
                         improved planting material and crop diversification. It would draw heavily from the experience of
                         Papua New Guinea in its on-going implementation of the Productive Partnerships in Agriculture
                         Project (PPAP) which focuses on cocoa and coffee. The Equity Facility would utilize the same
                         operational procedures and commercial banking partnerships as the Supplemental Equity Facility
                         (SEF) operated under RDP I. The ASEF would assist businesses to access commercial credit for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities such as capital investments, bridge finance for cash-flow, or as collateral leverage to access
                         finance and expand the size of an investment. The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock would
                         manage the two facilities, but the central project team in MDPAC would be responsible for financial
                         management (disbursement and acquittal) of these funds.

                         Agriculture Partnership Support and Capacity Building would be aimed at building on the
                         institutional strengthening of MAL begun under RDP I and increase its ability to facilitate private
                         sector investment in the agricultural sector for the benefit of rural communities. As the private
                         sector’s desire to provide improved farmer services is not matched by the required capacity, MAL
                         would provide training, mentoring and even seconded support to private sector firms engaged in
                         partnerships. Specific activities would include “Regulation and Monitoring” activities that would
                         improve the quality of processed cocoa and coconut products; “Action Research and Development”
                         activities that will disseminate techniques for improving productivity and production of cocoa and
                         coconuts; and “Industry Coordination” activities that will enhance public-private dialogue
                         particularly for cocoa and coconuts.

                         Component 3 – Program Management (US$ 4.3 million). Most of the management activities and
                         associated costs that are specific to each component would be managed within those components.
                         The main functions that would remain under this overarching component would include: Program
                         Manager, Finance Manager, Procurement Officer, M&E/MIS Officer, and Environmental Officer.
                         The only new TOR/position would be M&E Officer, with some minor modifications made to other
                         positions. In addition, vehicles and office equipment would be purchased to update or replace
                         deteriorating goods purchased at the beginning of RDP I in 2008.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will be implemented in the 9 provinces including: Makira, Isabel, Guadalcanal, Central,
                         Choiseul, Malaita, Western, Temotu and Rennell and Belona. Choiseul and Temotu are small
                         provinces with a population of approximately 20,000 each and Rennell and Belona have a combined
                         population of approximately 3,000; all four island groups are remote from the capital city, Honiara;
                         while Malaita is the most populated province (population approximately 120,000) and centrally
                         located, and Western province has a population of approximately 60,000.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The borrower has demonstrated an effective ability to manage environmental and social safeguards
                         under RDP I. A qualified safeguard specialist is in the Project Coordination Unit who is responsible
                         for screening and resolving safeguard issues both prior to a sub-project being included in the
                         program and during sub-project implementation. The need for enhanced personnel will be reviewed
                         during preparation. Through RDP I, the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock has built its capacity
                         to regulate agriculture-related environmental safeguards, including the formation and regular
                         convening of a Pesticide Registration Advisory Committee (PRAC) to regulate the use of pesticides.
                         Periodic training will be conducted for safeguard and other project staff as well as for funding
                         recipients under Components 1 and 2.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Ly Thi Dieu Vu (EASNS)
                           Ross James Butler (EASNS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          The type and scale of physical investments
                           BP 4.01                                     under RDP II will be similar to those
                                                                       implemented in RDP. Under component 1, the
                                                                       potential negative environmental and social
                                                                       impacts related to development of small-scale
                                                                       infrastructure are mostly at small scale, short
                                                                       term and manageable. Under Component II,
                                                                       potential negative impacts associated supports
                                                                       provided to agricultural sector would be the
                                                                       main concerns, particularly when pesticide is
                                                                       supplied to cocoa and coffee growers, under
                                                                       component 2. An Environmental and Social
                                                                       Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared
                                                                       in 2007 and has been being implemented in
                                                                       RDP. As the design of RDP II is very similar to
                                                                       that of RDP, the existing ESMF will be
                                                                       reviewed and updated taking into account the
                                                                       lessons learnt from RDP implementation for
                                                                       application for RDP II. If the Project supports
                                                                       the purchase of pesticides or leads to increase
                                                                       use of pesticides, a pest management plan will
                                                                       be prepared as part of the updated ESMF.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes          RDP II will be implemented in 9 provinces with
                                                                       various types of small-scale infrastructure.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       Environmental screening introduced in the
                                                                       ESMF ensures project siting avoids critical
                                                                       habitats, and negative potential impacts on other
                                                                       natural habitats such as streams, lakes etc. will
                                                                       be mitigated.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36             No           The size of sub-project sites will be very small
                                                                       and located within existing communities,
                                                                       deforestation for infrastructure development
                                                                       will not happen in RDP II. Component II
                                                                       mainly involving support on farming techniques
                                                                       with the aims of improving productivity of
                                                                       existing plantations rather than expanding the
                                                                       existing cultivation areas. Therefore, the
                                                                       activities under Component II of RDP II are not
                                                                       envisaged to affect forest, forest health and
                                                                       forest-dependent communities.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09        Yes          Under Component 2, grant recipients may
                                                                       purchase chemicals for enhancing cocoa,
                                                                 coconut or other crop production. The Pesticide
                                                                 Registration Advisory Committee (PRAC),
                                                                 which advises the Registrar, will continue to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 used to control pesticide imports, distribution,
                                                                 sale and use. Enforcement of the regulation is
                                                                 the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture
                                                                 and Livestock. The ESMF will include a Pest
                                                                 Management Plan to ensure safety for human
                                                                 and the environment associated with the
                                                                 transport, storage, handling and disposals of
                                                                 agricultural chemicals including packaging
                                                                 materials.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Project siting will avoid known physical cultural
                         BP 4.11                                 resources such as temples, structures of spiritual
                                                                 values to communities, objects and structures
                                                                 having high landscape values etc. Chance Find
                                                                 Procedures will be included in the updated
                                                                 ESMF to address the cases where objects are
                                                                 found during ground excavation.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The investments under RDP II, will be carried
                                                                 out in 9 provinces in which Indigenous Peoples
                                                                 are the overwhelming majority of project
                                                                 beneficiaries as known for Solomon Islands.
                                                                 Therefore, a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan is
                                                                 not required, but provisions responding to the
                                                                 policy will be incorporated into overall project
                                                                 design. This is the same approach to that
                                                                 adopted under RDP I.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 The ESMF and Project Implementation Manual
                                                                 currently being used for RDP I will continue to
                                                                 be applied, including an inclusive, participatory
                                                                 community needs assessment process, screening
                                                                 criteria, and forms to document broad
                                                                 community support and consensus on priority
                                                                 sub-projects. Community consultations will be
                                                                 facilitated and documented by suitably qualified
                                                                 personnel in the Project Management Unit.
                                                                 Ongoing monitoring and community
                                                                 consultations by such personnel will assess
                                                                 whether broad community support is maintained
                                                                 during implementation.

                                                                 Each sub-project will be identified and driven
                                                                 by the recipient community which will ensure
                                                                 that Free, Prior and Informed Consultation will
                                                                 be built into each sub-project conception and
                                                                                                                                 development and that the subproject will
                                                                                                                                 provide benefits that are culturally appropriate
                                                                                                                                 to the people. In addition to the agreed criteria
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 in the ESMF, the community driven nature of
                                                                                                                                 the sub-projects will further serve to ensure
                                                                                                                                 compliance with OP/BP 4.10.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The sub-projects are identified and driven by the
                                 4.12                                                                                            recipient communities. Screening criteria
                                                                                                                                 including undisputed access to land for the
                                                                                                                                 purposes of executing the sub-project are
                                                                                                                                 prerequisites to inclusion of sub-project in the
                                                                                                                                 program. Land to be used for subproject
                                                                                                                                 construction will be voluntarily donated and the
                                                                                                                                 process will follow provisions of the Final Draft
                                                                                                                                 PIC Voluntary Land Donation Protocol that
                                                                                                                                 includes the required and appropriate supporting
                                                                                                                                 documentation. No involuntary resettlement as a
                                                                                                                                 result of the project is anticipated. Component 2
                                                                                                                                 activities will not include the conversion of land
                                                                                                                                 for the purpose of agricultural use.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The Project will not finance construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of any dam. The project is also not
                                                                                                                                 dependent on any existing dam or dam under
                                                                                                                                 construction.
                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Jul-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      May – July 2014
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Erik Caldwell Johnson

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Josefo Tuyor (RSA)                                                                                                   Date: 22-May-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Michel Kerf (SM)                                                                                                     Date: 23-May-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
