                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC2906

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                           Project ID:      P129791
                            Project Name:      Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)
                            Task Team          Shunong Hu
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          04-Nov-2013                     Estimated        24-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Ports, waterways and shipping (80%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry
                                               sector (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Natural disaster management (60%), Other environment and natural resources
                                               management (20%), Trade facilitation and market access (2 0%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    126.20                    Total Bank Financing:         60.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     66.20
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        60.00
                              Total                                                                       126.20
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to reduce the vulnerability of fishing communities to
                           extreme weather events in selected counties of Fujian Province.

                           The project will combine coastal engineering investment with capacity building and improved early
                           warning and disaster response systems to reduce damages and losses of lives and boats from extreme
                         weather events, such as typhoons and seasonal storms, in selected counties of Fujian Province.
                         Lessons learned will be disseminated and serve as example for future investments in the sector.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Fujian Province has the longest coast line in China. It is facing increased vulnerability to extreme
                         weather events and natural disasters as a result of developments along the coast and climate change.
                         Following the Disaster Prevention and Relief Strategy of Fujian Province, this project will help
                         reduce the vulnerability of fisherman to storm surges and extreme weather events along the coast of
                         Fujian by reducing the exposure of fishing boats and port facilities, and strengthen disaster response
                         systems. The project include investments in: (a) early warning system; (b) fishing ports facilities
                         such as breakwaters, docks, shelters, port accesses, anchorages, and trestle bridges in selected
                         counties; and (c) capacity building. The project is divided into the following components:

                         Component 1. Expansion and Upgrading of Fishing Port Facilities: This component focuses on
                         building the infrastructure to protect fishing boats from being lost or damaged by typhoons and
                         seasonal storms. Under this component, eight fishing ports will be constructed or upgraded, including
                         associated infrastructure such as breakwaters, docks, bank protection, land formation, buildings,
                         trestle bridges, anchorage, and access roads to the ports.

                         Component 2. Upgrading of Early Warning and Response Systems: This component includes: (i)
                         upgrading Fujian Provincial Central Ocean and Fishing Vessels Management Information System
                         Platform; (ii) installing a dedicated connection between the Provincial Center and the Plow Satellite
                         Operations Service Center, to enable direct connection with the Plow Satellite communication and
                         positioning system; (iii) upgrading and improving the user friendliness of the interface between the
                         Provincial Center, cities, counties, and Class I fishing ports and the Plow Satellite services.

                         Component 3. Establishing a Training Center: This component will help strengthen the Fujian Ocean
                         Technology Training Center to provide necessary professional training, including fishery production,
                         boat maintenance and operation, and risk mitigation, to reduce vulnerability of fishermen. This
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component will finance the construction of the Fujian Ocean Technology Training Center, including
                         a 6-story building with a constructed area of 6000 m2 and training equipment, designed to
                         accommodate 200 trainees each course, and training curriculum/materials.

                         Component 4. Project Management and Implementation Support: This component includes: (i)
                         project management consultancy (review of design and procurement, and preparation of semi-annual
                         progress reports; (ii) related studies; (iii) study tours and training to build capacity of project
                         management staff.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in three counties, Xiapu, Hui’an and Minhou, in Fujian Province. Construction
                         sites for Component I, Fishing Port, are in remote coastal village with limited farmland and
                         essentially depend on marine fishing/coastal aquaculture for their livelihood. The Training Center
                         under Component III, will be built in a relatively new urban zone in Minhou, a suburb of Fuzhou
                         City.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The implementing agency is Fujian Provincial Ocean and Fisheries Department (OFD). It was one of
                         the implementation agencies of the Sustainable Coastal Resources Development Project (1998 –
                           2007), and has some experience implementing World Bank projects. The Ocean and Fisheries
                           Divisions at the county level have very limited experience and capacity implementing WB financed
                           projects. Training and capacity building activities will be planned and conducted during project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           preparation and implementation. Hohai university will help train and assist the OFD in preparing the
                           social assessment and resettlement action plan for the project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Songling Yao (EASCS)
                           Ning Yang (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project will have significant benefits in
                           BP 4.01                                             terms of providing shelters to fishermen against
                                                                               typhoons and seasonal storms. Investments
                                                                               under Component 1 include infrastructure such
                                                                               as breakwaters, docks, embankment, access
                                                                               roads, etc. depending on the scale and actual
                                                                               needs of each individual fishing port. Limited
                                                                               land reclamation will be required, estimated at a
                                                                               few dozens of hectares, to expand existing
                                                                               docks and/or offloading areas in 2 to 4 fishing
                                                                               ports. Component 2 will finance the
                                                                               construction of a training center.

                                                                               Potential environmental and social impacts
                                                                               include: 1) construction impacts related to
                                                                               disturbance to mudflat, water quality, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               shipping and disposal of construction waste, 2)
                                                                               impacts related to land (mainly mudflat) take,
                                                                               disturbance to aquaculture and navigation
                                                                               during construction, and 3) operational impacts
                                                                               related to potential change of flow regime due
                                                                               to new breakwaters and/or docks that may
                                                                               change the sedimentation/erosion pattern in the
                                                                               vicinity of fishing ports. In addition, the waste
                                                                               from fishing port is also an environmental
                                                                               concern. For component 2, anticipated
                                                                               environmental issues are mainly related to
                                                                               construction activities, such as soil erosion,
                                                                               noise and dust.

                                                                               The EA will include an analysis of cumulative
                                                                               impacts to address the potential overlapping of
                                                                               environmental impacts associated with fishing
                                                                               port development. Where applicable, related
                                                                               activities such as processing plants will be and
                                                             that may be modified and have environmental
                                                             impacts because of the project shall be covered
                                                             in the EA.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             The scale of the proposed ports is relatively
                                                             small and most activities are related to
                                                             upgrading or expanding existing ports, the
                                                             associated impacts are mostly site-specific by
                                                             nature. Considering the location and sensitivity
                                                             of projects sites and the weak environmental
                                                             management capacity at the county level, the
                                                             team proposes to classify the project as a
                                                             Category A project from an environmental point
                                                             of view.

                                                             Public consultation and information disclosure
                                                             will follow OP4.01 requirements during EA
                                                             preparation. At least two rounds of public
                                                             consultation with potentially affected fishermen
                                                             and other relevant stakeholders will be
                                                             conducted through surveys, interviews and
                                                             public meetings as needed. The full draft EA
                                                             will be disclosed.

                                                             One consolidated EA for all project sites will be
                                                             prepared, including an EIA, a stand-alone EMP
                                                             for Component 1, and a Construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Environmental Code of Practice for Component
                                                             2. An Environmental Assessment Executive
                                                             Summary for the project will be prepared as
                                                             well.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The task team has conducted initial screening
                                                             and desk review of each port sites. The selected
                                                             fishing ports are located in natural shelters and
                                                             co-exist with fishing villages. Fishing boats
                                                             berth either by anchoring at the mudflat or the
                                                             docks. Nearby some fishing ports, aquaculture
                                                             (clam, seaweed, etc.) was observed. The
                                                             mudflats/shallow sea areas have been affected
                                                             by human activities over a long period of time
                                                             (e.g. receiving wastewater from fishing villages
                                                             and aquaculture activities). However, the policy
                                                             is considered triggered due the fact that the
                                                             project fishing ports are located in coastal area.
                                                             Detailed screening on the presence/absence of
                                                             will be needed through consultation with local
                                                                 communities and ocean management authorities
                                                                 during EA preparation. The EIA shall include
                                                                 comprehensive ecological baselines including
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 species composition and biodiversity of
                                                                 mudflats, natural sea grass beds and seaweeds
                                                                 that are directly or indirectly affected by the
                                                                 project sites. The ecological impacts of the
                                                                 project sites should consider the effects during
                                                                 construction (e.g. turbidity, siltation, etc.) and
                                                                 operation (e.g. changes in flow regime, etc.)
                                                                 separately.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project does not affect any forests. The
                                                                 policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project does not involve the procurement
                                                                 nor use of pesticides. The policy is not
                                                                 triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Initial screening indicates no cultural relics with
                         BP 4.11                                 high cultural value have been identified. Further
                                                                 screening will be conducted in consultation with
                                                                 local communities and cultural heritage
                                                                 authorities to determine whether the policy shall
                                                                 be triggered. Chance-find procedures will be
                                                                 included in the EA.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    IP screening by the identification mission and
                                                                 by local authorities concluded that there is no
                                                                 minority village present in or affected by the
                                                                 project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 An IPP Screening Note was provided to the
                                                                 RSS and further detailed IP related information
                                                                 will be collected and included in a standalone
                                                                 social assessment according to OP 4.01.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Construction of eight fishing ports in Xiapu and
                         4.12                                    Hui’an counties require land and aquaculture
                                                                 farm acquisition. The training center in Minhou
                                                                 County will be constructed on public land
                                                                 allocated by local government, due diligence
                                                                 review will be conducted by the team.
                                                                 Livelihood of some villagers will be affected
                                                                 and will require proper restoration.

                                                                 A RP will be prepared to cover all land related
                                                                 impacts clearly identified prior to project
                                                                 appraisal, while a RPF will be developed for
                                                                 unclear impacts mainly covering impacts of
                                                                 borrow/disposal sites, access road, etc.; and any
                                                                                                                                 change of project activities.

                                                                                                                                 In addition, the standalone social assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 will be conducted, including gender issues and
                                                                                                                                 other social issues.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project doesn't involve any dams. The
                                                                                                                                 policy is not triggered.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project doesn't involve any international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways. The policy is note triggered.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not located in any disputed area.
                                 7.60                                                                                            The policy is not triggered.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Jul-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      During the identification mission, draft TORs for the preparation of the EA and RAP had been
                                      discussed with the candidate local consultants. During the preparation mission scheduled in later
                                      April 2013, the team will discuss further in detail with the local consultants on the first draft EA
                                      report and RAP.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Shunong Hu

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 10-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 11-Oct-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
