                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSR5456
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Philippines                                  Project ID:           P064925
                            Project Name:      Support for Strategic Local Development and Investment Project (P064925)
                            Task Team          Christopher T. Pablo
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Mar-2006                                  Estimated   29-Jun-2006
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASPS                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%), Urban Transport
                                               (20%), Hydropower (13%), Sub-national government admini stration (9%),
                                               Housing construction (8%)
                            Theme:             Other urban development (33%), Municipal finance (33%), Decentralization
                                               (17%), Other Private Sector Development (17%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                        Yes
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       109.00           Total Bank Financing:                                      100.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                              9.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                               100.00
                              Total                                                                                               109.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The project development objective is to improve local public service provision and management by


                                                                                Page 1 of 10
                         facilitating LGU access to viable financing to implement strategic infrastructure investments.
                          3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project has two components: (1) Subprojects for Infrastructure and Finance Improvement
                         (USD99 million) enables local government units (LGUs) to implement infrastructure subprojects that
                         have been identified in development plans and multi-year investment programs as a result of CDS or
                         similar participatory, multi-year planning exercises; and (2) LGU Capacity Building and Project
                         Implementation Support (USD 8.0 million) provides assistance to LGUs participating in the
                         subprojects for subproject preparation work including feasibility studies and detailed engineering
                         design, procurement, supervision and management, and improved management and operations of
                         municipal enterprises and services.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will finance reconstruction of municipal infrastructure of LGUs located in areas affected
                         by the three major disasters, namely: (1) Typhoon Haiyan that hit central Philippines including
                         Aklan, Capiz, Iloilo and Palawan, Leyte, and Samar, among others; (2) the 7.2 magnitude earthquake
                         in the Bohol and Cebu islands; and (3) the Zamboanga City siege by separatist rebels. As a financial
                         intermediary operation, the location and nature of the investment subprojects will be determined by
                         the demand by disaster-affected LGUs in the aforementioned areas and LBP’s appraisal of specific
                         LGUs’ financial creditworthiness.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (EASPS)
                         Gerardo F. Parco (EASPS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes            The project will be funding infrastructure
                          BP 4.01                                            subprojects, which will have environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             impacts. The nature of these impacts will depend
                                                                             on location, type and scale of the subprojects. In
                                                                             the implementation of SSLDIP, subprojects
                                                                             financed were typically municipal facilities such
                                                                             as public markets, and water supply systems,
                                                                             among others. An updated Integrated
                                                                             Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework
                                                                             (IESSF) will be prepared by LBP to guide
                                                                             subproject proponents in the screening,
                                                                             categorization and preparation of specific
                                                                             instruments of each subproject during
                                                                             implementation. It will also take into account
                                                                             lessons learned from implementing the IESSF in
                                                                             the original project.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes            The IESSF screening process will be used to
                                                                             determine whether a subproject would
                                                                             significantly convert or degrade any protected
                                                                             areas, known natural habitats, or established or
                                                                             proposed critical natural habitats as defined under



                                                                     Page 2 of 10
                                                                         the policy. These types of subprojects would be
                                                                         ineligible in compliance with the policy. If it is
                                                                         determined that a subproject will affect non-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         critical natural habitat, appropriate mitigation
                                                                         measures will be put in place as part of the
                                                                         environmental assessment (EA) for the
                                                                         subproject.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            The project, which will finance rehabilitation of
                                                                         damaged infrastructure, is not expected to finance
                                                                         activities that would involve significant
                                                                         conversion or degradation of critical forest areas
                                                                         as defined under the policy. Specifically, the
                                                                         project is not envisaged to have impact on the (1)
                                                                         health and quality of forests; and, (2) rights and
                                                                         welfare of people and their level of dependence
                                                                         upon or interaction with forests. It is also not
                                                                         envisaged to bring about changes in the
                                                                         management, protection, or utilization of natural
                                                                         forests or plantations, whether they are publicly,
                                                                         privately, or communally owned.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project will not procure any pesticides nor
                                                                         will an increased use of pesticides result from the
                                                                         project. No further action is required under this
                                                                         policy.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The project may entail excavation, earth
                         BP 4.11                                         movement and/or inundation of land areas. An
                                                                         assessment of physical cultural resources to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         affected by potential subprojects will be carried
                                                                         out within the EA process. The updated IESSF
                                                                         will include Chance Find Procedures and
                                                                         construction contracts will have the chance find
                                                                         provisions.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           Most subprojects are expected to be located in
                                                                         urban centers, although some may be located in
                                                                         the periphery. Some provinces affected by the
                                                                         typhoon where the restructured project will
                                                                         operate have known indigenous peoples (IP) such
                                                                         as Palawan, Aklan, Zamboanga City, etc. Some
                                                                         subprojects maybe located in areas where these
                                                                         IPs are present. The updated IESSF shall include
                                                                         an updated IP Framework that would address IP
                                                                         concerns and issues during implementation of the
                                                                         restructured project.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The updated IESSF shall include a Resettlement
                         4.12                                            and Compensation Framework that would
                                                                         provide the procedures and guidelines for the



                                                                 Page 3 of 10
                                                                                compensation of lost assets, and necessary
                                                                                assistance to at least restore to pre-project level,
                                                                                the economic condition of persons affected by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                subprojects under SSLDIP.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           Yes             Under the original project, a mini-hydropower
                                                                                subproject in the Municipality of Cantilan is
                                                                                being financed. Requirements under the policy
                                                                                have been adequately addressed in this sub-
                                                                                project. Generic dam safety measures were
                                                                                prepared by qualified engineers as required under
                                                                                the policy. The structure and design of the dam
                                                                                have been verified by the team and found to be
                                                                                generally acceptable. Two specific
                                                                                recommendations have been communicated by
                                                                                the team to the project proponents. The
                                                                                Safeguards Action Plan includes specific and
                                                                                time bound activities to ensure that these
                                                                                recommendations are complied with. The
                                                                                restructured project has specifically excluded the
                                                                                financing of any additional dam subprojects due
                                                                                to the limited time and available resources. The
                                                                                screening process of the IESSF will therefore
                                                                                screen out activities involving construction, repair
                                                                                and rehabilitation of dams.
                            Projects on International        No                 N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                There are currently 78 subprojects funded by the project. The cost of each subproject ranges from
                              Php 18 to 190 million (USD 400 thousand to 4.2 million). These subprojects include public
                              markets, water supply systems, and sports centers, among others, which have localized and short-
                              term impacts. There are no potential large scale, significant or irreversible impacts expected as a
                              result of the implementation of the restructured project.

                             The safeguards issues faced so far by the project relate to (1) application of OP 4.37 (Dam Safety)
                             and OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples); and (2) right of way (ROW) acquisition involving a large water
                             supply project.

                             The PAD states that two safeguards policies (OP 4.37 Dam Safety and OP 4.10 Indigenous
                             Peoples) are not triggered in the original project. The ISDS and the original IESSF were also not
                             disclosed in InfoShop. OP 4.37 Dam Safety and OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples are now being


                                                                        Page 4 of 10
                         triggered because the Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP), the implementing agency, funded the
                         Sipangpang mini-hydropower development subproject (located in Cantilan, Surigao del Sur) that
                         involves construction, rehabilitation and repair of a small dam and is located in an IP area. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         team closely monitored the subproject and visited the site four times; the latest in November 2013
                         when the Task Team carried out due diligence of this subproject. The Task Team verified that the
                         subproject generally complies with the Bank dam safety policy. The Team advised LBP to require
                         the local government unit (LGU) of Cantilan, the subproject owner, to post an engineer from the
                         design consultant on-site who will ensure construction quality and supervise adjustments to the
                         design. This subproject is now nearing completion and the LBP has instructed its project
                         implementation consultant (PIC) to continue to monitor the dam construction, rehabilitation and
                         repair and ensure that the design requirements are being met.

                         On presence of and impacts on IPs in the project area, the prescribed processes were carried out by
                         LBP, including the requirement to secure clearance from the National Commission on Indigenous
                         Peoples (NCIP), as well as free and prior informed consent from the affected IP community for the
                         subproject to proceed. The regional office of the NCIP has endorsed the clearance to its head
                         office and the formal clearance is expected soon. The consent by the IP community is embodied in
                         a Memorandum of Agreement between the LGU, the NCIP and the tribal community in the area.
                         The Task Team in several field visits found that no IP families live in the vicinity of the dam. The
                         Team further found that (a) extensive consultations were carried out by the LGU and the NCIP
                         during project preparation in 2004-2005, which resulted in the IP granting its Free and Prior
                         Informed Consent; (b) six IP coordinators were hired by the LGU to be part of the Project
                         Management Unit and were paid a small honorarium. The coordinators represent the IP
                         community in the project as well as in the water management program of the LGU, particularly in
                         the regulation of logging and harvesting of forest products; (c) at least 80 percent of the workers
                         are members of the IP residing in the municipality; and (d) interviews with women and the elderly
                         reveal that the project has resulted in better access of the IP community to health and welfare
                         activities of the LGU.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A number of subprojects involved ROW acquisition that resulted in voluntary sale of the required
                         ROW. One large subproject, the Iligan water supply subproject, involves ROW acquisition
                         through expropriation. Due diligence was carried out. The Task Team reviewed the land
                         acquisition and compensation documents, and visited the project site during several supervision
                         missions during 2011-2013, and was an observer in series of consultations between the LGU and
                         landowner to agree on compensation for property affected by the laying of water pipes and the
                         construction of water impounding facilities. These consultations did not result in an agreed
                         compensation package. Thus, the LGU initiated expropriation with the courts, a remedy consistent
                         with Bank land acquisition policy. Furthermore, the Team communicated to the LBP the need to
                         continuously monitor the expropriation proceedings.

                         The Task Team has documented these Safeguards issues, the required actions and
                         recommendations to address these issues, as well as updates on key actions in project documents
                         including project monitoring reports, Aide Memoires and back-to-office reports, among others.

                         Under the restructuring, investments in disaster-hit areas will be eligible for financing. The project
                         will support investments of varying sizes. The impacts of the restructured project are expected to
                         be localized and short term. And these temporary impacts will be minimized by proper planning,
                         application of preventive measures, and mitigated by corrective actions in the Environmental
                         Management Plans of each subproject.

                                                                    Page 5 of 10
                           A list of negative activities specific to disaster situations will be included in the updated IESSF.
                           Subprojects involving dam construction, rehabilitation and repair would not be eligible for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           financing under the restructured project. This is due to the limited funding and time available
                           under the restructured project, which will not allow enrolment of such subprojects th at normally
                           entail large funding requirement and long preparation and implementation timetables.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The conditions in the typhoon-ravaged area are generally degraded. Vegetation has been stripped,
                           debris has been left uncollected and water and sanitation services are not fully restored. The
                           impact of the projects activities will be generally positive by providing access to basic services.
                           No negative, long term impacts are expected.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             The subproject approval process incorporates the consideration of project alternatives. This
                           process is conducted prior to the finalization of project design to ensure that adverse impacts are
                           avoided or minimized.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             This project adopts an open-menu approach to the provision of financing subprojects of LGUs
                           and local service providers. With this approach, the safeguards instrument of the project is the
                           IESSF. In the IESSF, the sub-borrowers (LGUs or private sector participating entities) are
                           responsible for the implementation of the Environmental Assessment and Social Assessment that
                           are required by the Philippine regulatory framework and World Bank safeguards policies. The
                           sub-borrowers would need to obtain the necessary clearances as defined in the IESSF for each
                           subproject before project implementation. On the other hand, LBP is responsible for supervising
                           and monitoring subproject implementation, and for ensuring that sub-borrowers follow the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           processes and requirements prescribed in the IESSF. The World Bank provides guidance and
                           reviews compliance with safeguards policies.

                          Capacity to Implement Safeguards Policies

                          LBP capacity in implementing social and environment safeguards was assessed during project
                          preparation. LBP has demonstrated capacity to implement the Safeguards Instruments, having
                          satisfactorily implemented the Bank-funded Water Districts Development Project (WDDP). The
                          WDDP Project Management Office (PMO) was retained to manage SSLDIP. Furthermore, WDDP
                          was a Category A project that financed four drainage subprojects, a wastewater treatment
                          subproject, and around 15 community-based piped-water supply and sanitation systems. These
                          subprojects were supervised by the PMO and were comprised of qualified engineers, social
                          safeguards/community participation specialists, and environmental specialists. The PMO is
                          supported by a Project Implementation Consultant (PIC) with similar skills complement. The
                          PMO and the PIC conduct regular field visits to subprojects, provide orientation to sub-borrowers
                          on the social and environmental safeguards requirements of the project. They also extend
                          assistance to sub-borrowers in the implementation of subprojects, including the conduct of
                          consultations with various subproject stakeholders. The project environmental and social
                          safeguards specialists have the capacity in presenting, discussing and analyzing environmental and
                          social issues with LGUs, communities and non-government organizations (NGOs). They have


                                                                     Page 6 of 10
                         provided guidance to LGU staff, NGOs and community-based organizations in following
                         community participatory procedures. The PMO has also recently increased its complement of
                         safeguards staff to 10.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environment protection is a priority concern of LBP. It established an Environment Unit that is
                         responsible for ensuring compliance by LBP projects with the country’s environmental laws. LBP
                         has an ISO 14001 Certification. At the sub-borrower level (LGU and participating institutions),
                         orientation and training on Philippine and Bank regulatory framework on environment and social
                         safeguards were carried out. Further technical support and close supervision were provided to
                         these sub-borrowers.

                         Assessment of Safeguards Implementation

                         Safeguards implementation by LBP has been rated, on average, Moderately Satisfactory for the
                         last seven years of project implementation. The IESSF is generally adequate in its coverage and
                         effectiveness in managing most of the impacts of the enrolled subprojects, but is inadequate with
                         respect to Dam Safety guidelines and in addressing IP issues. While LBP generally complied with
                         safeguards policies during implementation, the quality of compliance was affected by the weak
                         performance of the implementation support consultant during certain years of implementation (this
                         consultant has since been changed by LBP). Another set of implementation support consultants
                         were recruited to ensure adequate monitoring of Environmental Management Plans and in
                         screening of subprojects. LBP also enlisted its regional Lending Centers to assist in the monitoring
                         of environmental and social impacts of the subprojects. In addition to the consultants, LBP
                         recruited on full time basis a social safeguards and environment specialist for SSLDIP.

                         Request for exemption under OP 10.00 paragraph 11.

                         At the request of the Borrower, the Task Team is processing the restructuring following para. 11
                         of OP 10.00, i.e. Projects in Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints. For
Public Disclosure Copy




                         such projects, the fiduciary and environmental and social requirements during preparation phase
                         may be deferred during implementation phase. Also, such projects may be processed under special
                         procurement arrangements. The proposed restructuring aims to enable the project to process
                         reconstruction projects that would require immediate funding approval and procurement of goods
                         and services, and therefore meets the provisions of this para of OP 10.00.

                         OP 10.00 (Investment Project Financing) requires that the project safeguards instrument (in this
                         case, the Integrated Environment and Social Safeguards Framework (IESSF)) is updated,
                         consulted upon and disclosed prior to approval of the restructuring. The policy however also
                         provides for an exception from this requirement in situations where the restructured project
                         responds to an urgent need (paragraph 11(a)). RVP approval for this exception is therefore sought
                         as consultations on, and disclosure of, the updated IESSF will only take place after approval of the
                         restructuring.

                         Safeguards Action Plan

                         Consistent with the requirements of the Instructions: Preparation of Investment Project Financing-
                         Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraint , the team and the Government
                         have prepared a safeguards action plan, which references the updated IESSF and sets out the due
                         diligence undertaken by the team with respect to several ongoing subprojects that have safeguard

                                                                   Page 7 of 10
                           issues. Specifically the action plan presents time-bound activities that include a) updating,
                           consultation on and disclosure of the updated IESSF; (b) ensuring compliance with agreed
                           technical improvements to the Sipangpang mini hydro power subpproject; (c) due diligence to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           address outstanding issues in the application of the IP Policy in the implementation of the
                           Sipangpang mini hydro project; and (d) due diligence of the Iligan subproject.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The LBP-PMO, Lending Centers, and participating LGUs disseminate information on the project
                           and its environmental and social safeguards requirements. Direct consultations will continue to be
                           carried out with the LGUs and project beneficiaries, communities, non-government organizations,
                           indigenous/tribal groups, and other affected persons in the subproject areas.

                           The Bank will continue to monitor and address potential environmental and social issues that may
                           arise during project implementation. Supervision missions will put particular attention to
                           stakeholder feedback on project compliance to safeguards requirements.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          30-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       14-Apr-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                          14-Apr-2014
                           Comments: The Task Team is seeking exemption on the required updating/preparation,
                                         consultation and disclosure of the Integrated Environmental and Social Safeguards
                                         Framework after the approval of the restructuring per OP 10.00 para. 11. To this end,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         a Safeguards Action Plan has been prepared, reviewed and approved by the RSS.
                                         The action plan spells out the details and dates of the updating, consultations and
                                         disclosure of the updated IESSF as well as the due diligence of subprojects financed
                                         under the original project that have some safeguard issues.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          30-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       14-Apr-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                          14-Apr-2014
                           Comments: The Ressettlement and Compensation Framework (RCF), as part of the IESSF, will
                                         be prepared after the approval of the restructuring as per the Safeguards Action Plan.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          30-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       14-Apr-2014




                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                      14-Apr-2014
                           Comments: The IP Framework, as part of the IESSF, will be prepared after the approval of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         restructuring as per the Safeguards Action Plan.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?



                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                             Have dam safety plans been prepared?                            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                             Bank?
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Christopher T. Pablo
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (RSA)                     Date: 11-Feb-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Ousmane Dione (SM)                             Date: 11-Feb-2014




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
