                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC8824

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Romania                         Project ID:      P148585
                            Project Name:      Romania Secondary Education Project (P148585)
                            Task Team          Janssen Edelweiss Nunes T
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Dec-2014                     Estimated        17-Feb-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEDDR                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Secondary education (75%), Tertiary education (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (75%), Education for the knowledge economy (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       250.31                Total Bank Financing:       250.31
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       250.31
                              Total                                                                       250.31
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve the transition from upper secondary into tertiary
                           education of Romanian students, particularly those students from disadvantaged groups.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed Project is to be implemented over a period of five years, between 2015 and 2019, and
                           would be financed by a loan of US 275.26 million. The proposed Project is organized around four
                           components as follows:
                         •       Component 1 – Improving the Quality and Relevance of Upper Secondary Education
                         •       Component 2 – Supporting the Needs of Newly Enrolled Tertiary Education Students
                         •       Component 3 – Strengthening the Institutional Capacity to Implement and Monitor Programs
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for Education Quality Improvement
                         •       Component 4 – Supporting Results-Based Education Quality Improvements

                         Component 1- Improving the Quality and Relevance of Upper Secondary Education

                         The objective of this component is to improve the quality and relevance of upper secondary
                         education through a decentralized approach. This subcomponent would support grants for high
                         schools with high shares of students from disadvantaged groups, with the aim at facilitating the
                         transition from upper secondary into tertiary education. The selection criteria for high schools to
                         benefit from this component is that they need to serve a significant numbers of students who are:
                         from Roma communities; from minorities; from low income families; living in rural areas; at risk of
                         leaving school early; and performing low in tests/exams including the Baccalaureate. These target
                         groups will be identified during project preparation. At the end of the proposed Project, it is expected
                         an increase in the average completion rate and the Baccalaureate passing rate, as well as in the share
                         of graduates of technological upper secondary education schools who continue into tertiary
                         education.

                         This component would finance technical assistance to targeted high schools on the preparation of
                         proposals for the grants, which should help these schools’ representatives identify the local needs in
                         terms of improving the teaching and learning conditions. The grants would be awarded to targeted
                         high schools on the basis of a menu of eligible activities to be further identified. These activities
                         would include, but would not be limited to: counselling; tutoring; remedial classes; extracurricular
                         activities; forums with representatives of the local labor market; outreach to families; teachers
                         training; purchase of teaching and learning materials; equipping laboratories; and minor civil works.
                         Adopting a limit for investments in goods and civil works would be considered at preparation. The
                         feasibility of participation of experienced teachers in activities like tutoring would be explored at
Public Disclosure Copy




                         preparation.

                         The preparation of proposals for the grants should include the participation of representatives of
                         teachers, parents, local authorities, in addition to school managers. To increase equity in
                         opportunities in upper secondary education, a set of criterion for the allocation of grants per county
                         would be developed taking into account several factors such as: average income level of families;
                         share of students from Roma communities and minorities; share of students living in rural areas;
                         share of students at risk of leaving school early; and students’ performance in tests/exams including
                         the Baccalaureate. The evaluation of proposals would probably take place at the county level with the
                         participation of representatives of Inspectorates and other regional stakeholders, following a good
                         practice of the Romania Rural Education Project (P073967).

                         Component 2 – Supporting the Needs of Newly Enrolled Tertiary Education Students

                         The objective of this component is to support the needs of students from disadvantaged groups who
                         are at risk of dropping out tertiary education institutions in the first two years of education. These
                         students are those who pass the Baccalaureate with marks close to the cutting point, which is
                         currently set at six (from zero to ten). This component would support grants for tertiary education
                         institutions with the highest shares of students from disadvantaged groups who drop out in the first
                         two years of education. The selection criteria would be defined during project preparation. At the end
                         of the proposed Project, it is expected a decrease in the drop-out rate of students of the first two years
                         of tertiary education who are enrolled in targeted institutions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The grants would be awarded competitively to tertiary education institutions on the basis of a menu
                         of eligible activities to be further identified. These activities would include, but would not be limited
                         to: leveling programs; remedial programs; counselling; tutoring; outreach to families; and purchase
                         of equipment and teaching materials to addre ss the needs of students targeted for this component.

                         Component 3 – Strengthening the Institutional Capacity to Implement and Monitor Programs for
                         Education Quality Improvement

                         Sub-component 3.1 – Institutional Capacity Development. This sub-component would enhance
                         institutional capacity towards improvements in the quality of upper secondary education. This
                         component would support technical assistance (TA) to help the Ministry of National Education
                         (MoNE) design and implement programs or activities aimed at improving the education quality
                         including: (i) strengthening the MoNE’s monitoring and evaluation capacity; (ii) developing
                         parameters for the revision of the upper secondary education curriculum; (iii) designing and
                         implementing communications campaigns on Project-financed activities targeted to students from
                         disadvantaged groups; and (iv) revising the students’ loan scheme for tertiary education. Other
                         activities to be supported under this component would be identified during project preparation.

                         Sub-component 3.2 – Project Management. The MoNE would be the main implementing agency of
                         the proposed Project (see Section C). This sub-component would support day-to-day project
                         management activities, such as project audits, as well as operational and staffing costs of the
                         MoNE’s Unit for Externally Financed Projects.

                         Component 4 – Supporting Results-Based Education Quality Improvements

                         This results-based component would disburse against actions, outputs and outcomes, for which a set
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) would be fully defined at preparation. The DLIs would be
                         selected on the basis of MoNE’s strategic priorities related to the PDO. The set of DLI may include,
                         but would not be limited to: (i) adoption of a revised curriculum for upper secondary education; (ii)
                         certification of teachers and school managers for the implementation of the revised upper secondary
                         education curriculum; (iii) utilization of an improved EMIS to track upper secondary education
                         students and monitor their transition into tertiary education; and (iv) establishment of a mechanism to
                         monitor drop-outs in early years of tertiary education.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project activities would be carried across the country. No significant environmental issues or
                         impacts are envisaged. The population targeted are disadvantaged students including those: from
                         Roma communities; from minorities; from low income families; living in rural areas; at risk of
                         leaving school early; and performing low in tests/exams including the Baccalaureate. No social or
                         cultural issues are envisaged.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The MoNE would be the main implementing agency of the proposed Project. High schools and
                         tertiary education institutions identified as beneficiaries of the grants components would implement
                         the Project under a decentralized approach, but with technical assistance of specialists supported by
                           the Project. The MoNE has successfully implemented World Bank-financed projects in the past and
                           is prepared to play this role again. The MoNE’s Unit for Externally Financed Projects (UEFP) has
                           extensive experience with Bank-financed projects, having implemented almost all of the previous
Public Disclosure Copy




                           operations in Romania, as well as projects financed from other sources (e.g. European Investment
                           Bank, Council of Europe Development Bank, European Union Structural Funds). This unit has the
                           adequate capacity to carry out day-to-day project management activities including those related to
                           environmental and social protection.
                           Depending on the scope of civil works to be undertaken under the high schools grants component,
                           environmental issues related to rehabilitation of high schools would be tackled through site specific
                           EMP checklists to screen out any potentially non-conforming activities, and this will be elaborated in
                           the Project Operations Manual.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Cesar Niculescu (GENDR)
                           Mihai Magheru (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        No               Under the Component 1 – Improving the
                           BP 4.01                                              Quality and Relevance of Upper Secondary
                                                                                Education, the proposed Project will support a
                                                                                grant scheme for eligible activities to be
                                                                                determined during preparation, which could
                                                                                include small civil works, i.e. rehabilitations of
                                                                                high schools. Although minor civil works
                                                                                involving building renovation may be financed,
                                                                                these will be interior and small scale, and do not
                                                                                warrant triggering OP 4.01 or preparation of an
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                EMP. There are some social opportunities (and
                                                                                risks) associated with the Project in terms of
                                                                                changes in some peoples’ access to education or
                                                                                options (e.g. programs for disadvantaged
                                                                                students, social and economic opportunities
                                                                                available to Roma students), which should be
                                                                                addressed in the PAD and perhaps even a social
                                                                                assessment (as there will be no environmental
                                                                                assessment to incorporate these aspects).
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Jul-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      N.A.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Janssen Edelweiss Nunes T

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Nina Chee (RSA)                                                                                                      Date: 20-Nov-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Luis Benveniste (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 20-Nov-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
