                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA8137
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Central America                   Project ID:    P149895
                            Project Name:     Honduras and Nicaragua Catastrophe Risk Insurance Project (P149895)
                            Task Team         Ana Campos Garcia
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                           Estimated   23-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    LCSDU                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Non-compulsory pensions and insurance (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Other Financial Sector Development (50%), Other Private Sector Development
                                              (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      24.00           Total Bank Financing:                24.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              24.00
                              Total                                                                                    24.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to enable the access of Honduras and Nicaragua to efficient
                           sovereign risk insurance associated with tropical cyclones, earthquakes, and/or excess rainfall.
                            3. Project Description
                           The Project will finance the entrance fee and the annual insurance premiums necessary for Honduras

                                                                      Page 1 of 5
                         and Nicaragua to participate in the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF). Project
                         components have been designed in the context of the broader Central America and Caribbean
                         Catastrophe Risk Insurance Project (P149670) and fully complement its objectives and activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Payment of the entrance fee to the CCRIF for Honduras and Nicaragua

                         The objective of this Component is to assist Honduras and Nicaragua to join the CCRIF by financing
                         their entrance fees. This fee is equivalent to the first year’s insurance premium for each of the two
                         participating countries.

                         Component 2: Payment of annual insurance premium to the CCRIF for Honduras and Nicaragua

                         The objective of this Component is to assist Honduras and Nicaragua to purchase the catastrophe
                         insurance coverage offered by the CCRIF during the initial four years of their membership. In the
                         event that individual countries choose to pay a portion of the annual premium payment, remaining
                         project finance would be used towards additional years of insurance premium payments. Risk
                         coverage could be associated with tropical cyclone (wind and storm surge) and/or earthquake risk in
                         the first years. Upon availability of an additional excess rainfall product offered by CCRIF, financing
                         may also be used towards coverage against excess rainfall. Every year, Honduras and Nicaragua will
                         have the choice of selecting the amount of insurance coverage per peril, depending on country risk
                         profile and priority needs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed Project does not contemplate any direct physical investments, but rather will finance
                         entrance fees and annual insurance payments to the CCRIF for Honduras and Nicaragua. The
                         insurance funds will not be tied or tracked to any specific investments, and the Project therefore does
                         not have any safeguards implications.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No              The proposed Project will finance entrance fees
                          BP 4.01                                             and annual insurance payments to the CCRIF for
                                                                              Honduras and Nicaragua. Since none of the
                                                                              payments are linked to carrying out any specific
                                                                              investments or physical works, the Project is not
                                                                              expected to cause any adverse environmental
                                                                              impacts.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No              The proposed Project will finance entrance fees
                                                                              and annual insurance payments to the CCRIF for
                                                                              Honduras and Nicaragua. Since none of the
                                                                              payments are linked to carrying out any specific
                                                                              investments or physical works, the Project is not
                                                                              expected to have any impacts on natural habitats.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              The policy is not triggered as the proposed
                                                                              Project will only finance entrance fees and annual


                                                                      Page 2 of 5
                                                                        insurance payments to the CCRIF for Honduras
                                                                        and Nicaragua. As none of the payments are
                                                                        linked to any specific investments or physical
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        works, the proposed Project will not finance any
                                                                        activities that could affect the welfare of forest
                                                                        dependent communities or the management of
                                                                        forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No           This policy is not triggered as the proposed
                                                                        Project will not finance any activities that involve
                                                                        the procurement or significant use of pesticides,
                                                                        but rather will only finance entrance fees and
                                                                        annual insurance payments to the CCRIF for
                                                                        Honduras and Nicaragua.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No           The proposed Project will finance entrance fees
                         BP 4.11                                        and annual insurance payments to the CCRIF for
                                                                        Honduras and Nicaragua. Since none of the
                                                                        payments are linked to any specific investments
                                                                        or physical works, the Project is not expected to
                                                                        have any impacts on physical cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No           The proposed Project will finance entrance fees
                                                                        and annual insurance payments to the CCRIF for
                                                                        Honduras and Nicaragua. Since none of the
                                                                        payments under the proposed Project are linked to
                                                                        any specific investments or physical works, the
                                                                        project activities will not have any impacts on
                                                                        indigenous peoples.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No           Given that the proposed Project will only finance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.12                                           entrance fees and annual insurance payments to
                                                                        the CCRIF for Honduras and Nicaragua which are
                                                                        not linked to any specific investments or physical
                                                                        works, the proposed Project will not cause any
                                                                        involuntary resettlement as defined by the policy.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No           This policy is not triggered as the proposed
                                                                        Project will neither support the construction or
                                                                        rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
                                                                        investments which rely on services of existing
                                                                        dams.
                         Projects on International         No           This policy is not triggered as the proposed
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                           Project will only finance entrance fees and annual
                                                                        insurance payments to the CCRIF for Honduras
                                                                        and Nicaragua and will not affect any
                                                                        international waterways as defined under the
                                                                        policy.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No            The proposed Project will exclusively finance
                         7.60                                           entrance fees and annual insurance payments to
                                                                        the CCRIF for Honduras and Nicaragua. As the


                                                                Page 3 of 5
                                                                                proposed Project is not linked to any specific
                                                                                investments or physical works, the policy on
                                                                                disputed areas is not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed Project does not contemplate any direct physical investments, but rather will finance
                              entrance fees and annual insurance payments to the CCRIF for Honduras and Nicaragua. The
                              insurance funds will not be tied or tracked to any specific investments, and the Project therefore
                              does not have any safeguards implications.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The proposed Project does not contemplate any direct physical investments, but rather will finance
                              entrance fees and annual insurance payments to the CCRIF for Honduras and Nicaragua. The
                              insurance funds will not be tied or tracked to any specific investments, and the Project therefore
                              does not have any safeguards implications.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The proposed Project does not contemplate any direct physical investments, but rather will finance
                              entrance fees and annual insurance payments to the CCRIF for Honduras and Nicaragua. The
                              insurance funds will not be tied or tracked to any specific investments, and the Project therefore
Public Disclosure Copy




                              does not have any safeguards implications.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              N/A
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            N/A
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                             Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the           Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [     ]
                             international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                             be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                             issue, been prepared



                                                                        Page 4 of 5
                             Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the OP?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Ana Campos Garcia
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Sector Manager:        Name: Anna Wellenstein (SM)                       Date: 24-Mar-2014




                                                                      Page 5 of 5
