INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR8413
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Nov-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        China                      Project ID:   P116656
Project Name: Zhejiang Qiantang River Basin Small Town Environment Project (P116656)
Task Team       Guangming Yan
Leader(s):
Estimated       07-Jun-2010                Estimated     20-Jan-2011
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                       Lending       Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Wastewater Collection and Transportation (55%), Water supply (18%),
Sanitation (17%), Solid waste management (9%), Public administra tion- Water,
sanitation and flood protection (1%)
Theme:          City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (53%), Pollution management and
environmental health (40%), Environmental policies and institutions (7%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                   No
O
U         Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:     215.00            Total Bank Financing:   100.00
o        Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                Amount
Borrower                                                       115.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          100.00
Total                                                          215.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
Project Development Objective. The proposed project development objective is to narrow the gap in
Page 1 of 12


﻿sustainable urban environmental infrastructure service provisi                  on
between small towns and large urban centers in Zhejiang Province. This will b
e achieved by supporting investments in wastewater, water supply, and solid wast
e in ten selected small towns located in the Qiantang River Basin. In addition,
O
U        the project intends to enhance the institutional capacity in the selected small
towns to manage urban environmental infrastructure in a sustainable manner.
Progress towards meeting the PDO would be measured through a variety of indicators to be
developed during project preparation including on increased access to s
ervices and reduced urban pollution loads, as well as indicators on institutiona
1 sustainability (i.e., operating efficiency rates, cost effectiveness, and cost
recovery rates, etc.).
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
Project Development Objective. The proposed project development objective is to narrow the gap in
sustainable urban environmental infrastructure service provisi                  on
between small towns and large urban centers in Zhejiang Province. This will b
e achieved by supporting investments in wastewater, water supply, and solid wast
e in ten selected small towns located in the Qiantang River Basin. In addition,
the project intends to enhance the institutional capacity in the selected small
towns to manage urban environmental infrastructure in a sustainable manner.
Progress towards meeting the PDO would be measured through a variety of indicators to be
developed during project preparation including on increased access to s
ervices and reduced urban pollution loads, as well as indicators on institutiona
1 sustainability (i.e., operating efficiency rates, cost effectiveness, and cost
recovery rates, etc.).
3. Project Description
The original project consists of the following four components.
Component 1: Water Supply and Distribution (US$35.64 million, of which the IBRD loan is US
$18.99 million). Construction and/or installation of water supply treatment plants and clear water
distribution networks to enhance water supply in the sub-urban areas and adjacent towns in: Zhuji
City of Shaoxing Municipality and Wucheng District of Jinhua Municipality.
Component 2: Wastewater Collection and Treatment (US$158.03 million, of which the IBRD loan is
US$68.05 million). Construction and/ or installation of wastewater collection networks and treatment
facilities, stormwater collection networks, associated roads, and river embankment rehabilitation
works in: Jiande City of Hangzhou Municipality; Qujiang District of Quzhou Municipality; Lanxi
City/ Youbu Town of Jinhua Municipalty; Pan'an County/ Jianshan Town of Jinhua Municipality;
Pan'an County/ Shenzhe District of Jinhua Municipality; Pan'an County/ Yunshan District of Jinhua
Municipality; Tonglu County/ Jiangnan Town of Hangzhou Municipality; and Longyou County/
Chengbei New District of Quzhou Municipality.
Component 3: Solid Waste Management (US$20.32 million, of which the IBRD loan is US$10.96
million). Improvements in solid waste management in Jiande City of Hangzhou Municipality through
the construction of the Qingshankejiawu landfill in Meicheng Town which will serve five towns and
one community of Jiande City; the construction of a tertiary leachate treatment plant; the closure of
Page 2 of 12


﻿three existing open dumps; and the provision of solid waste collection vehicles and equipment.
Component 4: Institutional Strengthening and Training (IST) (US$2.00 million, IBRD loan). This
component consists of: i) provision of technical assistance for project management and
O
U        implementation including advisory and quality control services to the PPMO, PMOs, and PIUs in
support of the project's infrastructure investments and on institutional and financial sustainability
issues; ii) provision of technical assistance to support the development of strategic master plans and/
or other specific sector studies as the Bank may agree for sustainable environmental infrastructure
service provision in small towns; and iii) provision of training and carrying out of study tours to
build capacity of the PPMO, PMOs, and PIUs on technical, operational and institutional aspects of
sustainable environmental infrastructure service provision in small towns.
The proposed changes are to: (a) drop the wastewater subcomponent in Pan'an County/Yunshan
District and some activities in Pan'an County/Shenze District; (b) finance new activities in Zhuji City
and Qujiang District with Loan proceed savings; (c) update the project cost and financing plan; (d)
reallocate Loan proceeds among expenditure categories and revise the disbursement ratios for certain
categories; (e) revise the result framework; and (f) amend the legal agreements to incorporate the
above changes.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Located in the southern wing of the Yangtze River Delta, Zhejiang Province has a total area of
101,800 km2. The Qiantang River, the largest river in Zhejiang Province, starts in Xiuning County of
Anhui and passes through Zhejiang Province and then flows to the East China Sea through Hangzhou
Bay. Its catchment area in the upstream of Hangzhou Gate is 42,200 km2 and the length of its main
stream is 484 km. The project includes eight cities/counties in the Qiantang River Basin: Jiande City,
Meichen Town/ Jiande City, YoubuTown/ Lanxi City, Qujiang District, Wucheng Distrcit, Panan
County, Longyou County, and Jiangnan Town/ Tonglu County. All projects are located either in the
economically less advanced middle or upper part of Qiantang River Basin, such as Quzhou and
Jinhua Municipalities, or the less developed counties and towns in the lower part of the Basin, such
as Jiande City and Tonglu County in Hangzhou Municipality.
Zhuji City is located in the N of Zhejiang and on the S bank of Qingtang River at the middle reach of
the river basin. It is 200 km SW of Shanghai and 90 km S of Hangzhou. The city is affiliated to
Shaoxing Municipality and covers an area of2,311 km2 with a population of 1.06 M. It consists of
27 townships and sub-districts.
Jiande City is located in the W of Zhejiang in the upper-middle reach of the river basin. It is affiliated
to Hangzhou Municipality and covers an area of 2,321 km2 with a population of 590,000. Meicheng
Town, under the jurisdiction of Jiande, is 240 km SW of Hangzhou.
Tonglu County is in the NW of Zhejiang and located in the upper reach of the River. Bordering Zhuji
to the E and Jiande City to the NE, the county is affiliated to Hangzhou Municipality and covers an
area of 1825 km2 with a population 390,000. Jiangnan Town, located 10km E of Tonglu County,
covers an area of 78km2 with a population of 52,000.
Quzhou Municipality is located in the W of Zhejiang Province and in the upstream of the Qiantang
River. It covers an area of 8,837 km2 with a population of 2.49 M. It consists of one city, two
districts and three counties under its jurisdiction. Qujiang, one of the districts of Quzhou
Page 3 of 12


﻿Municipality, consists of 2 sub-districts, 10 towns and 9 townships, covering an area of 1,748 km2
with a population of 350,000.
Longyou County is located in the mid-west of Zhejiang Province. It is affiliated to Quzhou
O
U        Municipality and covers an area of 1143 km2 with a population of 400,000. The County consists of 6
towns, 7 townships and 2 sub-districts under its jurisdiction. Having been a traditional agricultural
county, Longyou is rich in land and forest resources.
Jinhua Municipality is located in the central part of Zhejiang, bordering Shaoxing and Hangzhou to
the NE. Lanxi City, Wucheng District, and Pan'an County are all affiliated to Jinhua. Lanxi is
located at the middle reach of the river basin and is 132km SW of Hangzhou. The city has a
population 650,000; Youbu Town, a historic town of Zhejiang, is 18km SW of Lanxi City. Youbu
Town covers an area of 63.5km2 with a population of approximately 40,000; Wucheng District
covers an area of 1,388 km2 with a population of 590,000. It consists of 9 town, 9 villages and 9 sub-
districts under its jurisdiction; Pan'an County has a population 230,000 and covers an area of
1,1 98km2, featuring mountains (altitude>800m) and hills over the county.
As part of restructuring, the two new proposed activities are located in the original project city/
district of Zhuji and Qujiang.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Feng Ji (GENDR)
Songling Yao (GSURR)
Ximing Zhang (GWADR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment Yes
OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09  No
*         Physical Cultural Resources Yes
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement  Yes
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas No
OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Page 4 of 12


﻿1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
OP 4.01. Environmental Assessment. The project brings positive environmental benefits and
contributes to Zhejiang's strategy of scaling-up environmental infrastructure provision and
improving the water quality of the Qiantang River. The project as a whole is substantially positive
in environmental terms, with the benefits greatly outweighing the negative impacts. Nevertheless
some negative impacts have been identified in the EA process. The principal impacts include:
disposal of sludge generated at the WWTPs, leachate and landfill gas impact, outfall impact, and
construction spoil disposal etc.
OP 4.04 Natural Habitats. OP 4.04 was marked as TBD at the PCN stage as it was not clear
whether the project would have any adverse impacts on natural habitats including on a protection
area (mainly for Chinese medicine herbs) in Panan County. The EA confirmed that there will be
no adverse impacts to natural habitats in the influence area of the project. Though there are
impacts at the outfalls, they will be minor on the receiving bodies because i) the four WWTPs are
all of small scale and distributed in different cities and counties, and ii) the receiving water bodies
generally have high absorption capacities. The outfall impact has been minimized by applying
stringent effluent discharge standard
and by careful site selection of the outfalls.
OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources. Four bridges in Youbu Town have been identified as PCRs
which are located in the vicinity of the Youbu subproject. The rehabilitation of the Youbu Stream
through a combination of river back bank reinforcement, landscaping, and the repaving of two old
streets in Youbu Town may temporarily cause adverse impact on the bridges.
OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples. OP4. 10 was marked TBD at the PCN stage. The task team screened
for and did not find any minority villages through desk review and two field visits. It further
suggested the SA continue screening for the presence of Ethnic Minorities. The SA completed the
screening for Ethnic Minorities in the project area and indicated that there is only one ethnic
minority village, Gewuta Village in Wucheng District, in the project area. The village consists of
six ethnic minority people, constituting 71% of the total population, including She, Miao
minorities, etc. However, these minorities are part of mainstream society. They do not have their
own language but speak Mandarin. Furthermore, they do not have customary economic, social, or
*           political institutions separate from the dominant society. It is thus concluded that they do not fall
under the definition of Indigenous Peoples as per OP 4.10, and that the policy does not apply to
this project.
OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. Resettlement Plans (RPs) have been prepared for all project
activities and are acceptable to the Bank. The project will directly impact ten townships in the
eight counties. The major resettlement impacts include: (i) 99 ha collective land will be
permanently acquired, from 596 households with 2014 persons; (ii) 82 ha land will be temporarily
occupied, including 34 ha of collective land from which 711 households with 2642 persons derive
a portion of their income; (iii) 183 households with 650 persons will have their houses demolished.
OP/BP 4.37. Safety of Dams. The project does not finance the construction of dams, but some of
the water supply systems to be constructed would draw directly from reservoirs controlled by
existing dams. Specifically, there are two existing upstream dams which provide water sources for
the water supply sub-projects: (i) Xinfan Dam in Wucheng District, Jinhua City and (ii) Qingshan
Page 5 of 12


﻿Dam in Zhuji City. The Bank's dam safety expert has visited the two dams and reviewed the
documents concerning safety of dams. Xinfan Dam is operationally safe; Qingshan Dam, whose
remedial works have been properly completed end of 2009, is also operationally safe. An
Operation and Maintenance (O&M)
and Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) for both dams exist and are acceptable. During project
implementation the O&M and safety status will be monitored.
The Chinese Government has issued a series of guidelines and regulations for dam safety
Management, including the Reservoir Dam Safety Management Regulation, Regulations on
Reservoir Dam Safety Review, Guidelines for Dam Safety Review, Guidelines for Emergency
Preparedness Plan, and Guidelines for Operation, Maintenance and Surveillance of Dams. The
Bank task team will include a dam safety expert, with terms of reference based on requirements of
OP4.37, to monitor the dam safety status and supervise the implementation of any remedial works
to ensure the project being implemented in compliance with the Bank Dam Safety Policy.
Restructuring:
Two new investments were proposed during restructuring. One new proposed investment in Zhuji
City will mainly include the expansion of 48.6 km complementary distribution pipelines, in the
same project areas. No major changes in the focus of the original project are anticipated, just a
scaling-up of activities to enhance the impact and development effectiveness. There is no new
environmental issue.
With respect to the second new investment in Qujiang District, two roads (Jiangbindong Road and
Guifangbei Road) with total lengthen of 2.3km and the associated pipelines will be constructed
including 4.4k m storm water pipes, 2.3km water supply pipes and 2.9km sewer networks
connecting to the wastewater treatment facility financed under the original project. The key
environmental issues include mainly construction related impacts, and traffic noise and road safety
issues during operation phase. These impacts are limited, and site specific and can be readily
managed by good construction practice and design, and the specific measures proposed in the
EMP. The above proposed new investment does not pose a substantial change in the overall
project safeguards risks nor in the original environmental categorization (Category A).
The two proposed activities both have resettlement related impacts. The Zhuji city water supply
subcomponent will require temporary use of 365mu land to accommodate the installation of
distribution of pipelines. For the construction of two roads and associated pipelines, 99 mu of
farmland will be permanently acquired. A total of 230 persons from 55 households in three
villages have been affected by land acquisition.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The investments in the urban environment in the cities/ counties/ towns supported by the project
will improve the public health, visual impact, and are also expected to have a positive impact on
property values in these areas. No adverse long term social impacts are anticipated. The
restructuring activities have the similar impacts as the original project components.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Alternatives were considered for water treatment and distribution, wastewater collection and
treatment, and landfill components during the Feasibility Study and EA preparation process,
Page 6 of 12


﻿including site selection, treatment technology, sludge disposal, and outfall selection. The objective
of the alternative analysis was to minimize the environmental impacts and project costs.
Furthermore, minimizing land acquisition and resettlement was also a critical project design
O
consideration. The main relevant measures taken include: i) reducing size of land occupied and
number of households to be relocated through an alternative analysis of project location and
technical designs; and ii) preferring unused land or land with poor quality.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The implementation arrangements at the Provincial level are the same as those for the existing
Zhejiang Urban Environmental Project. The PPMO, under the Provincial Construction Bureau,
will be responsible for project preparation and implementation. It is the same PPMO which is in
charge of the ongoing Zhejiang Urban Environment Project. The PPMO has satisfactorily prepared
and been implementing the Zhejiang Urban Environment Project. Its capacity to oversee and
ensure safeguards compliance during project preparation and implementation is deemed adequate.
Corresponding project city/ county level PMOs have been established to manage project
preparation and implementation of the sub-components.
Environmental Safeguards
The borrower has engaged EA consultants to prepare the EA reports for all project components,
which satisfy the Bank's requirements for OP.4.01 and Chinese EA regulations. The EA & EMP
specifies appropriate mitigation measures, environmental monitoring plans, institutional
arrangements, training and equipment requirements together with budget estimates for
implementation of the mitigation measures and monitoring plans. The main mitigation measures
are described below.
Sludge and other solid waste from wastewater treatment plants will be sent to nearby landfills for
disposal. The outfall impacts will be minimized (i) by site selection of outfall to avoid sensitive
receptors; and (ii) by applying more stringent discharge standard (Class 1A). For the new sanitary
landfill, groundwater pollution will be minimized by the installation of an impermeable membrane
liner, and a leachate collection and treatment facility. Landfill gas will be collected and flared in
short term, and to utilize the landfill gas in long term when there is adequate gas generation at the
*           landfill. Most of the construction spoils will be re-used on site, and spoil disposal plans prepared
for each project component where excess spoil will be generated.
To avoid any adverse impact on the four old bridges during construction, mitigation measures in
line with Bank policy and the national regulatory and legal framework concerning cultural heritage
have been agreed on with the concerned parties. The local PMOs will engage qualified and
experienced contractors, who will minimize vibration, dust, noise, solid and water pollution, avoid
night-time construction, minimize traffic in sensitive area, and develop temporary traffic plans to
detour traffic around construction sites. Chance finds procedures are also included as a mitigation
measure.
Implementation of the Ongoing Project: Environmental progress report for the ongoing project has
been prepared by the PMO regularly. Both the progress report and regular Bank mission confirm
that safeguards-related activities are being satisfactorily implemented and that there are no
significant outstanding environmental safeguard implementation issues.
Page 7 of 12


﻿Restructuring: The new proposed activities are still under management by the existing Zhuji and
Qujiang PMOs. The original EMP for Zhuji City is still adequate for Zhuji's new proposed
investment, i.e. water supply network in the same project area, which was covered by the original
EA. There is no new environmental issue. With respect to the second new investment in Qujiang
District, a supplemental EMP for the newly added investment has been prepared. Specific
measures have been proposed in the supplemental EMP, including measures for construction
impacts, and mitigation measures (e.g. traffic noise, road safety), for operation phase.
Social Safeguards
Livelihood development. Land acquisition impact is very limited in the affected villages with, on
average, only 2.14 % farmland taken. The key measures for livelihood development include cash
compensation, social security, and training, given land redistribution within villages is not
possible. The affected farmers who will lose land will be provided with two options: a package of
cash compensation, living subsidies/ pension arrangement and free job training, or cash
compensation       plus training. Those who temporarily lose land will receive periodic rent
support during land occupation and may repossess their land af ter construction. For the two new
proposed activities under the restructuring, livelihood development was developed in the two
individual RPs, following the same strategies as the original project in the RPF.
Household development. All 183 households under the six subprojects are in rural areas, and they
are to be separately provided cash compensation, cash compensation plus residential plot, or cash
compensation plus the right to purchase replaced house for resettlers. The resettlement planning
concluded that the proposed cash compensation can meet the requirement of housing restoration.
In addition, all relocated households also have the right to receive moving subsidies and transition
allowances. Vulnerable households have been identified and will be provided with extra financial
and physical assistance in their house rehabilitation. About 20 households need housing
restoration, the prepared RP determined two ways in terms of cash compensation plus replacement
house, and cash compensation. Other measures such as resettlement assistance, training, capacity
building, and grievance redress are also explored based on meaningful consultation with the
affected people, village committees and local governments and will be implemented by
responsible agencies defined in the new RP.
Linked activities. Linked activities not financed by the Bank were identified during project
preparation. Five activities were identified as linked to the project, among which two activities had
completed resettlement related assignments within two years prior to identification mission and
the other three ones will implement resettlement assignments during project implementation. The
already implemented resettlement under the two previous activities were reviewed by the social
team and are reflected in the Annex 3 of the RP, the oncoming resettlement for the three ones will
be planned and implemented according to the RPF. The new proposed activities under the
restructuring have no any linked activities identified.
Management and monitoring. The PPMO will lead and coordinate the resettlement
implementation, and the specific activities of resettlement and land acquisition will be handled by
county/ district PMOs. The RAPs have developed management systems for the project
resettlement implementation, through provincial level to subproject project office at county level,
including organizations and their responsibilities, personnel, and financial resources and training
arrangements, etc. The consolidated RAP has listed resettlement staff in each city project
Page 8 of 12


﻿management office. The consolidated RAP has determined monitoring indicators and reporting
systems for internal and external monitoring. The two new proposed activities under the
restructuring will be integrated into the existing monitoring system.
O
Other social issues. The SA provided extensive recommendations on project planning and design,
as well as resettlement, which were incorporated into the project planning and design. The
recommendations mainly relate to: i) attitudes of various stakeholders to the project; ii) technical
and/or institutional capacity of local government and relevant authorities/agencies; iii) social risk
analysis and mitigation measures in project preparation, implementation and operation stages; iv)
identification of vulnerable people; v) affordability of water and waste water tariff and solid waste
fee; vi) willingness to pay.
Resettlement Planning for the New Proposed Activities. Two individual RPs were prepared with
assistance from Hohai University and submitted to the Bank. The TT social member provided
suggestions, guidance and review comments, and found they are complaint with OP 4.12. The RPs
were disclosed locally and in the Infoshop.
Zhuji: A RP was drafted in line with the RPF and by the PMO with assistance from Hohai
University. The main measure is to compensate in cash in the occupation period in line with the
municipal land regulation, given the impact is temporary and partial, and the total cost is about
3.57 million yuan. The RP was disclosed locally on Aug 28, 2014 and in InfoShop on Oct 9, 2014.
Zhuji Government agreed to implement and monitor the RP as usual and the project external
monitor will cover the component resettlement.
Qujiang: The RP was prepared according to the RPF with assistance from Hohai University.
Compensation for land is based on national land regulation and provincial land plot price and for
house is based on replacement price for structure. Livelihood restoration for those who lost land
mainly relies on cash compensation, training, and social security program, while housing
restoration is in two ways of combination of cash compensation plus replacement house, and cash
compensation. Other measures such as resettlement assistance, training, capacity building, and
grievance redress are also explored based on meaningful consultation with the affected people,
village committees and local governments and will be implemented by responsible agencies
defined in the RP. The RP for Qujiang was disclosed locally on Sept 23, 2014, and in InfoShop on
October 9, 2014.
Evaluation on the Ongoing Project.
Progress: The original RPs are being smoothly implemented and the regular Bank supervision
missions found the resettlement implementation satisfactory. Till End of March 2014, the project
has completed: (i) permanent land acquisition of 938 mu, which is 63% of planned acquisitions;
(ii) temporary land acquisitions of 1,243 mu, which is 101% of planned; (iii) house demolitions of
21,697 m2, which is 43% of planned demolitions; and (iv) new house restoration of 73
households, which is 40% of planned house restoration. Based on the original Resettlement Plan
(RP), the remaining resettlement to be completed is only in three out of the eleven subprojects,
namely, Jiande landfill; Jiande Chengdong WWTP; and Longyou County.
Monitoring: The completed resettlement has generally been implemented satisfactorily by PMO,
and has been monitored by independent resettlement monitor from Hohai University. The semi-
annual progress reports and regular external resettlement monitoring reports stated that the
resettlement impacts were fully investigated, disclosed, transparently compensated in line with the
Page 9 of 12


﻿RPs, and that the affected people were consulted and generally satisfied with the compensation
and resettlement. The task team was able to confirm the above findings during field visits, and is
satisfied with the resettlement implementation completed to date.
O
Grievance redress: in the resettlement implementation, transparent and effective grievance redress
system was established and executed to let the affected persons aware of and use the channel.
There is no any pending complaint so far.
One dropped subcomponent, Yunshan wastewater sub-component using domestic financing, is
still and will be continuously under the supervision and monitoring.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Environmental Safeguards
In accordance with the World Bank Safeguard policies and Chinese regulation, public
consultations have been conducted during the environmental assessment, including public
consultation meetings, and a questionnaire survey on project affected people and other
stakeholders to discuss project and their concerns. Their opinions and concerns have been taken
into account in the EA process and project design.
The EA&EMPs were locally disclosed in April 2010 through announcements published in the
local newspaper and on the internet websites of local cities and counties. The safeguard documents
were also disclosed at the Bank's InfoShop.
With respect to the restructuring, the supplemental EMP for Qujiang City was locally disclosed at
the local government website (http://qj.qz.gov.cn) on September 23, 2014 with an announcement
published in the Qujiang daily newspaper on October 28, 2014. The EMP was disclosed at the
InfoShop on November 12, 2014.
O
Social Safeguards
Consultation and participation. Resettlement consultation was conducted throughout the project
areas in more than 20 villages of ten townships, including local authorities and design institutes,
through meetings, focus group discussions, questionnaire surveys, and asset investigation. All the
stakeholders of the project including government, villagers, designers were involved in the
selection of the locations of plants/ pump stations as well as realignment of various pipes, to
mitigate resettlement impacts, and to develop rehabilitation measures. The consolidated RAP
report includes a set of tables which show the consultation issues, process and outputs and a plan
for consultation in next stage. The new prepared RPs under the restructuring are also based on
extensive consultation along the project lines and at related villages.
Vulnerable households. The social assessment identified five vulnerable households in the project
areas and accordingly provided for supplementary measures in addition to common resettlement
measures, including house provision, as well as life subsidies or employment.
Gender. The resettlement planning paid attention to women who are affected by the project and
developed specific measures to: i) integrate women into the project consultation and participation
process; ii) ensure that compensation contract for households be signed by both spouses together
Page 10 of 12


﻿when applicable; iii) prioritize women for training courses provided by local governments to
enhance their potential of earning additional income; iv) award prioritize when appropriate
employment to women.
O
Q)          Information disclosure. Before project appraisal all the resettlement documents were disclosed
locally in May 2010, with announcements in local newspapers, and in the InfoShop. They were
also available on relevant websites and in PMO offices for public information during the project
implementation.
Restructuring: The two RPs under the restructuring were disclosed locally on Aug 28, 2014 and
Sept 23, 2014 separately and in InfoShop on Oct 9, 2014.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                30-Oct-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                             12-Nov-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                      23-Sep-2014
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                01-Sep-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                             09-Oct-2014
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                      23-Sep-2014
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes[X] No[     ]  NA [    ]
property?
Page 11 of 12


﻿Does the credit/10an incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA[]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                     Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [ X ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA [ X ]
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
O
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Guangming Yan
Approved By
Regional Safeguards    Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                  Date: 07-Jan-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/      Name:                                      Date:
Manager:
Page 12 of 12


