                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC6511

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Georgia                          Project ID:       P148048
                            Project Name:      Third Secondary and Local Roads Project (P148048)
                            Task Team          Joseph Melitauri
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          04-Apr-2014                      Estimated         17-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSTR                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (98%), Public administration-
                                               Transportation (2%)
                            Theme(s):          Trade facilitation and market access (25%), Rural services and infrastructure
                                               (25%), Regional integration (25%), Infrastructure serv ices for private sector
                                               development (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     90.00                      Total Bank Financing:         75.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      15.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         75.00
                              Total                                                                         90.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to: (i) reduce road user cost, (ii) increase road safety
                           and (iii) improve the management of routine maintenance on the selected local roads.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed project would consist of four components totaling US$90 million.

                         Component 1: Improvement of Secondary and Local Roads (about US$ 85.0 million). This
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component will finance (i) the rehabilitation of secondary and local roads, totaling 175 km including
                         the Gurjaani-Bakurtsikhe bypass (15 km), and (ii) routine maintenance pilot in three selected
                         Municipalities using a micro-enterprise approach. This component will include a training activity
                         targeted to the selected Municipalities on micro-enterprise contract management.

                         Component 2: Capacity Building and Advisory Services to the newly established local roads Unit
                         within the Roads Department (about US$ 2.0 million). The aim of this component is to consolidate
                         the previous condition survey carried out by the Roads Department (RD) on the core local road
                         network, integrate this in the RD database and RMS and develop a priority road rehabilitation/
                         maintenance program for the core local road network. The component will also finance baseline
                         survey and impact studies on project beneficiaries. Through the collection of quantitative and
                         qualitative data (practical surveys instruments before and after project completion), the proposed
                         assessments will document potential income and social impacts.

                         Component 3: Road Safety Technical Assistance sub-component ($0.3 million). This sub-component
                         will finance a pilot “Safe Village” program in four demonstration villages linked to Third SLRP road
                         sections. The “Safe Village” program will comprise a combination of road safety elements, such as
                         education programs in village schools, publicity campaigns among the villagers and other road users.

                         Component 4: Design and supervision consultant (US$2.7 million). This component will finance the
                         detailed design of the remaining project work program (the detailed design of around 70 km out of
                         175 km of the selected secondary and local roads will be completed during the project appraisal
                         stage) and the supervision activities for all road rehabilitation and maintenance works. This
                         component will also finance independent technical audits of civil works.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         SLRP III will be implemented country-wide and covers the selected road sections.

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The safeguard policies will be implemented by the Roads Department. The RD currently carries out
                         several donor-funded road projects. It has past experience and an acceptable track record of applying
                         international standards to the environmental and social management. While the RD has adequate
                         knowledge and experience in implementing the Bank's safeguard policies, a large number of ongoing
                         contracts compared to the current staffing constrains RD's ability to monitor effectively and manage
                         environmental performance of the projects. However, RD's capacity to monitor adherence to the
                         safeguard policies is overstretched due to a large number and geographic spread of the ongoing road
                         contracts. The environmental performance of the ongoing SLRP is assessed to be marginally
                         satisfactory. To achieve fully satisfactory safeguard compliance of the proposed project, RD needs
                         additional staff. RD's capacity for monitoring safeguard implementation should be further enhanced.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)
                         Vera Dugandzic (ECSSO)
                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          The project is not expected to have significant
                           BP 4.01                                     impact on the environment. All planned
                                                                       physical works are limited to rehabilitation of
                                                                       the existing alignments. Overall long term social
                                                                       and environmental impacts will be positive,
                                                                       while negative impacts will be of minor scope
                                                                       and duration, and typical for any secondary/
                                                                       local road rehabilitation activity.

                                                                       The only higher risk activity is upgrading of the
                                                                       Gurjaani bypass road connecting two rural
                                                                       settlements in Kakheti region, East Georgia.
                                                                       Construction of this 15 km road had been
                                                                       initiated decades ago, the corridor had been
                                                                       cleared, and the road base preparation
                                                                       commended, but later the site got abandoned.
                                                                       Over the years it became an informal waste
                                                                       dump site for household and construction waste,
                                                                       including discarded roofing sheets containing
                                                                       asbestos. While no other hazardous material has
                                                                       been identified as yet, further investigation of
                                                                       waste composition will be required. While the
                                                                       national legislation establishes procedures for
                                                                       handling asbestos-containing waste, the country
                                                                       lacks proper infrastructure for hazardous waste
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       disposal. The Roads Department will work with
                                                                       Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources
                                                                       Protection, and with local authorities to identify
                                                                       an acceptable solution for collecting and
                                                                       disposing off the waste dumped along the
                                                                       Gurjaani-Bakurtsikhe bypass alignment, with
                                                                       particular attention to suitable disposition of the
                                                                       asbestos and any other hazardous material that
                                                                       may be encountered. Because the risk associated
                                                                       with the described investment as well as the
                                                                       measures for its mitigation are known upfront
                                                                       and are not of large scale, and because all other
                                                                       considered investments will have minimal
                                                                       negative impacts on the natural and social
                                                                       environment, the project is classified as
                                                                       environmental category B.

                                                                       An Environmental and Social Management
                                                                       Framework (ESMF), currently used for the
                                                                 ongoing SLRP II, will be updated for the
                                                                 purposes of SLRP III. ESMF will provide an
                                                                 overview of the expected environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 social issues related to the project
                                                                 implementation and will offer comprehensive
                                                                 guidance on the site-specific environmental
                                                                 management planning to be carried out by the
                                                                 client using consultant services for all sections
                                                                 of roads to be proposed for the project
                                                                 intervention on a rolling basis. The use of an
                                                                 EMP Checklist for Small Scale Road
                                                                 Construction or Rehabilitation is proposed to
                                                                 facilitate site-specific environmental
                                                                 management planning under the project, with
                                                                 the exception of a higher risk Gurjaani-
                                                                 Bakurtsikhe bypass sub-project.

                                                                 ESMF will be disclosed in-country and opened
                                                                 for public feedback prior to the project
                                                                 appraisal, while site-specific EMPs will be
                                                                 subjected to the similar procedures and get
                                                                 finalized based on the received public feedback
                                                                 prior to commencement of works in each
                                                                 individual road section.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The project will not finance new road
                         4.12                                    construction and all civil works will be
                                                                 performed within the existing right-of-way.
                                                                 However minor land acquisition may take place
                                                                 to provide adequate sidewalks and drainage, if
                                                                 required.

                                                                 Also, informal land use along the Gurjaani-
                                                                 Bakurtsikhe bypass road sub-project is quite
                                                                 likely, as the route was laid decades ago and
                                                                 abandoned afterwards. Thus potential land
                                                                 acquisition and resettlement may occur on this
                                                                 subproject.
                                                                                                                                 A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will
                                                                                                                                 be developed prior to appraisal based on the
                                                                                                                                 existing RPF currently in use for the purposes of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 SLRP II. If relevant, the RPF will take into
                                                                                                                                 account any lessons learned during the
                                                                                                                                 implementation of the two previous SLRPs. As
                                                                                                                                 it is expected that a detailed design and
                                                                                                                                 feasibility study for the bypass alignment will
                                                                                                                                 be ready by the project appraisal, a draft
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be
                                                                                                                                 developed specifically for the Gurjaani-
                                                                                                                                 Bakurtsikhe bypass by the project appraisal as
                                                                                                                                 well. Its preparation and implementation will be
                                                                                                                                 linked with corresponding civil works
                                                                                                                                 procurement milestones to ensure that
                                                                                                                                 compensation and assistance is delivered to
                                                                                                                                 project affected people prior to taking over of
                                                                                                                                 their land and other assets lost to the project
                                                                                                                                 activities.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Public Disclosure Copy




                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 28-Mar-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The RD will update the ESMF and RPF currently used for the implementation of SLRP II, re-
                                      disclose them through the RD's web page, open these documents for public feedback, and finalize
                                      in the manner satisfactory to the Bank before SLRP III appraisal. If any site specific displacement
                                      becomes known prior to appraisal, draft RAP(s) will also be prepared as appropriate. Site-specific
                                      EMPs and RAPs, as required, will be developed on a rolling basis, disclosed, discussed with the
                                      project affected stakeholders, and finalized on a rolling basis over the course of the project
                                      implementation. Works may not commence at any project site unless an EMP satisfactory to the
                                      Bank is developed, and RAP, if required, is prepared and implemented by the client.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Joseph Melitauri

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: John R. Butler (RSA)                                                                                                 Date: 09-Jan-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Moustafa Baher El-Hefnawy (SM)                                                                                       Date: 09-Jan-2014


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
