                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA6887
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Sri Lanka                        Project ID:    P132698
                            Project Name:     Skills Development Project (P132698)
                            Task Team         Halil Dundar
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         20-Feb-2014                      Estimated   29-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    SASED                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Vocational training (70%), Tertiary education (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (70%), Improving labor markets (20%),
                                              Social safety nets (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     650.00           Total Bank Financing:              90.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                   Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                  417.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                          90.00
                              Asian Development Bank                                                              100.00
                              KOREA, Govt. of                                                                      26.00
                              GERMANY German Technical Assistance Corporation
                                                                                                                     17.00
                              (GTZ)
                              Total                                                                                650.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                                                     Page 1 of 7
                         The Project Development Objective is to expand the supply of skilled and employable workers by
                         increasing access to quality and labor market relevant training programs.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Program Scope and Description. A comprehensive Sri Lanka skills development plan is being
                         finalized by the Ministry of Finance and Planning (MOFP). The plan identifies key challenges in the
                         skills development sector, policy directions and key implementation activities by implementing
                         agency. It will serve as the foundation for World Bank support. It stresses the importance of
                         engaging employers to play an active role in managing the sector, of leveling the playing field
                         between the public and private sector in training provision, of enhancing the productivity of the
                         informal sector, and of making a wider and more systematic use of monitoring and evaluation
                         (M&E) to improve the quality and efficacy of the training programs.

                         The proposed Project would support the above government program through two components: (i)
                         Program Support to the National Skills Development Program; and (ii) Innovation, Results
                         Monitoring and Capacity Building.

                         Component 1: Program Support to the National Skills Development Program [Total: US$648
                         million; of which IDA contribution is US$90 million]

                         This Component 1 uses a results-based financing (RBF) modality. Disbursements up to a capped
                         amount will be made against specific line items in the MYASD’s annual budgets, referred to as
                         eligible expenditure programs (EEPs), and will be conditioned on the achievement of specified
                         results, as measured by disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) (see Annex 1 for the DLI matrix).
                         Interventions to be supported under this Component can be grouped under three closely related
                         pillars, linked to the five specific NSDP policy areas: (i) strengthening governance and management
                         (policy thrust 1 of the government's program): (ii) enhancing quality and relevance of training (policy
                         thrusts 2 and 3); and (iii) increasing access to training opportunities (policy thrusts 4 and 5).
                         Pillar 1: Strengthening Sector Governance and Management. The main objective is to strengthen the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         governance and management of the sector with increased and tighter focus on results and more
                         efficient use of resources. This pillar would support and monitor reforms to accomplish the following
                         priority objectives: (i) ensuring adequate and predictable financing of the sector; (ii) improving labor
                         market supply and demand analysis; (iii) improving monitoring and assessment of training provider
                         performance; (iv) increasing coordination within MYASD and across ministries; (v) rationalizing
                         utilization of existing TVET resources; and (vi) implementing performance-based financing to
                         support institutions that perform well.
                         For this pillar, the release of IDA funds will be linked to achievement of the following four DLIs: (i)
                         increased efficiency of resource utilization (DLI1); (ii) MYASD annul budget approved and executed
                         in line with the government skills sector development plan and its fiscal and budgetary framework
                         (DLI2); (iii) timely availability of reliable institution and agency data and periodic analysis of
                         courses, centers, and teacher performance (DLI3); and (iv) performance- based funding of public
                         training providers, designed, piloted, evaluated, and expanded (DLI4).
                         Pillar 2: Improving the Quality and Relevance of Skills Development. The objective of this pillar is
                         to improve the quality and relevance of skill development programs offered by public, private and
                         NGO institutions. It would support: (i) unifying the Sri Lanka qualification framework and
                         establishing pathways between general and technical education; (ii) simplifying, updating, and
                         developing the NVQ system to respond to employer needs including increasing demand for soft
                         skills; (iii) addressing the shortage of qualified instructors through design and implementation of a
                         recruitment and compensation policy linked to performance; (iv) designing and implementing a

                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         teacher professional development program to upgrade skills of instructors; and (v) establishing
                         effective mechanisms and incentives to involve employers in training design and management of
                         training institutions. For this pillar, release of IDA funds would be linked to the achievement of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         following DLIs: (i) improved relevance of training programs for students through increased employer
                         participation (DLI5); (ii) improved quality assurance mechanisms (DLI6); (iii) implementation of a
                         revised human resource plan (DLI7); and (iv) skills upgrading of teaching staff in priority areas
                         (DLI8) (see Annex 1 for details).
                         Pillar 3: Expanding Access to Quality Skills Training. Under this pillar, the Government plans to
                         increase equitable access to quality skills development programs. The following are priority
                         interventions which would be supported and monitored: (i) development and implementation of a
                         social awareness strategy to inform the public of the benefits of skills training and reduce the
                         attached stigma; (ii) implementation of a purchase model to increase numbers trained in relevant
                         occupations in specific growth sectors; (iii) design and launch of a targeted stipend program to
                         remove financial obstacles for meritorious low-income students and workers; and (iv) expansion of
                         market-driven middle-level technician training programs through establishment of university
                         colleges. For this pillar, the release of IDA funds will be linked to the following DLIs: (i)
                         implementation of the purchase model (DLI9); and (ii) improved use and dissemination of system
                         information (DLI10).

                         Component 2: Innovation, Results Monitoring and Capacity Building [IDA contribution is US$10
                         million]

                         This component aims to strengthen the implementation capacity of MYASD and its implementing
                         agencies and help them to achieve the objectives of the Government's plan. This component will
                         provide support in the following areas: M&E, coordination, planning, communication, financial
                         management, procurement, and safeguards. It will also help MYASD to design and realize policy
                         reforms, including piloting and evaluating innovative approaches and facilitate regular dialog
                         between the government, public and private sector on skills. This component would finance training,
                         recruitment of short and long-term technical experts, procurement of goods needed for specific
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities, and incremental operating costs.
                         Project Financing. The proposed Project will use an Investment Project Financing (IFP) instrument
                         with a result-based funding modality. Component 1 will be the result-based component. Under this
                         Component, project funds will be disbursed against selected line items in MYASD annual budgets
                         (EEPs) up to capped amounts. (ii) Disbursements will be conditioned on achievement of the agreed
                         set of results, the DLIs. The Project will also include an innovation, resulting monitoring and
                         capacity development component to strengthen MYASD implementation and monitoring end
                         evaluation capacity and cover needs for specific expertise to in order to enable MYASD to meet the
                         agreed DLIs. This component use the traditional investment project approach This approach will not
                         only enable the continuation of the reforms initiated through the program, supported by the IDA-
                         financed Project, but will also deepen the focus on results instead of inputs and outputs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in all 9 provinces of Sri Lanka.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Mohamed Ghani Razaak (SASDS)
                         Mokshana Nerandika Wijeyeratne (SASDI)


                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes           The Bank will provide parallel financing with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                         ADB for the implementation of the GOSL’s
                                                                         National Skills Development Program. This
                                                                         program will likely to include the upgrading of
                                                                         training facilities and new construction.
                                                                         Upgrading activities may include physical
                                                                         upgrading, refurbishments and/or rehabilitation of
                                                                         existing buildings and possibly minor
                                                                         construction work. It is expected that potential
                                                                         environmental impacts from such activities will
                                                                         be minor and irreversible and thus will not pose
                                                                         major environmental issues. In order to mitigate
                                                                         these and ensure all such activities undertaken are
                                                                         conducted in an environmentally sound manner, a
                                                                         set of EDDGs have been prepared by the project
                                                                         regardless of degree of the expected impacts to
                                                                         the environment.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            It is expected that construction will be carried out
                                                                         in land owned by the MYASD and not in areas
                                                                         where there will be potential threats to significant
                                                                         natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            No activities in forests or in close proximity to
                                                                         forest areas are expected.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            Not Applicable as no project interventions are
                                                                         made where significant use of pesticides and
                                                                         other such substances are utilized.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            Project interventions are not envisioned to be
                         BP 4.11                                         conducted in areas close to sites of cultural
                                                                         importance. Renovation, rehabilitation and
                                                                         improvements will be made to buildings built
                                                                         over the last few decades and not deemed socially
                                                                         or culturally important.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            The Project will cover the entire country and will
                                                                         not include interventions targeted at specific
                                                                         communities, or social groups.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No            It is expected that construction of all the skill
                         4.12                                            development facilities will be confined to existing
                                                                         premises and not involve private land
                                                                         acquisitions.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No            Not applicable as the project does not involve
                                                                         new construction/rehabilitation of any Dams
                         Projects on International         No            Not Applicable
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                                           No            Not Applicable


                                                                 Page 4 of 7
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP
                            7.60
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental Safeguards
                              Under Component 1, the WB will provide parallel financing for the implementation of the
                              GOSL’s National Skills Development Program (NSDP). This program will include the upgrading
                              of physical infrastructure when strengthening Technical and Vocational Education andTraining
                              (TVET) institutes, under the preparation and implementation of business plans for each TVET
                              institute. The likely upgrading and rehabilitation activities, under GOSLs program, may
                              potentially cause environmental impacts, however these potential impacts are not-likely to be of
                              large-scale, highly significant, or irreversible. Thus they can be addressed with the help of
                              appropriate mitigation measures and due diligence.

                              ADB is a parallel financier to this program and will be directly financing physical interventions.
                              MYSAD in collaboration with ADB has prepared an Environmental and Social Management
                              Framework (ESMF) with implementation arrangements to ensure that any major construction/
                              rehabilitation and/or renovation work undertaken are conducted in an environmentally sound
                              manner and follow national environmental policies and procedures. This document has been
                              reviewed and is acceptable as per WB environmental safeguard operational policy 4.01 -
                              Environmental Assessment.

                              Social Safeguards
                               The project is designed not to have any negative social impacts, and will not trigger any policies
                              on social safeguards. The project overall brings positive impacts by promoting job related skills
Public Disclosure Copy




                              for upward social mobility and wider career options for all social categories including poor,
                              women and other communities to make this as a socially inclusive intervention. In order to ensure
                              this among many aspects of development, the National Skills Development Program (NSDP) of
                              the GOSL will be ensuring skills training facilities will be upgraded and new facilities will be built
                              contributing to the improvement of skills development process. The construction/renovation work
                              financed as part of the NSDP will take place mostly in the existing sites; any new land may be
                              allocated from existing state land or will be purchased through a market transaction. There will not
                              be any involuntary resettlement or displacement of people due to the need of new land and sites
                              selected for the program will be free of squatters or illegal occupants and will not be in use by the
                              individuals for income earning or livelihood activities. Therefore, the NSDP will not bring forth
                              any negative social impacts in relation to the setting up of these facilities.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              None Anticipated
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              None
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.


                                                                         Page 5 of 7
                           In order to ensure environmental due diligence of physical interventions of Component 1 and as
                           the Bank will not be directly financing physical interventions, but monitor the overall program
                           under Pillar 3, the project has prepared a set of Environmental Due Diligence Guidelines (EDDG)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           outlining environmental standards that should be followed during the implementation of proposed
                           physical interventions and monitored accordingly by the MYSAD. All standards in the EDDG
                           have been outlined in accordance with the National environmental policies and procedures that
                           entail infrastructure development to be conducted in an environmentally sound manner. Apart
                           from this MYSAD will comply to all procedures and protocols outlined in the ESMF prepared for
                           the NSDP in collbaration with ADB.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The EDDD has been disclosed in the MYSAD website as of the 26th of February 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   26-Feb-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Sri Lanka                                                        26-Feb-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         N/A
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?


                                                                    Page 6 of 7
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Halil Dundar
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Amit Dar (SM)                             Date: 21-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
