INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCIO58
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Jan-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Turkey                     Project ID:   P151739
Project Name:    Turkey Geothermal Development Project (P151739)
Task Team        Shinya Nishimura
Leader(s):
Estimated        12-May-2015                Estimated     24-Jul-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Other Renewable Energy (80%), General energy sector (20%)
Theme(s):        Climate change (50%), Infrastructure services for private sector development
(50%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     356.00             Total Bank Financing:   250.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                         66.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           250.00
Clean Technology Fund                                            40.00
Total                                                           356.00
Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to scale up private sector investment in geothermal energy
development in Turkey. This will be achieved by reducing the risks taken on by the private sector in
the exploratory phases, and by providing access to long-term financing for resource development
phases.


﻿C. Project Description
The project proposes to achieve the Objective by providing support to overcome the barriers, as per
following; (i) Risk sharing mechanism to stimulate investment in early stage geothermal exploratory
drilling activity, and (ii) Loan facility with Industrial Development Bank of Turkey (TSKB) to
support the capacity drilling and construction stages of geothermal development.
Component 1: Risk Sharing Mechanism for Resource Validation (USD 40 million, CTF grant)
The Directorate General for Mineral Research and Exploration (MTA) has been responsible for the
exploration and mapping of geothermal resources in Turkey. It has traditionally been the main
institution advancing the development of geothermal utilization by carrying out surface exploration
and exploration drilling in fields believed to be suitable for power generation, significantly reducing
the risk to private developers that would then acquire concessions to those fields. As MTA's mandate
has changed, it currently has very limited additional geothermal exploration activities planned, the
entire exploration risks have now to be taken on fully by the private sector investors. These investors
often have limited financial (equity) and technical capacity for the lengthy and costly resource
exploration, which has resulted in a slowdown in geothermal drilling activity in the country as just a
limited number of these potential new sites have been developed beyond the very early exploration
phases.
The risk sharing mechanism to be supported under this component is expected to be capitalized by a
$40 million CTF grant. The mechanism will rely upon a clear set of criteria for success/failure in
drilling an exploration well based upon the level of geothermal resource found that needs to be pre-
defined. The risk of failure will be shared among two parties: the Risk Sharing/ Grant Facility and
the concession holder. In the case the resource is not found at an expected level pre-defined
contractually, the Mechanism would cover part of the concession holder's drilling expenditures. In
the case of success, the concession holder may be required to transfer to the Mechanism a premium,
in addition to paying the drilling company for its services. The design of the mechanism will be
refined during project preparation.
The Directorate General of Renewable Energy of the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources
(MENR) has been identified as the most likely administrator for the risk sharing mechanism. MENR
would be fiduciary responsible for the Facility and it would hire a consultant to establish and operate
the Mechanism.
Component 2: Loan Facility for Resource Development (US$ 250 million, IBRD loan)
This component aims to address the financing gap that the project sponsors face today for resource
development phases of the geothermal project, specifically during the capacity drilling phase, by
providing concessional financing. Commercial banks in Turkey currently finance geothermal
projects only after commissioning has been completed, or more often, after operations have begun
and production of electricity has been verified. This financing gap is a barrier to scaling up
geothermal development, which is commonly seen in other countries as well. The Project proposes to
capitalize a credit line to a Financial Intermediary, TSKB, with a $250 million IBRD loan. TSKB
would on-lend at market rates to project developers starting at the capacity drilling stage. To ensure
buy-in, TSKB will provide co-financing to the loan facility from its own resources, for an amount yet
to be decided. Eligible sub-borrowers will use the Bank financing through the FI for drilling of
geothermal deep wells. For drilling of the wells, the sub-borrowers will contract a drilling service


﻿provider using their commercial practice. The loan facility will be open to any geothermal
development that has reached the capacity drilling stage, regardless of whether it benefited or not
from the risk sharing mechanism under Component 1.
O
U       Specific technical, financial and corporate eligibility criteria will also be developed for this
component. Technical criteria will be developed in consultation with various stakeholders and will
also include environmental and social requirements in accordance with TSKB Environmental Risk
Mitigation Tool, IFC's EHS for Geothermal Power Generation, and World Bank safeguards. All the
applicable criteria and requirements will be described in the Operations Manual to be prepared for
this component.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Exact location of the sub-projects to be supported under both components is currently unknown.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The main counterpart for the first component will be MENR, which will hire an expert consultant to
establish and operate the risk sharing mechanism. This consultant would be a firm with adequate
skills to manage application rounds; to screen applicants according to pre-established financial and
technical criteria, including environmental and social; to prepare legal agreements between the
Mechanism and the applicants; to review claims of a failed well by applicants, and to recommend the
execution of payments to the DGRE. The Operations Manual for the Mechanism will outline all the
procedures to be followed by DGRE and by the consultant. The institutional capacity of DGRE and
their consultants to implement WB's safeguard policies as well as the actual implementation of the
EMF will be monitored by the WB team during project preparation and implementation phases.
TSKB will be the FI bank for the second component. TSKB has significant experience regarding
implementing national and WB policies in environmental and social safeguards.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
0
Esra Arikan (GENDR)
Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project has been assigned Category 'Fl' in
OP/BP 4.01                              accordance with World Bank safeguard policy OP/
BP/GP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), this has
been confirmed by the Quality unit as well. Under
the first component there will be exploration-drilling
activities, which will be conducted by 3-4 drilling
companies. Under the second component private
companies will borrow from TSKB (FI of the
project) for capacity drilling activities. It is estimated
that both the exploration and capacity drilling phases
of the project could be categorized as 'B' under OP
4.01, as the types of potential impacts are expected to


﻿be limited and be relatively easy to assess and
mitigate through careful siting and good drilling
practices. Sub-projects (exploration and
development) in critical or sensitive natural habitats
will be excluded, and the details about screening
projects accordingly will be explained in the
environmental framework document.
Main environmental issues related to exploration and
capacity drilling phases will be: site preparation,
topsoil management and prevention of soil
contamination, storage and disposal of drill muds,
managing the prevention of contamination of
aquifers, monitoring of gas emissions (C02, H2S,
etc.) from the wells, management and monitoring of
geothermal water discharges (during exploration -
Component 1 and capacity drilling - Component 2)
and monitoring of water quality in the vicinity of
drilling area, monitoring noise during drilling works,
construction of access roads, closure of wells/
rehabilitation of areas if the wells are identified to be
unsuccessful, etc. It is not possible to assess the
potential risk of ground water contamination by
geothermal activities in advance of the project as the
implementation sites have not yet been determined.
However, a mapping exercise utilizing currently
available resource maps would enable the Team to
identify areas where geothermal potential coincides
with important ground water resources.
The direct environmental impacts of exploratory
drilling (Component 1) are expected to be minimal,
although the predictable drilling expansion and
power plant development following successful
exploration must be regarded as a linked (induced)
impact. The EMF for Component 1 shall outline the
best practices in exploration, drilling and well
management to be followed by the sub-borrower and
the monitoring protocols to be followed for adequate
supervision. For sub-projects that did not benefit
from the risk sharing mechanism under Component 1
but are applying for capacity drilling financing under
Component 2, the EMF will provide guidance for
TSKB to carry out a simple "due diligence" audit to
confirm that the exploratory phase was carried out in
an acceptable manner, consistent with national laws
and the principles of the WB Safeguard Policies.


﻿The gaps between national environmental screening
and assessment procedures and WB safeguard
policies will be detailed in the EMF to be prepared
for Component 2, and the EMF will specify that
where there are differences the more stringent
requirements will apply. The EMF will also provide
guidance on risk screening of proposed sub-projects
(including assessment of potential cumulative
impacts), mitigation measures to reduce/manage
potential adverse impacts, and recommendations for
"best practice" technologies such as re-using C02
and excess heat for productive purposes.
The locations and the scope of sub-projects will be
identified during the project implementation and
relevant environmental assessment documents will
be prepared according to sub-project categorization.
As it will be detailed in the EMF, it is expected that
for component 2 sub-projects will be reviewed by
TSKB for having national environmental clearances
and then necessary environmental assessment
documentation in line with OP 4.01 requirements
will be completed by the sub-borrower. Sub-project
partial EAs/EMPs will be submitted to WB for prior
review and after getting no-objections these will be
disclosed in client's/sub-borrower's websites and will
be included in the corresponding bidding documents
and/or contracts of the investment projects. It is
planned to have environmental management
framework (EMF) which will be prepared by the
client and disclosed in country and in Infoshop
before appraisal.
The TA component of the project will also need to
comply with OP 4.01 and therefore it will be ensured
that the TORs for the consultants to be hired for TA
studies covers the safeguard issues related to OP
4.01.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes           The exploration and capacity drilling activities
(component 1 and 2) may take place in rural areas
which are potential natural habitats. Therefore, the
policy is considered to be triggered to be on the safe
side. According to this policy, the projects which do
not create any significant adverse impacts on natural
habitats and that are not placed in critical natural
habitats will be eligible for financing. Issues related
to natural habitats will be detailed in the EAs and


﻿EMPs that will be prepared for the sub-projects
under Component 1 and 2.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           No
a
Pest Management OP 4.09      No
a
Physical Cultural Resources  No           Sub-projects will not be conducted in culturally
OP/BP 4.11                                sensitive areas. But in any case, whether or not they
are in historic areas, any sub-project EMPs/partial
EAs will include procedures and responsibilities for
managing accidentally discovered or chance find
cultural artifacts. Consideration of such concerns is
provided in the works contracts that will include
requirements that the contractor is obliged to look for
chance finds and immediately stop work at the
contested location and alert responsible authorities in
case of chance finds, and only continue works after
official approvals from the responsible authorities are
secured. Since the national regulations on the
conservation of cultural properties are strict, it is not
anticipated that any additional requirements would
arise from the World Bank safeguard policies.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         Under the Component 1 there will be exploration
BP 4.12                                   drilling activities carried out by drilling companies.
Under the Component 2 private companies will
borrow from TSKB (FI of the project) for capacity
drilling activities. Upon obtaining the initial license,
drilling companies often try to buy the land from the
land owners without state involvement for the sake
of expediency (under OP 4.12 this is not technically
a "voluntary" sale, because if the land owner refuses
to sell, the drilling company can still apply for the
land to be expropriated). If such a sale cannot be
completed, drilling companies contact EMRA, the
energy regulatory authority, for EMRA to carry out
expropriation of the lands necessary for drilling.
According to Turkish regulation and discussions with
above counterparts, all involuntary land acquisition
will generally be completed prior to World Bank
financing of above components. The counterparts
were informed however that even if the land
acquisition is completed prior to World Bank
financing, OP 4.12 applies if land was acquired in
anticipation of or in preparation for a project shortly


﻿before initial discussions with the Bank and the land
is directly linked to the World Bank project. In such
cases, the counterparts, in coordination with the sub-
borrowers will need to conduct social audits to
ensure that the land acquisition was completed in
accordance with the objectives of OP 4.12, and in
cases when necessary, develop a corrective action
plan to bridge significant gaps.
In cases where additional involuntary land
acquisition will be necessary, the counterparts will be
responsible in preparing Resettlement Action Plans
prior to such land acquisition.
Temporary social impacts during drilling activities,
such as disturbances to the local population, may
also occur during the project. The need to avoid or
mitigate such impacts was also discussed with
counterparts.
As specific sub-projects are not identified at this
point, all of the potential social impacts and the
procedures to manage these social impacts will be
covered in a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
In some cases investors will already have acquired
needed land prior to approaching the risk sharing
Facility for exploration.Therefore, the RPF will set
out measures for carrying out "Resettlement/Land
Acquisition Audits" in case of land already acquired
as well as Resettlement/Land Acquisition Action
Plans for any land acquisition that would be required
after project funds are sought. The RPF will specify
that, wherever The possible, remedial measures
called for in the Audit will be implemented prior to
proceeding with the subproject activities. Where
subproject activities are already ongoing at the time
Project funds are sought, remedial measures should
be implemented as soon as possible.
The RPF will be prepared by the client and disclosed
in country and in Infoshop before appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No
Projects on International     No           During sub-project applications the nature of the
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       groundwater reservoirs, being in national or
international waterways, will be assessed from the
applicants. The major geothermal potential in turkey
is concentrated in Aegean and West Mediterranean
regions so an international waterway is not expected


﻿to be an issue. Still, the EMF will provide guidance
on this aspect.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Mar-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Prior to Appraisal, an Environmental and Social Management Framework will be prepared for the
project which will define the review and assessment process by MENR, TSKB and WB for the
sub-projects. Similarly, land acquisition framework will be prepared and disclosed before
appraisal stage.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Shinya Nishimura
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards     Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                         Date: 08-Jan-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/       Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (PMGR)                     Date: 09-Jan-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


