                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSR6306
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Jun-2013, 30-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Dominican Republic                           Project ID:           P095863
                            Project Name:       Dominican Republic Municipal Development Project (P095863)
                            Task Team           David Tuchschneider
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           10-Dec-2009                                  Estimated   21-Jan-2010
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      LCSAR                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:           Sub-national government administration (100%)
                            Theme:            Rural services and infrastructure (78%), Other rural development (22%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                               No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:         21.47                 Total Bank Financing:        20.00
                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                                Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                               1.47
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                 20.00
                              Total                                                                                                 21.47
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           Improve the technical and financial capacity of the Participating Municipalities to program, finance
                           and deliver Minimum Municipality Services. This would be achieved through the provision of: (i)
                           technical assistance in core municipal management functions, such as participatory planning and



                                                                                  Page 1 of 8
                         budgeting, procurement, financial and human resource management; and (ii) matching grants for
                         investment sub-projects identified in the Municipal Development Plan.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Improve the technical and financial capacity of the Participating Local Governments to program,
                         finance and deliver Minimum Municipality Services. This would be achieved through the provision
                         of: (i) technical assistance in core municipal management functions, such as participatory planning
                         and budgeting, procurement, financial and human resource management; and (ii) matching grants for
                         investment sub-projects identified in the Municipal Development Plan.
                         3. Project Description
                         Overall, the project seeks to assist the Government of the Dominican Republic with their efforts in
                         the decentralization of government responsibilities by providing support at the local government
                         level for institutional development and institutional strengthening. The Project will strengthen the
                         management capacity of local governments to increase their capacity to deliver Minimal
                         Municipality Services. This institutional strengthening will be linked with and practiced in the
                         execution of local public investments. This will contribute to increase quality of local public
                         investments as well as reduce local government discretionary spending through transparency in
                         public expenditures, and the participation of communities and civil society in local government.

                         Component 1: Institutional Strengthening (US$ 5.70 million, IBRD)

                         (a)     Provision of support for the institutional strengthening of Participating Local Governments,
                         including, inter alia: (i) the design and implementation of a new municipal organizational structure
                         and establishment of organizational units and planning systems; (ii)        the creation and
                         functioning of municipal development councils, including specific actions to enhance the
                         transparency of municipal administrations and the participation of civil society; (iii)      the
                         strengthening of the municipal administration, including: (A) the budget and financial administration
                         system in each Participating Local Government; (B) improving procurement management policies;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and (C) strengthening the human resource management function; and (iv) the strengthening of the
                         capacity for programming, implementing and managing basic municipal services, including the
                         preparation and implementation of minimum annual maintenance programs.

                         (b)     Strengthening the national level institutional support system for local governments,
                         including, inter alia, providing assistance to strengthen the capacity of VdP, DGODT, DGIP and
                         DGDES to implement the new national, regional, provincial and municipal planning systems.?

                         (c) Provision of support for the formulation of Municipal Development Plans (“MDPs?), including,
                         inter alia, institutional action plans and local investment programs, as well as assistance in the
                         preparation of Municipal Subproject Agreements.

                         Component 2: Municipal Investments (US$8.00 million, US$7.30 IBRD, US$0.70 Local
                         Governments)

                         (a) Provision of support for the carrying out of municipal investments required to improve coverage,
                         quality and management of Minimum Municipal Services and infrastructure, through the provision
                         of Matching Grants to Participating Municipalities for the implementation of Municipal Subprojects.

                         (b)     Provision of technical assistance and training to Participating Local Governments to assist in


                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         the management of Municipal Subproject implementation.

                         Component 3: Project Administration, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$3.56 million, US$3.20
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IBRD, US$ 0.36 GoDR)

                         (a)     Provision of support for Project coordination and strengthening of DGDOT through the
                         provision of technical assistance (including audits), training, goods and equipment, as well as
                         incremental operating costs required for Project administration and monitoring.

                         (b)     Carrying out of monitoring and evaluation activities that provide inputs to continuously
                         guide Project management decisions, including the preparation of a communication strategy to
                         support Project implementation (all for purpose of ensuring the achievement of Project objectives).

                         (c)     Provision of support for the preparation of studies relevant to Project objectives, including
                         social and institutional assessments required for the inclusion of new municipalities in the Project.

                         Partial Cancellation: A total of US$3.0 million will be canceled from the loan, reduced wholly from
                         component 2, Municipal Investments. The reduction in component costs is determined by the overall
                         reduction in the project area and, consequently, in the number of beneficiaries. The revised costs and
                         financing add up to US$17 million (IBRD), US$0.36 million (National government) and US$ 0.70
                         million (Local governments), for a total cost of US$18.06 million.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The original selection of the project municipalities was done primarily on an analysis of 154
                         municipalities, based on the 2002 census and the 2005 poverty study by STP/ONAPLAN. The 154
                         jurisdictions were ranked in terms of four characteristics: percentage poor population, percentage
                         illiterate, percentage rural, and population density (top rank would be lowest density). Out of this list,
                         25 border municipalities were then excluded because they already had substantial support. After this
Public Disclosure Copy




                         exclusion, out of the top 60 municipalities selected dispersed throughout the country, three criteria
                         were used to reduce this group to a manageable size, given the limitations of resources and the
                         interest of the government in focusing on a geographically limited area. The three positive criteria
                         were: (i) transport access and connectivity; (ii) economic potential; and (iii) natural resource
                         management. As a result, a group of 30 municipalities were selected for the project based on the
                         criteria of connectivity, economic potential, and natural resources, as well as achieving a
                         representative distribution of activities within eligible regions and provinces. The total population of
                         these 30 municipalities added up to 671,904, of which an estimated 487,250, or 72.5%, were
                         classified as poor. At appraisal, it was expected that the Project would reach 15 municipalities and
                         thus the target number of beneficiaries was established at 335,952.

                         The restructured Project will be implemented in 11 municipalities and 20 municipal districts
                         formerly under their jurisdiction. All these local governments were selected from the original Project
                         area. The first five municipalities were included as pilot municipalities and the rest of the local
                         governments were chosen after a public competition managed by DGODT and the institutions
                         representing local governments in the Dominican Republic. The total population (beneficiaries) of
                         the local governments (according to the 2010 Census) is 266,396, 47% of which are women.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Martin Henry Lenihan (LCSSO)


                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                           Tuuli Johanna Bernardini (LCSEN)

                            6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes           The restructuring does not imply changes in the
                            BP 4.01                                         Project’s environmental management.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           The Project's eligibility criteria exclude execution
                                                                            of works in protected areas or natural habitats.
                                                                            However, this safeguard is triggered given the
                                                                            rural location of many of the Participating Local
                                                                            Governments and their proximity to protected
                                                                            areas. All proposed works will be reviewed for
                                                                            their potential impacts on natural habitats as
                                                                            instructed in the Project's Environmental and
                                                                            Social Management Framework (ESMF).
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            No investments which have an impact on forests
                                                                            will be financed.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The Project does not include the procurement or
                                                                            use of, or lead to an increased use of pesticides or
                                                                            other agricultural chemicals.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           No works are anticipated in sites or areas known
                            BP 4.11                                         to contain resources of historical cultural
                                                                            significance. However, the safeguard is triggered
                                                                            as eligible activities include management/
                                                                            rehabilitation of existing cultural or sport assets;
                                                                            mainly public parks. Further, execution of civil
                                                                            works might imply discovery of chance finds and
                                                                            the ESMF includes guidance for addressing them.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            There are no indigenous people present in the
                                                                            project area.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           This policy was triggered to increase the number
                            4.12                                            and type of sub-projects eligible for financing by
                                                                            the Project, including the rehabilitation of
                                                                            municipal markets and abattoirs (necessitating
                                                                            temporary displacement of vendors), and the
                                                                            rehabilitation of rural roads and construction of
                                                                            bridges which may necessitate small scale land
                                                                            acquisition.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No            The Project does not depend on the safe
                                                                            functioning of any dam and neither invests in any.
                            Projects on International        No             No investments which have an impact on
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            international waterways will be financed.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No             The investments will not be located in areas of
                            7.60                                            territorial dispute.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues


                                                                    Page 4 of 8
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                           Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                             The restructured Project will include the possibility of financing a greater variety of municipal
Public Disclosure Copy




                           sub-projects, some of which may require temporary displacement of vendors (e.g municipal
                           market rehabilitation), while others such as road rehabilitation and bridgeconstruction may require
                           land acquisition. None of these impacts will be large-scale, significant or irreversible. Market
                           rehabilitation will result only in temporary displacement of vendors, and will only occur when
                           there is strong support among affected vendors for the sub-project. Other impacts from road
                           rehabilitation and bridge construction will be restricted to less than 10% of productive assets. Sub-
                           projects that might result in displacement of houses or commercial operations will not be eligible.

                           Regarding expected environmental impacts of the project, no works or activities that would meet
                           the criteria for Category A will be financed under the project and none are envisioned. Potential
                           negative environmental impacts are those common to small construction works. Positive impacts
                           are expected to result from restoration and rehabilitation of services supplied directly by the
                           municipalities, such as running an abattoir. In all cases, infrastructure will be restored to its
                           original function and service levels; for example, road works will be limited to repair and
                           rehabilitation of existing infrastructure. The project will not finance any works or activities related
                           to (solid) waste management.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             Because, sub-projects which may result in large scale or significant resettlement impacts will not
                           be eligible, any resettlement or land acquisition that might occur will not result in indirect or long
                           term impacts. For example, there will be no large scale resettlement of households, which might
                           have indirect long term impacts on host communities, or social services.

                           The project is not expected to have any direct or indirect and/or long term negative environmental
                           impacts. The expected negative impacts relate mainly with the active construction phase.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             The project cycle process and resettlement policy framework encourages the active screening of
                           sub-projects for resettlement impacts, and the engagement of the PRODEM team in looking for
                           alternatives that minimize land acquisition and resettlement impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The borrower has prepared a comprehensive resettlement policy framework, that includes a
                           comprehensive assessment of the legal and institutional framework for resettlement and land
                           acquisition, rules and regulations governing the voluntary donation of land, measures for
                           providing compensation and assistance to affected people, grievance redress mechanisms, as well
                           as guidance for the preparation of resettlement action plans. A member of the PRODEM team has
                           received the two week training in involuntary resettlement planning supported by the LCR
                           Safeguards Advisory Team, and the environmental specialist has been delegated to work on this
                           task. There are also plans to for the project to hire a resettlement consultant to help municipalities
                           prepare site specific resettlement action plans, once resettlement impacts have been identified
                           during the sub-project cycle.

                           Regarding environmental management of project activities, the original ESMF has been updated to


                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                           reflect a 2011 revision of the national EA regulation. The ESMF and related operational tools,
                           such as a methodological guide for screening sub-projects’ eligibility for project funding, provide
                           guidance for integrating socio-environmental control and monitoring points throughout the sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project cycle.

                           The PRODEM team includes a qualified environmental specialist with specific ToRs approved by
                           the Bank. One of this specialist’s tasks is to facilitate capacity building of the generally small and
                           marginal Municipal Environmental Units with a special focus on the national regulation on
                           environmental assessment and permits and environmental supervision of construction works.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Key stakeholders include the project coordination group within DGODT, local government
                           officials, beneficiaries of prioritized services, local non-governmental organizations, vendor
                           associations and neighborhood associations within the municipalities. The Resettlement Policy
                           Framework has been disclosed and discussed by the DGOTD, both at the level of the project
                           coordination unity, and within the five pilot municipalities – with municipal officials and local
                           civic associations.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01-May-2009
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Aug-2009
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Dominican Republic                                               01-May-2009
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      22-May-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Jun-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Dominican Republic                                               10-Jun-2013
                           Comments: Disclosed on website of the Direccion General de Ordenamiento y Desarrollo
                                         Territorial
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)           Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [     ]
                          report?



                                                                       Page 6 of 8
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                             Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of critical natural habitats?
                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       David Tuchschneider
                            Approved By



                                                                        Page 7 of 8
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)   Date: 29-Oct-2013
                         Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Laurent Msellati (SM)   Date: 30-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Page 8 of 8
