                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC6367

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Guyana                           Project ID:       P147250
                            Project Name:       GY Flood Risk Management (P147250)
                            Task Team           Armando Eduardo Guzman Es
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           01-Apr-2014                      Estimated         04-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      LCSDU                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Flood protection (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Urban planning and housing policy (60%), Climate change (20%), Water
                                                resource management (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     11.89                       Total Bank Financing:         11.89
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                    11.89
                              Total                                                                          11.89
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the project is to reduce the vulnerability of Guyana's low-lying coastal area to
                           flooding by implementing key strategic infrastructure investments.
                           C. Project Description
                           The low-lying coastal plains along the Atlantic Ocean are highly populated and generally lie below
                           sea level. They are bordered to the south by the EDWC and to the north by a seawall complex along
                         the Atlantic Ocean. Drainage in the coastal area is undertaken by a network of drainage and irrigation
                         canals which are in need of upgrading and expansion.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The EDWC system is separate from this drainage system. It stores water inland and drains directly to
                         nearby rivers and the Atlantic Ocean to avoid flooding in the coastal area. It includes a reservoir
                         fronted on three sides by an earthen dam with six main drainage relief canals. Three of these canals
                         drain into the Demerara River to the west (Kofi, Land of Canaan and Cunha canals), two drain into
                         the Mahaica River to the east (Lama and Maduni relief structures) and a new canal currently under
                         construction, drains north directly into the Atlantic Ocean (Hope-Dochfour canal).

                         The proposed USD 11.89 million IDA Credit will finance a set of priority investments to improve the
                         EDWC and coastal system drainage. It will also finance institutional strengthening for water
                         resources and investments planning and project management. Specifically project components
                         include:

                         Component 1: Upgrading the EWDC Dam and Drainage System (USD 7 million)
                         This will include upgrading and reconstruction of critical parts of the EDWC dam and critical
                         improvements to existing relief structures including safety improvements and widening of drainage
                         canals.

                         Component 2: Upgrading the East Coast Drainage System (USD 3.19 million)
                         Investments will be made to improve the coastal drainage systems including the installation of
                         pumps; reconstruction of culverts and widening of canals.

                         Component 3: Management and Planning Support (USD 0.7 million)
                         This component will provide planning support to allow for the identification and the preparation of
                         further investment works and will also assist in the establishment of monitoring systems and
                         collection of data for planning. It will also support the operating costs and specialized consultants for
                         the Guyana Ministry of Agriculture Agricultural Sector Development Unit (ASDU) to execute the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Guyana’s Region 4, an area of 1,843 square kilometers (711 square miles), includes Georgetown and
                         is home to the majority of Guyana’s population. It is bounded to the north by the Atlantic Ocean, to
                         the west by the Demerara River and to the East by the Mahaica River and Region 5. The East
                         Demerara Water Conservancy (EDWC), a large, shallow water storage system with a catchment area
                         of 571 square kilometers (220 square miles), provides agricultural lands and urban areas with
                         irrigation and drinking water. It is drained by a system of canals, sluices and pumps. This system,
                         combined with a dense network of drainage and irrigation canals in the lowland areas along the East
                         coast and Demerara River, provides flood control that is crucial for the protection of property, life
                         and economy in the country.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The project will follow the same implementing arrangements outlined under the CAP, with the
                         Agriculture Sector Development Unit (ASDU) within the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) being the
                         Project Implementing Agency. ASDU will also manage the fiduciary, safeguards and administrative
                         aspects of the project and the procurement process, including issuance of the tenders, undertaking
                         financial reporting for the project, and making payments to contractors.
                           The CAP program design recognized that ASDU had limited technical capacity to prepare safeguards
                           documents and monitor implementation, and would need extensive support from the Bank. This
Public Disclosure Copy




                           support was received, and capacity has since increased. The Bank has taken and will continue to take
                           measures to strengthen ASDU and its fiduciary capacities through fiduciary and financial
                           management training, provision of advice on an ongoing basis and close monitoring and support.
                           During Project preparation, a capacity building program and operations manual will be agreed for
                           ASDU including staffing (technical, procurement, financial management and safeguards) and
                           training on procurement, safeguards and financial management rules and processes.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Noreen Beg (LCSEN)
                           M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong (LCSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The Project is proposed as category B - Partial
                           BP 4.01                                             Assessment - assigned to projects that are likely
                                                                               to have localized, limited and reversible
                                                                               environmental impacts, that can be readily
                                                                               mitigated. The Project will have a largely
                                                                               positive social and environmental (health and
                                                                               safety) impact. Benefits that will accrue from
                                                                               the reduction of vulnerability of Guyana’s low-
                                                                               lying areas to flooding include: reduced risk of
                                                                               flood damage to infrastructure, agricultural land,
                                                                               residential and commercial property; and
                                                                               reduced mortality and morbidity arising from
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               flooding.

                                                                               Physical interventions resulting from the
                                                                               implementation of investments could have low
                                                                               to moderate negative impacts: primarily
                                                                               relatively minor air, water, and soil pollution.
                                                                               The most significant impacts will result from
                                                                               the construction and rehabilitation works (back-
                                                                               filling, excavation, earth-moving, dredging).
                                                                               These impacts will be assessed through a
                                                                               screening process and appropriate mitigation
                                                                               measures will be proposed.

                                                                               Given that the specific nature and location of all
                                                                               components is not going to be definitively
                                                                               determined prior to appraisal, a framework
                                                                               approach will be adopted. An Environmental
                                                                               and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                                                                               will be prepared, which will include an
                                                                 environmental baseline, a screening process for
                                                                 further investments, and proposed mitigation
                                                                 measures.The first year’s investments will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 fully defined before appraisal and for these
                                                                 Environmental Impact Assessments/
                                                                 Environmental Management Plans will be
                                                                 prepared as appropriate.

                                                                 The ESMF will be prepared, consulted on, and
                                                                 disclosed prior to project appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   Appropriate mitigation measures will be
                                                                 followed to limit the impact on local fauna, avi-
                                                                 fauna and to protect indigenous plant and tree
                                                                 species, and preserve the Demerara and
                                                                 Mahaica riverine ecosystems. Although the
                                                                 Conservancy is not a Protected Area, nor is ita
                                                                 critical natural habitat, it is host to several bird
                                                                 species and other wildlife. Unless site visits
                                                                 indicate otherwise, OP 4.04 – Natural Habitats –
                                                                 is triggered by the Project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    It is not expected that Project investments would
                                                                 affect the management of forests, the use of
                                                                 forests for livelihoods or would support
                                                                 investments such as plantations or other
                                                                 industrial uses. As such, OP 4.36 will not be
                                                                 triggered. The ESMF will explicitly forbid any
                                                                 project activities that would lead to the
                                                                 destruction, degradation or conversion of forests
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 and key forest ecosystems.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD   The Project will not finance any activities that
                                                                 would result in procurement or significant use
                                                                 of pesticides. It is not expected that there will be
                                                                 pesticide use in construction or rehabilitation
                                                                 works, but this will be confirmed during project
                                                                 preparation. If pesticides will be used, a Pest
                                                                 Management Plan will be prepared and OP 4.09
                                                                 will be triggered
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The project is not expected to have negative
                         BP 4.11                                 impacts on cultural property. However, “chance
                                                                 findings” during implementation of activities
                                                                 could be possible. Chance finds procedures will
                                                                 be incorporated into EMPs and construction
                                                                 contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   The Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP/BP 4.10) is
                                                                 unlikely to be triggered since the project is
                                                                 being implemented in Georgetown and not in
                                                                                                                                 the Amerindian Territories. However, and as a
                                                                                                                                 precaution the Bank Social Specialist will
                                                                                                                                 conduct a screening exercise during the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 forthcoming preparation mission to validate this
                                                                                                                                 assertion.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           It is not envisaged that there will be any land
                                 4.12                                                                                            acquisition or impacts during the first year of
                                                                                                                                 project implementation. However, investments
                                                                                                                                 in subsequent years are likely to entail land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition and resettlement including most
                                                                                                                                 significantly impacts on commercial activities in
                                                                                                                                 the Demarara drainage canals. In addition the
                                                                                                                                 Cunha canal land acquisition issues have yet to
                                                                                                                                 be resolved and these legacy land acquisition
                                                                                                                                 issues may be merged into this current project.

                                                                                                                                 A Resettlement Policy framework (RPF) will be
                                                                                                                                 prepared to allow application of the OP 4.12
                                                                                                                                 policy requirements. The RPF will clarify
                                                                                                                                 resettlement objectives and principles,
                                                                                                                                 organizational arrangements and funding
                                                                                                                                 mechanisms for any resettlement operation that
                                                                                                                                 may be necessary during project
                                                                                                                                 implementation.

                                                                                                                                 The RPF will be prepared and disclosed prior to
                                                                                                                                 project appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         Yes                           This policy is triggered because the project is to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 upgrade the EWDC Dam which meets the large
                                                                                                                                 dam criteria.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            Both the Demerara and Mahaica rivers originate
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            in Guyana, and a third canal drains directly into
                                                                                                                                 the Atlantic Ocean, so OP 7.50, Projects on
                                                                                                                                 International Waterways, is not triggered
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Feb-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Nov 20th 2013 – Feb 1st 2014
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Armando Eduardo Guzman Es




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Approved By:
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Maria Elena Garcia Mora (RSA)   Date: 11-Apr-2014
                         Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Anna Wellenstein (SM)           Date: 05-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
