                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC6150

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Turkey                           Project ID:      P127683
                            Project Name:      Integrated River Basin Management Project (P127683)
                            Task Team          Gerhard Dieterle
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          21-Apr-2014                      Estimated        18-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSEN                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Forestry (40%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (30%),
                                               Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestr y (30%)
                            Theme(s):          Other environment and natural resources management (20%), Water resource
                                               management (40%), Other rural development (20%), Biodiversi ty (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    204.00                     Total Bank Financing:        204.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        204.00
                              Total                                                                        204.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to improve productivity, sustainability and climate
                           resilience of water and land resources in a pilot basin through the introduction of integrated river
                           basin management. The integrated and participatory river basin management approach demonstrated
                           in the Ceyhan pilot river basin will provide crucial lessons to inform policy development and prepare
                           the framework for scaled-up implementation of integrated river basin management in other river
                         basins of Turkey. Stakeholder participation and consultation will be key for basin planning.

                         The project would achieve the PDO by:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (i) strengthening integrated and cross-sectoral river basin information generation and management,
                         planning, regulation and implementation, by enhancing the institutional and technical capacity of the
                         relevant agencies to carry out coordinated functions of river basin management at central and basin
                         levels;
                         (ii) piloting innovative approaches for more efficient and productive water management, particularly
                         in irrigated agriculture. This will be closely integrated with improvements in agricultural services, to
                         ensure that advanced irrigation technology translates into higher productivity in agriculture,
                         improved soil and environmental health. These investments are selected because they provide the
                         most concrete platform for engagement of all stakeholders, specifically including the Water User
                         Associations (WUAs), in the integrated basin planning and management process;
                         (iii) reducing risks from flooding and erosion by investing in the restoration of degraded and over-
                         used river basin landscapes, and introducing climate-smart and good agricultural practices.
                         C. Project Description
                         The integrated river basin management approach will be demonstrated in one selected river basin and
                         is expected to produce lessons learned to inform policy development and prepare a framework for
                         scaled up implementation in other river basins. Three components, reflecting the most urgent needs
                         for transformational change in river basin management would be:

                         1.Strengthening Integrated River Basin Planning and Management
                         2.Piloting Multi-Sectoral Investments in Selected Upstream and Downstream Areas
                         3. Project Management

                         The first component will include preparation of basin management plan(s), establishment of water
                         monitoring stations, databases, capacity building activities, etc. The second components will include
                         investments in selected areas. It is planned to work with 3-4 different WUAs in the basin which are
Public Disclosure Copy




                         working under different climatic conditions therefore have different priorities for investments. The
                         pilot investments for these WUAs will include i) improvement of conveyance, distribution and on-
                         farm irrigation efficiency - for most of the cases it will be conversion of open channels to drip
                         irrigation ii) climate-smart, water-efficient and environmentally-sound agriculture practices,
                         improvements in agronomic planning including the monitoring of nutrition element and herbicide/
                         pesticide fluxes, as well as the selection of crops iii) flood protection works, establishment of flood
                         warning systems iv) rehabilitation of existing drainage systems, studies v) interventions for
                         addressing agricultural pollution hotspots vi) assessments of climate change impacts and investments
                         to build climate resilience. The project will also include investments in the upstream of the basin
                         where problems are different in nature. The proposed investments for upstream are i) afforestation/
                         reforestation, ii) terracing iii) rangeland rehabilitation, rotational grazing iv) piloting innovative ways
                         of payment for environmental services targeted at reducing cost for downstream river basin users for
                         erosion and flood control as well as for reducing siltation of dams and irrigation systems. Third
                         component is the project management component which may involve investments such as
                         procurement of equipment for the basin agency, etc.

                         It is anticipated that the pilot project will leverage other funding sources to complement necessary
                         investments as part of an integrated and coordinated approach.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           It is anticipated that the Project will be limited in one of the 25 basins of Turkey based on basin-
                           specific integrated management plan. The initial discussions showed that Ceyhan Basin (in Western
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Mediterranean region) would qualify best due to its economic potential, the diversity of issues, the
                           competition between different water users and its location in different climatic zones. The PIU and
                           the Bank team will work on the criteria of the basin selection and a background analysis will be
                           conducted as soon as the basin name is determined.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The key counterparts will be the Ministry of Forestry and Water Affairs and Ministry of Food,
                           Agriculture and Livestock. Different general directorates will be responsible for the execution of
                           different investments. General Directorates of State Hydraulic Works, Forestry and Agricultural
                           Reform have participated in WB projects quite a while ago and there has been a staff turn over since
                           then, therefore it'll be necessary to train the implementing agencies for the safeguard policies again.
                           General Directorate of Water Management is a new agency and does not have any experience with
                           working with the WB. They would be responsible mainly for the first component of the project, and
                           the overall monitoring and evaluation of the project. Therefore, trainings on WB project cycle, and
                           environmental and social safeguard policies deemed necessary for the DGWM staff.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (ECSSO)
                           Esra Arikan (ECSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The project will include the investment
                           BP 4.01                                              components which are to be determined
                                                                                according to the needs of the selected river
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                basin. The first component will have TA
                                                                                activities and it is planned to have basin
                                                                                management plan(s) prepared. Terms of
                                                                                Reference for the River Basin Planning support
                                                                                will be disclosed in lieu of an EIA for that
                                                                                component. For Component 2, it is estimated
                                                                                that independent of the selected basin, the
                                                                                investments will focus on the efficient use of
                                                                                water in irrigation and conservation of upper
                                                                                watershed. Therefore, the potential investments
                                                                                could be listed as rehabilitation of irrigation
                                                                                schemes - mainly converting the systems from
                                                                                open channel to piped irrigation, establishment
                                                                                of monitoring systems, flood control structures,
                                                                                flood warning systems, erosion control activities
                                                                                such as terracing, afforestation, etc.

                                                                                It is anticipated that the list of investments will
                                                                                be determined during the project preparation
                                                             stage, therefore an environmental assessment
                                                             document covering all the sub-investments will
                                                             be prepared and disclosed before appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             After Project Concept Note Review meeting and
                                                             further finalization of components a follow-up
                                                             safeguards review meeting will take place in
                                                             January 2014 by when the investment list/
                                                             categories will be determined. It is expected that
                                                             in that safeguards meeting the EA instrument
                                                             will be defined.

                                                             It should also be mentioned that the project may
                                                             have significant social impacts. The potential
                                                             positive and adverse social impacts should also
                                                             be covered either within the scope of the E(S)IA
                                                             document or a separate social impact
                                                             assessment document could be prepared. The
                                                             social assessment will take into consideration:
                                                             Basin management planning leading to changes
                                                             in land use patterns under Component 1, which
                                                             can have social impacts on different user groups
                                                             and may prompt conflicts among them. Under
                                                             Components 2, changes in pricing, crop patterns
                                                             and land use will have social impacts on
                                                             farmers; need for behavioral change can affect
                                                             livelihoods and induce resistance. Support to
                                                             water users associations should be sensitive to
                                                             issues of representation and inclusion. Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             related to the government’s pre-existing and
                                                             ongoing land consolidation program also need
                                                             to be screened for legacy issues that can reflect
                                                             on the project activities.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   It is likely that some of the investments which
                                                             will be supported by this project will be located
                                                             in natural habitats. But this is not certain since
                                                             the final decision about the pilot basin has not
                                                             been given yet. The basin will be clear by the
                                                             next safeguards meeting (before appraisal stage
                                                             ISDS meeting) and then it will be decided how
                                                             to integrate the issues related to Natural Habitats
                                                             Policy in the EA document (ESMF and/or
                                                             ESIA, etc.) The project will avoid investments
                                                             in critical natural habitats and if any investments
                                                             are planned in natural habitats a screening will
                                                             be necessary to assess the necessity of
                                                             realization the project in that location and the
                                                             potential impacts on natural habitats. If any
                                                                 project is planned in natural habitats the policy
                                                                 has to be triggered. The Appraisal Stage ISDS
                                                                 will provide the clarifications about the results
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 of the follow up safeguards meeting, the
                                                                 policies triggered and the process of integrating
                                                                 the issues in the EA instrument.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                TBD   It is anticipated that the project will finance
                                                                 some afforestation, rangeland rehabilitation, and
                                                                 other erosion control activities in the forestland.
                                                                 However, in order to make a clear decision
                                                                 about triggering this policy the project location,
                                                                 investment list/categories of the project
                                                                 activities should be waited. Decision of
                                                                 triggering this policy will be discussed in the
                                                                 follow-up safeguards meeting (in January) and
                                                                 in case the policy has to be triggered it will be
                                                                 decided how the EA documents will integrate
                                                                 the requirements of this policy. Or the next SG
                                                                 meeting could result in a decision of preparing a
                                                                 specific document for this policy if necessary.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   Component 2 may include investments
                                                                 regarding piloting no-till agriculture and
                                                                 activities which may result in the change of crop
                                                                 type. No-till agriculture is expected to have
                                                                 implications in the herbicide and pesticide use.
                                                                 Improved pest management is foreseen to be
                                                                 part of the outcomes of the Project, specifically
                                                                 as a result of the new water system which will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 change how pesticides are applied and training
                                                                 related to the behavior of farmers. This is
                                                                 foreseen to be covered under an improved pest
                                                                 management plan, but will be further defined
                                                                 during project preparation. The integrated pest
                                                                 management will be a part of the environmental
                                                                 assessment process.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    The project will focus on activities which will
                         BP 4.11                                 take place in rural and agricultural areas. It is
                                                                 not expected that the project will finance
                                                                 investments in physically or culturally sensitive
                                                                 areas. However, given the richness of historical/
                                                                 cultural sites all over Turkey - rural and urban,
                                                                 this is not a sufficient guarantee. The project
                                                                 will be designed in order to prevent any activity
                                                                 which has potential for impacts on known
                                                                 cultural sites. The process of defining the
                                                                 eligible/ineligible activities will be made clear
                                                                 in the EA document to be prepared. As
                                                                discussed above, the EA instrument will be
                                                                determined in the next safeguards meeting. In
                                                                any case, if the project involves construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                activities, the chance find procedures will
                                                                always apply.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   While list of investments is not finalized at this
                         4.12                                   time, the project is likely to require land
                                                                acquisition. Therefore OP 4.12 is triggered. If
                                                                sub-projects are finalized before appraisal,
                                                                Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) will be
                                                                prepared. If sub-projects are not known at time
                                                                of appraisal, a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                (RPF) will be prepared, describing the
                                                                procedures for preparing and implementing
                                                                RAPs for the sub-projects during
                                                                implementation.

                                                                Additionally, sub-components such as
                                                                afforestation and rangeland rehabilitation may
                                                                involve temporary or permanent restriction of
                                                                access to land for traditional land and resource
                                                                use. These impacts fall under OP 4.12 as well,
                                                                and may require preparation of a Process
                                                                Framework.

                                                                The project will not finance land consolidation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                The Ministry of Agriculture has a pre-existing
                                                                and ongoing country-wide program for land
                                                                consolidation, and the project may fund
                                                                irrigation activities in already consolidated
                                                                areas. The land consolidation undertaken from
                                                                the government will be implemented separately
                                                                from the project. In already consolidated areas
                                                                where the Water User Associations and farmers
                                                                volunteer to switch from open to closed
                                                                irrigation channels, the project will conduct its
                                                                irrigation activities. (It is important to note that
                                                                the land consolidation will take place
                                                                irrespective of the World Bank project and the
                                                                irrigation schemes. As such, these project
                                                                activities do not trigger OP 4.12 on their own.
                                                                The sequencing of land consolidation and
                                                                irrigation schemes however, may pose a
                                                                reputational risk if associated land issues are
                                                                perceived as part of the World Bank project.
                                                                                                                                 Such social impacts and legacy issues related to
                                                                                                                                 the government’s land consolidation program
                                                                                                                                 will be assessed through the ESIA and a plan
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 will be put in place to monitor carefully in order
                                                                                                                                 to mitigate reputational risks.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         TBD                           Although it is not anticipated that this project
                                                                                                                                 will finance a dam or reservoir, the policy may
                                                                                                                                 have to be triggered since investments under
                                                                                                                                 component 2 (irrigation channels, etc.) may
                                                                                                                                 depend on an upstream dam/reservoir. The final
                                                                                                                                 decision for triggering this policy and the
                                                                                                                                 required instruments will be clarified as soon as
                                                                                                                                 the project investment list is finalized. The
                                                                                                                                 process necessary to fulfill the requirements of
                                                                                                                                 this policy will be determined in the next
                                                                                                                                 safeguards meeting (in January before
                                                                                                                                 Appraisal).
                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 17-Apr-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      The project is initially categorized as ‘B’ since no new type of investments in greenfield land or
                                      significant change of land use is foreseen. It is estimated that the project will mainly focus on
                                      rehabilitation of existing irrigation systems, assistance to farmers and water use organizations to
                                      adopt modernized irrigation and farm practices. The rating should be reconfirmed well before
                                      appraisal either if the lists of investments is then known or when a draft Environmental and Social
                                      Framework is prepared which would specifically exclude certain type of A category investments.

                                      It is anticipated that the list of investments will be determined during the project preparation stage,
                                      therefore an integrated environmental and social assessment document (ESIA) covering all similar
                                      sub-investments will be prepared and disclosed before appraisal. In case the investments are not
                                      clearly defined before appraisal, it could be decided if an environmental and social review
                                      framework is prepared and then separate environmental assessment processes are conducted for
                                      the sub-projects. The ESIA will also include the social impacts broader than taking of land, such
                                      as the impacts, consultation and mitigation measures for the transformation of “open” systems into
                                      “closed” water systems to reduce losses and impacts, consultation and mitigation measures related
                                      to protection of water sources.

                                      If sub-projects are finalized before appraisal, Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) will be prepared if
                                      required. If sub-projects are not known at time of appraisal, a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                      (RPF) will be prepared, describing the procedures for preparing and implementing RAPs for the



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             sub-projects during implementation.

                             As mentioned above, Component 1 will result in Basin Management Plans; therefore the TORs for
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the planning support will be disclosed in lieu of an EIA for that component. If the TORs are not
                             ready by appraisal, the ESMF could present the process of preparing, consulting and disclosure of
                             these TORs and then the TORs could be disclosed during implementation.

                             A Project Operational Manual will be prepared for the Project, in particular for small grants and
                             on-farm infrastructure activities and defining eligibility criteria what type of specific investments
                             would and would not be eligible for project financing. In addition, the TOR for the basin planning
                             activity of component 1 will also be disclosed before the completion of the Appraisal. After
                             Project Concept Note Review meeting and further finalization of components a follow-up
                             safeguards review meeting will take place January 2014 to determine which instruments will be
                             necessary. The timeline for preparation of the instruments will also be finalized at this time.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:       Name: Gerhard Dieterle

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: John R. Butler (RSA)                                 Date: 25-Nov-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Kulsum Ahmed (SM)                                    Date: 27-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
