                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA8240

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Apr-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Apr-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Ghana                             Project ID:    P148224
                                                       Parent         P120005
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     Additional Financing for Ghana Oil and Gas Capacity Building Project
                     (P148224)
   Parent Project    Gas and Oil Capacity Building Project (P120005)
   Name:
   Task Team       David John Santley
   Leader:
   Estimated                                           Estimated   22-Jul-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit: SEGOM                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Public administration- Energy and mining (70%), Tertiary education (15%),
                     Vocational training (10%), Public administration- Financia l Sector (5%)
   Theme(s):         Other public sector governance (30%), Environmental policies and institutions
                     (30%), Education for the knowledge economy (30%), Publ ic expenditure,
                     financial management and procurement (10%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      18.40           Total Bank Financing:                18.40
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                       Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                              18.40
     Total                                                                                    18.40
   Environmental C - Not Required
   Category:




                                             Page 1 of 5
Is this a           No
Repeater
project?

2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The project objective is to (i) improve public management and regulatory capacity while
   enhancing transparency; and (ii) strengthen local technical skills in Ghana's emerging oil and gas
   sector.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
The ongoing parent project and the additional financing provide support through two main
components: (A) institutional development and sector management and (B) provision of technical
and professional skills to Ghanaian workers needed by the petroleum sector. Component A focuses
on the project objective of improved management and regulation and increased transparency.
Component B focuses on enhancing technical skills in the sector through support to vocational
training schools and the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology.

Component A has five sub-components: (A.1) diverse support to the Ministry of Energy and
Petroleum and the Petroleum Commission, including in media and communications; (A.2) expansion
and revamping of the data repository to safeguard the oil and gas data being generated through
exploration and well development; (A.3) support to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), to
enhance its ability to monitor environmental issues in the oil and gas sector,
(A.4) support to the Ministry of Finance, particularly the Ghana Revenue Authority for revenue
management, and (A.5) support to the EITI Secretariat, other public bodies dealing with sector
governance such as the Attorney General’s Office and the Economic & Organized Crime Office
(EOCO).

Component B has two sub-components: (B.1) strengthen the capacity of Ghanaian training
institutions including Kikam Technical Institute, Takoradi Technical Institute and the Regional
Maritime University to enhance the skills of the local workforce to engage in the oil and gas sector
and (B.2) strengthen the capacity of Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and
Technology (KNUST) to provide high-level degree programs in petroleum engineering and
petrochemical engineering.

The proposed additional loan would help finance the costs associated with cost overruns and for
modified activities included as part of project restructuring in response to new circumstances that
have arisen during project implementation.
The proposed additional loan covers the financing shortfall due to major cost overruns on three
components (A.3, B.1 and B.2). The equipment packages at Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
(Component A.3), Kwame Nkrumah University for Science and Technology (KNUST) (Component
B.2) and Council for Technical and Vocational Education and Training (COTVET) (Component B.1)


                                             Page 2 of 5
have all had significantly higher costs than originally anticipated in the PAD.

Also, financing for Component A.4 will be increased by US$ 1.7 million to account for increased
training needs related to the implementation of the Petroleum Revenue Management Act (PRMA).

The financing for other Project components will also be revised to account for changes in
institutional environment and key funding needs for various Project beneficiaries. With the
establishment of the Petroleum Commission (PCG), the function of the data repository has been
transferred from the Ghana National Petroleum Corporation (GNPC) to PCG and hence funds
dedicated for the data center are being reallocated from A.2 to A.1.

The scope of the parent Project has been slightly revised during implementation. The information
resource centers, initially part of Component A.5, are being established and supported by the USAID.
Similarly, some of the technical assistance and capacity building activities envisaged under
Component A.3 for the EPA are being supported by Norway.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project provides technical assistance at the central government level in Accra and also supports
three vocational training institutions in the Western Region, the regional EPA lab in the Western
Region and KNUST in Kumasi.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Martin Fodor (AFTN3)
Felix Nii Tettey Oku (AFTN3)

 6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/        No
 BP 4.01
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

 Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

 Pest Management OP 4.09             No

 Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
 BP 4.11
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
 4.12
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

 Projects on International           No
 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                     No



                                              Page 3 of 5
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP
   7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The project provides technical assistance to the Petroleum Sector with limited associated
     environmental and social potential impacts. The environmental and social issues related to the Oil
     & Gas Sector as a whole are dealt with as part of a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
     (SEA) which has just been completed with support from the IDA-financed Natural Resources and
     Environmental Governance (NREG) Project. The Government may upgrade or construct additions
     to existing buildings at locations belonging to the implementing agencies. No land acquisition will
     be required for this project. The proposed works are located in and/or adjoining existing buildings
     and the environmental impacts are minor; these works will be undertaken according to local and
     national laws and regulations.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     There are no anticipated potential indirect and/or long term impacts associated with this TA
     project.
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.
     N/A
   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
     assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     The Environmental Protection Agency of Ghana is one of the key beneficiary agencies. EPA is the
     leading national entity for environmental management, and is amply equipped to handle negligible
     safeguards risks associated with project that include upgrading and equipping of some of its
     buildings by the project. To address specific compliance requirements associated with project
     activities, if any, the national regulatory requirements will be followed by EPA and other
     implementing entities. I
   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
     on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
     N/A
  B. Disclosure Requirements
   If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
   respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
   Audit/or EMP.
   If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?


                                               Page 4 of 5
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:      Name: David John Santley
   Approved By
   Sector Manager:        Name: Christopher Gilbert Sheldon (SM)            Date: 30-Apr-2014




                                             Page 5 of 5
