                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC6013

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Jul-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Africa                          Project ID:     P145566
                            Project Name:      Southern Africa Trade and Transport Facilitation Program - APL2 (P145566)
                            Task Team          Richard Martin Humphreys
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          17-Feb-2015                     Estimated       30-Apr-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                           Lending         Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (60%), Public administration-
                                               Transportation (20%), Public administration- Health (5%), Gen eral industry and
                                               trade sector (15%)
                            Theme(s):          Trade facilitation and market access (70%), Regional integration (25%), HIV/
                                               AIDS (5%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     62.00                    Total Bank Financing:        62.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                60.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                   2.00
                              Total                                                                      62.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the SATTFP APL 2 in Malawi is to facilitate the movement of goods and people
                           along the North-South Corridor and at the key border crossings, whilst supporting improvements in
                           the services for Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (HIV/
                         AIDS) and road safety. This is expected to be realized by the following components:

                         Component 1: Improving the Road Infrastructure. The first component comprises two sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         components to strengthen asset management and improve the condition of the road network:
                         a.        Component 1(a): The Karonga - Songwe Section of the M1 Corridor. This sub-component
                         will support the improvement of the Karonga-Songwe section of the M1 road. TMSA, through
                         COMESA, are currently funding the design work for this section, with the likely intervention
                         including a mix of periodic maintenance and localized reconstruction to complete rehabilitation. The
                         provisional cost estimate for this component is US$ 20-25 million;
                         b.       Component 1(b): Accident Blackspot Intervention. This sub-component will support the
                         identification and mitigation of key accident blackspots on the road network. A grant was approved
                         by the Global Road Safety Facility to procure consultants to undertake the assessment, and the
                         selected consultants commenced their assignment in Malawi on November 11, 2013. The provisional
                         cost estimate for these interventions is US$3 million.

                         Component 2: Improving the Social Infrastructure. The second component comprises two sub-
                         components to mitigate the social costs associated with increased transport volumes on key regional
                         trading corridors:
                         a)       Component 2 (a): Improving management of road safety. The first sub-component involves
                         supporting the implementation of the recommendations of the recently completed Corridor Road
                         Safety Management Capacity Review. The study called for the identification and establishment of a
                         cross-sectoral Lead Agency for Road Safety in Malawi and a results focused road safety strategy,
                         which is now being established with support from the European Union. The component proposes to
                         provide support to the design and implementation of pilot road safety projects in support of defined
                         targets and the purchase and installation of accident analysis software. The provisional cost estimate
                         for these interventions is US$2 million.
                         b)       Component 2 (b): Improving health services and emergency response: This sub-component
                         will refurbish and extend priority lower level health centers, both existing ones and establish new
                         ones at the border crossings, and provide, and provide technical assistance to develop the capacity of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the staff in the local health centers, in HIV/AIDS awareness, counseling and testing. It will also
                         support the piloting of an emergency response service for road traffic accidents. The provisional cost
                         estimate for these interventions is US$2 million.

                         Component 3: Improving Trade Facilitation. The objective of this component is to reduce the cross
                         border transport cost by streamlining, modernizing, simplifying and harmonizing the trade and transit
                         procedures and the policies increasing professionalism of economic operators. This is expected to be
                         realized by the following provisional list of sub-components:
                         (i)      The migration from Asycuda ++ to Asycuda World;
                         (ii)     An assessment of the feasibility and design of a National Single Window;
                         (iii)    The installation of a National Single Window facility;
                         (iv)     An assessment of development options for the Malawi Bureau of Standards (MBS);
                         (v)      An assessment of the feasibility of the upgrading and modernization of border post facilities
                         and traffic control; and
                         (vi)     the upgrading and modernization of border post facilities at Songwe. Dedza and Mwanza.
                         The provisional cost estimate for these interventions is US$17.5 million.

                         Component 4: Institutional Strengthening and Implementation Assistance. The third component will
                         provide necessary project management, implementation assistance and capacity building to the RA,
                         and strengthening of the institutional framework for transport. The following activities will be
                         included:
                         (i)      the procurement of consultants to prepare a National Transport Policy and Strategy,
                         including an action plan, to guide the sustainable development of the transport sector to 2030;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (ii)     the procurement of qualified consulting engineers to assist RA in the preparation of designs
                         and supervision of works to mitigate the accident blackspots;
                         (iii)    the procurement of qualified consulting engineers to assist RA in the supervision of the
                         implementation of civil works on the M1;
                         (iv)     the procurement of qualified consulting engineers to assist RA and MRA in the preparation
                         of designs and supervision of works at the border crossing interventions;
                         (v)      the procurement of consultants to undertake a quality review of the processes of scheme
                         identification, design, implementation, supervision and handover;
                         (vi)     the procurement of consultants to operationally establish the road asset management system
                         in the RA;
                         (vii)    Support to the RA to assist the PIT in project implementation; and
                         (viii) Capacity building and training in the Ministry of Transport and Public Works.
                         The provisional cost estimate for these interventions is US$7.5 million.

                         Component 5: Improved corridor management and monitoring (US$2 million). The IDA regional
                         grant will be used to support the continued strengthening of the DCC and the funding of its operating
                         costs for a finite period, until a sustainable financing proposal has been introduced. The further
                         progression of this component is predicated on the DCC being adjudged to have met the condition
                         outlined in APL-1, that it has developed the fiduciary capacity through support from that operation,
                         to receive this tranche in its own right.
                         C. Project Description
                         The North-South Corridor (NSC) enters Malawi at Songwe on the border with Tanzania and provides
                         a strategically important road connection for Malawi to the port of Dar-es-Salaam. In addition to
                         offering an alternative to the ports in Mozambique, the corridor forms a key trading route with Kenya
                         and Tanzania. The corridor runs south through Malawi, serving Lilongwe, the capital, and Blantyre
Public Disclosure Copy




                         where a large proportion of the country’s commercial and industrial capacity is located. The
                         southern section of the NSC extends west from Blantyre to the border with Mozambique at Mwanza
                         and then to Beira, the port that is used for the majority of Malawi’s overseas imports and exports, and
                         to South Africa. The Nacala Corridor which connects Zambia and Malawi to the port of Nacala
                         crosses the NSC in Malawi. A further branch of the NSC enters Mozambique at Dedza, providing a
                         more direct route to Beira and South Africa for Lilongwe and the north of Malawi. Customs data
                         from 2010 shows that 38 percent of Malawi’s foreign trade passes through Mwanza, 26 percent
                         through Dedza and 22 percent through Songwe.

                         The pavement condition along the 970 km of the NSC (M1) in Malawi between Songwe, Blantyre,
                         Lilongwe and Mwanza is generally in good to fair condition. Recent visual surveys have identified
                         limited sections displaying signs of pavement failure, with much of the road in need of periodic
                         maintenance in the short term. Edge-break is widespread and there is a lack of paved shoulders,
                         posing a safety hazard at locations where there are significant movements of pedestrians and cyclists.
                         South of Lilongwe, a 159 km section has recently benefitted from periodic maintenance with
                         localized reconstruction, funded by the Government of Malawi (GoM) and the European Union
                         (EU). The Roads Authority (RA) has identified three sections of the M1 road which are in poor
                         condition for consideration for inclusion in the project. In order of decreasing priority, these are: (i)
                         Karonga - Songwe (47km), (ii) Bwengu - Chiweta (60km), and (iii) Lilongwe - Kasungu (150km).
                         Road transport along the main trading routes corridors has been identified as a major factor in the
                         spread of Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (HIV/AIDS).
                         Transport workers, their spouses, and sexual partners have long been identified as vulnerable groups
Public Disclosure Copy




                         at high risk of HIV/AIDS. This reflects that: (a) the former are often absent from home for
                         prolonged periods, increasing the likelihood of unsafe sexual activity; (b) there is often a lack of
                         knowledge among long-distance truck drivers in respect of risky and safe behavior; (c) there is often
                         higher than average levels and frequency of alcohol consumption among this group, increasing the
                         incidence of risky behavior; and (d) the increased mobility can itself facilitate HIV transmission from
                         areas of high to low prevalence, nationally, and across borders.

                         Similarly, fatalities and injuries from road traffic crashes represent a significant and growing
                         economic and social cost in Africa, particularly on the major trade corridors. Africa has one of the
                         highest road traffic death rates in the world, with little difference in rates between those countries
                         categorized as low-income (32.3 deaths per 100,000 head of population per year) and those
                         categorized as middle-income (32.2 deaths per 100,000 head of population per year). In Malawi a
                         study was undertaken by the National Road Safety Council in 2005 to create a baseline for road
                         safety, but there has not been any detailed research since then and significant under-reporting is
                         likely. The study identified the main causes of crashes along with age and type of road user involved.
                         The study found 56 percent of crashes were caused by high speed, 32 percent by negligence, poor
                         driving and fatigue and 12 percent by road, vehicle or weather factors. Pedestrians accounted for 73
                         percent of fatalities, with 20 percent being vehicle passengers and 7 percent vehicle drivers. One
                         estimate of the overall cost of road traffic crashes to the national economy is that the social and
                         economic costs amount to some Kwacha 12 billion (US$34 million equivalent) annually, equivalent
                         to 3 percent of GDP. There is currently no results-focused road safety strategy.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The resealing/rehabilitation of the Karonga - Songwe road section of the North South Corridor in
                         Malawi, the mitigation of the identified accident blackspots, the improvements at the three border
Public Disclosure Copy




                         crossings, and refurbishment of 20 health facilities along the corridor are all expected to involve
                         activities either entirely within the current right of way (ROW), or completely within the footprint of
                         the existing facility.

                         During the Bank’s site visit to the road section and the border crossings in November 2013, no
                         significant environmental and social negative impacts expected from the project were observed. The
                         Karonga-Songwe road section doesn’t cross any sensitive or critical areas and the interventions do
                         not require any new alignments. The environmental issues if any in the case of the border crossing
                         interventions and refurbishment of health facilities will be confirmed during the preliminary
                         assessment to be prepared as part of the feasibility studies. In this context, according with the Bank’s
                         Environmental Assessment Policy the project is classified as Category B.

                         Site specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for the Karonga – Songwe road
                         section will be developed during project preparation. The border crossings interventions will require
                         a preparation of an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), which should be included
                         as part of the feasibility studies of the border crossing improvements.

                         OP 4.12 is triggered despite the fact that the interventions are expected to be within the existing
                         ROW for the road infrastructure component and within the footprint of the existing facilities at the
                         border crossings as well as the health facilities for the trade facilitation and social infrastructure
                           components respectively. At this early stage of the design for the road works it is not clear if land is
                           needed and if so how much. In addition, there are encroachments within the ROW in terms of crops,
                           trees, and limited number of dwelling/buildings. In accordance with Malawian legislation, the road
Public Disclosure Copy




                           reserve for highways of this nature includes area extending 30m from the middle line to both sides of
                           the road. At the moment there are settlements located within these 30m, and hence there is a need for
                           preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). However, since the design of the road
                           rehabilitation works is not ready at this stage, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been
                           prepared and is in the process of being finalized based on the comments of the World Bank. The
                           RPF will guide the preparation of RAP and will be disclosed in the country and Infoshop by
                           appraisal. The RAP for the road section will be prepared based on the principles guided by the RPF
                           and disclosed accordingly by appraisal. The RPF will be also guide future RAPs in relations to other
                           works under the project if any additional land take will be required based on the respective designs.
                           All costs associated with expropriation are to be borne by the Government of Malawi.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Road Authority (RA) has an Environmental Unit and sufficient capacity to manage the potential
                           environmental and social impacts of the proposed project. To strengthen the institutional capacity of
                           the RA, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)has been prepared and is
                           currently being finalized with the support of the Bank’s safeguards team. An environmental and
                           social strengthening plan will be prepared based on the ESMF during the project preparation to
                           ensure a good environmental and social management of the project interventions by the RA.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Helen Z. Shahriari (GURDR)
                           Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (GEEDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              This policy is triggered due to the potential
                           BP 4.01                                               adverse environmental and social impacts from
                                                                                 the civil works activities in Components 1, 2
                                                                                 and 3 (Improvement of the Karonga - Songwe
                                                                                 road, improvement of the border post at
                                                                                 Songwe, Dedza and Mwanza, the alleviation of
                                                                                 accident blackspots, and the improvement of the
                                                                                 lower level health facilities along the corridor).
                                                                                 Following the Bank’s Operational Policy the
                                                                                 project is classified as “Category B”.

                                                                                 An ESMF has been developed in order to
                                                                                 strengthen the capacity of the RA and ensure
                                                                                 adequate environmental and social management
                                                                                 during project implementation. It will be
                                                                                 disclosed before appraisal.

                                                                                 A site specific ESIA for the Karonga-Songwe
                                                                                 road section will be carried out during project
                                                                 preparation, and an ESMP will be developed as
                                                                 part of the Feasibility Studies for the border
                                                                 crossing improvements.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    The location of the project interventions is not
                                                                 expected to have any negative impacts on
                                                                 natural habitats, including critical or sensitive
                                                                 areas.

                                                                 The ESMF includes appropriate screening
                                                                 provisions and management measures in case
                                                                 any critical areas are identified during project
                                                                 preparation or implementation.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The location of the project interventions is not
                                                                 expected to have any negative impacts on forest
                                                                 areas.

                                                                 The ESMF includes appropriate screening
                                                                 provisions and management measures in case
                                                                 any forest areas become affected.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not finance any agricultural
                                                                 investments that may result in the use of
                                                                 pesticides, nor does it require other pest
                                                                 management procedures.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   This Policy is triggered given Malawi’s rich
                         BP 4.11                                 archaeological and cultural resources and the
                                                                 likelihood of the Project to support works
                                                                 requiring excavations. The ESMF includes
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Chance Find Procedures (CFP) as well as
                                                                 measures to screen for and manage potential
                                                                 impacts on cultural heritage or property that
                                                                 could be affected by neighborhood development
                                                                 plans.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                 area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   This policy is triggered despite the fact that the
                         4.12                                    interventions are expected to be almost entirely
                                                                 within the existing ROW for the road
                                                                 component and within the footprint of the
                                                                 existing facilities in the border crossing as well
                                                                 as the health facilities for the trade facilitation
                                                                 and social components respectively. However,
                                                                 the design for the road works has not been
                                                                 finalized yet and some of the related
                                                                 infrastructure such as access roads and queries,
                                                                 etc. could potentially require additional land.
                                                                 Moreover, there are encroachments within the
                                                                                                                                 right of way (ROW) in terms of crops, trees, and
                                                                                                                                 a limited number of dwelling/buildings. Finally,
                                                                                                                                 there are currently settlements within the road
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 reserve, which includes area extending 30m
                                                                                                                                 from the middle to both sides of the road (in line
                                                                                                                                 with the Malawian legislation for highways).
                                                                                                                                 Hence, a RAP will be prepared as soon as the
                                                                                                                                 final design for road works is ready. The
                                                                                                                                 preparation of RAP will be guided by the RPF,
                                                                                                                                 which is currently being finalized and disclosed
                                                                                                                                 in the country and Infoshop by appraisal. The
                                                                                                                                 RAP will be disclosed in country and Infoshop
                                                                                                                                 as soon as it is finalized during project
                                                                                                                                 implementation. All costs associated with
                                                                                                                                 expropriation are to be borne by the
                                                                                                                                 Government of Malawi.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not finance the construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of Dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         TBD                           Some investments under the project are
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            expected to take place near the international
                                                                                                                                 border between Malawi and Tanzania, but no
                                                                                                                                 impact on the river is expected. The potential
                                                                                                                                 impacts will be confirmed and if any, specific
                                                                                                                                 measures will be included.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project will not finance any activities in
                                 7.60                                                                                            areas subject to international disputes.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jun-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) has been launched for the Karonga-
                                      Songwe road section. Preparatory activities for the other components have also commenced. The
                                      ESMF, ESIA, and RPF will be consulted upon and disclosed before appraisal.

                                      As mentioned before, in accordance with the ESMF, the border crossing improvements will
                                      require a preparation of an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), but the type of
                                      environmental and social instruments required will be confirmed after the completion of the final
                                      design.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Richard Martin Humphreys

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 15-Jul-2014
                                 Coordinator:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (SM)   Date: 15-Jul-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
