                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC8692

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mexico                           Project ID:      P149858
                            Project Name:      Mexico Reducing Inequality of Educational Opportunity Project (P149858)
                            Task Team          Ciro Avitabile
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          23-Jun-2014                      Estimated        22-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEDDR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Primary education (66%), Pre-primary education (31%), Public administration-
                                               Education (3%)
                            Theme(s):          Education for all (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    150.00                     Total Bank Financing:        150.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        150.00
                              Total                                                                        150.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the Compensatory Education Project is to improve access to ECD
                           services at the national level and increase the retention rates in basic education schools in the 400
                           municipalities targeted by the Cruzada Nacional contra el Hambre. This objective would be achieved
                           through the scaling-up of interventions at the early childhood and basic education levels. These
                           interventions aim at strengthening the involvement and the collaboration of parents, community and
                           teachers in the delivery of education services.
                         C. Project Description
                         The Project would seek to scale up two of the four interventions that were already included under the
                         Mexico Compensatory Education Project: Early Childhood Development (ECD), API. At the same
Public Disclosure Copy




                         time, it would provide technical assistance to improve the design of Fortalecimiento Comunitario
                         para la Educación (FORTALECE) intervention. The Project would continue following a multi-layer
                         approach that recognizes the importance of multiple actors in improving student outcomes
                         throughout the different education stages. The ECD intervention would promote the parent/child
                         interaction as the main driver of the cognitive and non-cognitive development of children in the 0-4
                         age group. The API intervention acknowledges that students, parents, and teachers play a key role in
                         the learning production function of students in basic education and will seek to strengthen the
                         abilities of all of them. Finally, by strengthening the design of the FORTALECE intervention, the
                         Project would contribute to the strengthening the role of community and increasing the
                         accountability in CONAFE-administered schools. Therefore, it would complement the efforts to
                         improve the school-based management model in the Secretariat of Public Education (SEP)
                         administered schools that the Bank is supported through the Mexico School-Based Management
                         Project (PEC, P147185).

                         Component 1: Supporting Early Childhood Development (US$120.0 million). This Component
                         would finance community sessions aiming at improving the competencies and practices of parents,
                         relatives and caregivers of children aged 0-4 in caring for children and contribute to the children's
                         comprehensive development and school readiness. Activities under this component include, inter
                         alia:

                         a)       Funding the salaries and per diems to attend training sessions for the ECD promoters,
                         module supervisors, and zone coordinators;
                         b)       provision of technical assistance and training to ECD promoters, module supervisors, and
                         zone coordinators to train parents, relatives and caregivers of children aged 0-4;
                         c)       provision of technical assistance to design training materials for the training of parents,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         relatives and caregivers of children aged 0-4.

                         Component 2: The Asesores Pedagogicos Itinerantes (APIs) Intervention (US$25.0 million). This
                         component would finance activities to provide services of mobile pedagogical support to under-
                         performing students, teachers, and parents in under-performing community schools in the 405
                         municipalities of the Cruzada Nacional Contra el Hambre. Each mobile tutor is assigned two
                         communities. Activities include:

                         a)     Funding the salaries and per diem to attend training sessions both for the APIs and their zone
                         coordinators;
                         b)     Funding of the training sessions for the APIs;
                         c)     provision of technical assistance to design materials for tutors to provide the mobile
                         pedagogical support

                         Component 3: Technical Cooperation, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$5.0 million). This component
                         would finance activities to strengthen the design and implementation of the three interventions.
                         Activities include:
                         a)      Qualitative and process evaluations of the FORTALECE program
                         b)      Consultancies to improve the implementation and the design of the FORTALECE program
                           c)      Data collection to evaluate the impact of the API Intervention
                           d)      Consultancies to improve the information and monitoring system
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)
                           The Compensatory Education Project (Loan 7859-MX, P101369) targeted the poorest 172
                           municipalities in Mexico. Following the new social protection priorities defined by the Mexican
                           Government, the proposed Project would target the 405 poor and marginalized municipalities
                           included in the program “Cruzada Nacional Contra el Hambre” (CNCH). Because many of the
                           indigenous communities are marginalized and poor, this new focus would increase coverage of
                           indigenous localities from about 27% in the previous Project to about 44% in the selected
                           municipalities under CNCH; there is an indigenous population of 5.9 million in these localities,
                           representing 53% of the national indigenous population. Coverage for ECD would be nationwide. It
                           is important to note that although the CNCH program may incorporate additional municipalities in
                           the future, it has been agreed with the Borrower that the Project would continue to focus only on the
                           initial 405 municipalities.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           CONAFE has been implementing the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) prepared for the previous
                           operation. This institutional knowledge is expected to facilitate implementation of the IPP under the
                           new operation. The proposed technical assistance component would provide information for and
                           support this effort through studies such as the impact evaluation of the API Intervention, which
                           should differentiate an impact assessment of the program on indigenous communities. The
                           strengthened monitoring and evaluation system that would be developed with the technical assistance
                           can further contribute to assess the implementation of the IPP.

                           CONAFE’s institutional capacity could also benefit from a stronger coordination with programs such
                           as Oportunidades, which operates in indigenous localities and supports community organization
                           (Comités de Educación, for instance) and is also developing its own ECD program. Inter-insitutional
Public Disclosure Copy




                           collaboration between this Project and the School Based Management Project (P147185) would also
                           be important, given that the School Based Management Project would be supporting some CONAFE
                           schools and the links could be strengthened under the two new operations. The Comisión Nacional
                           para el Desarrollo de los Pueblos Indígenas (CDI), while leading the conceptual and analytical work
                           on the identification and characterization of indigenous peoples in Mexico, is not involved inn any
                           operational activity.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Jose Vicente Zevallos (GURDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        No               The proposed Project seeks to improve
                           BP 4.01                                              education outcomes in the schools of poor
                                                                                communities through activities such as early
                                                                                childhood development and special assistance to
                                                                                students and teachers in these schools. These
                                                                                types of activities do not cause any adverse
                                                                                impact on the environment. The Project has thus
                                                                 been classified as “C” and OP/BP 4.01 is not
                                                                 triggered.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    The Project would only conduct activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 intended to improve education outcomes in poor
                                                                 schools and therefore is not expected to cause
                                                                 any impact on natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The Project would not be situated near forests
                                                                 and would not have any impact on forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    This Project would not finance any procurement
                                                                 or significant use of pesticides or any activity
                                                                 related to pest management in any way.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    The Project would not include any activity that
                         BP 4.11                                 may affect existing physical cultural resources
                                                                 or works that may result in chance findings of
                                                                 such resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The Project would target the 405 municipalities
                                                                 under the Cruzada contra el Hambre.
                                                                 Approximately 44% of the localities in these
                                                                 municipalities are of indigenous descent; they
                                                                 speak their own language, maintain -at different
                                                                 degrees- their traditional organizations and
                                                                 identify and recognize themselves as
                                                                 indigenous. The indigenous population in these
                                                                 localities is 5.9 million, corresponding to 53%
                                                                 of the national indigenous population. The IPP
                                                                 prepared for the previous Project has been
                                                                 updated using the results of project evaluations
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 and recently conducted consultation.
                                                                 Evaluations conducted from 2009 to 20012
                                                                 indicate that the Project has adequate targeting
                                                                 and that its activities have widespread
                                                                 acceptance and are well-received by indigenous
                                                                 communities. The majority of the parents (90%)
                                                                 give a positive qualification to ECD,
                                                                 FORTALECE and APIs. Consultation was
                                                                 conducted in selected localities according to the
                                                                 following criteria: (i) localities under the
                                                                 CNCH; (ii) where all Project activities are
                                                                 implemented; (iii) in localities with a high
                                                                 representation of some the major indigenous
                                                                 peoples (nahuas in Puebla, maya varieties in
                                                                 Chiapas). Though the large number (62) of
                                                                 indigenous peoples in the country make it
                                                                 difficult to find a nationally-representative
                                                                 sample, the two entities where consultation was
                                                                 conducted can be considered to properly reflect
                         the common characteristics of indigenous
                         populations in Mexico in terms of factors that
                         can explain the gaps in education attainments.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Among these are geographic dispersion,
                         difficult access, and monolingual prevalence.
                         Moreover, Náhutal is the indigenous language
                         with the highest number of speakers in 16
                         entities. Consultations unanimously
                         corroborated support of the program and the
                         positive effects of ECD and APIs. However, in
                         extreme poverty conditions, language barriers
                         and some traditions (job preference for men, for
                         instance) may be hindering results. The IPP
                         recommends: (a) revising the intervention
                         model, taking into account language barriers,
                         updating and improving educational materials
                         and methods, and developing a true bilingual
                         education model; (b) increasing support to APIs,
                         including better accommodation conditions and
                         incentives to remain in the program; (c)
                         provision of better infrastructure to carry out
                         Project activities; (d) offering concrete
                         incentives to mothers to participate in ECD,
                         taking into account indigenous culture (most
                         women are monolingual) and competition from
                         other social programs offering transfers; (e)
                         strengthening linkages with other programs,
                         such as Oportunidades and PEC, and indigenous
Public Disclosure Copy




                         education programs in the Secretariat of Public
                         Education. Interventions targeted at addressing
                         points a and d would be piloted in the states of
                         Oaxaca and evaluated through a rigorous impact
                         evaluation. Based on the results of a cost-benefit
                         analysis, they would be scaled-up in the entire
                         country. The team is actively promoting the
                         dialogue between CONAFE and the authorities
                         that manage PEC and Oportunidades, relying on
                         the support of the Bank's teams working on both
                         projects. Conditional on data availability, the
                         take up of the Oportunidades program among
                         CONAFE beneficiaries will be monitored. The
                         Project could also benefit from a gender
                         approach by strengthening the role of the
                         “Promotoras Comunitarias” and engaging
                         women that are traditionally responsible for the
                         care of children within indigenous communities.
                         Certifying promotoras (as has been done in
                                                                                                                                 some states) has proved to be positive. The
                                                                                                                                 possibility of increasing the number of female
                                                                                                                                 APIs would also help increase women's
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 participation.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The Project would not include any activity that
                                 4.12                                                                                            requires land acquisition or major construction
                                                                                                                                 that may cause any type of involuntary
                                                                                                                                 resettlement as defined in the policy.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The proposed Project would not involve any
                                                                                                                                 activity related to the construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of dams and would not depend
                                                                                                                                 upon the operations of an existing dam.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The proposed Project would not affect
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The Project would not be situated in any
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 23-May-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      An Indigenous Peoples Plan has been prepared, incorporating results from evaluations from the
                                      previous Project and consultations conducted during preparation of the new operation. The IPP
                                      includes recommendations to improve the Project's intervention model to further benefit
                                      indigenous children and their communities. These recommendations will be discussed and agreed
                                      upon with the Borrower and will be taken into account in the Project's final design. The final IPP
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      will be completed and disclosed before Appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Ciro Avitabile

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                                                                                             Date: 06-Aug-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager:   Name: Reema Nayar (PMGR)                                                                                                   Date: 06-Aug-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
