                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA11058
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Oct-2014, 12-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Myanmar                           Project ID:    P146482
                            Project Name:      Ayeyarwady Integrated River Basin Management Project (P146482)
                            Task Team          Greg J. Browder
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Oct-2014                       Estimated   11-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GWADR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%), Flood protection
                                              (25%), Ports, waterways and shipping (25%), Public adm inistration- Water,
                                              sanitation and flood protection (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (60%), Natural disaster management (20%),
                                              Environmental policies and institutions (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     100.00           Total Bank Financing:                100.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              100.00
                              Total                                                                                    100.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The program development objective for the Series of Projects (of which the AIRBM will be the first)
                           is to strengthen integrated, climate resilient management and development of the Ayeyarwady River
                           Basin and national water resources.

                                                                      Page 1 of 20
                         The project development objective of the AIRBM is to contribute to the development of integrated
                         river basin management on the Ayeyarwady river.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         A multi-phased approach (Series of Projects) is proposed that will focus, in the first phase, on
                         developing the institutions and tools needed to enable informed decision making in the management
                         of Myanmar’s national water resources and to implement integrated river basin management on the
                         Ayeyarwady, while immediately enhancing the river’s productivity with “low/no/low regrets”
                         investments in the hydro-meteorological observation system and services (to support agricultural
                         productivity and water-related disaster risk management) and in navigation enhancements (to
                         promote sustainable transportation) on the Ayeyarwady. The project would also support a prompt
                         and effective response to potential crises and emergencies.

                         The project design includes three inter-related investment components plus a contingency component
                         to allow for rapid reallocation of funds if emergencies arise.

                         Component 1: Water Resource Management Institutions, Information & Capacity Building (USD 32
                         million)

                         1.1 Institutional Development (USD 10.5 million): This sub-component will support (a) design and
                         construction of a new NWRC Secretariat and HIC headquarters facility in Mandalay, immediate
                         refurbishment of associated office space in Yangon and Nay Pyi Taw, and provision of office
                         furnishings and equipment; (b) development of the NWRC institutions, mandates, business plans,
                         staffing strategies and operational procedures, as well as institutional, legal and regulatory reviews
                         and reforms relating to water resources management, and (c) capacity building, including possible
                         twinning arrangements.

                         1.2 Ayeyarwady River Basin Master Plan and Decision Support System (DSS) (USD 10 million):
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This sub-component will provide immediate guidance on investment options while also developing
                         the tools and processes needed to ensure the government has ongoing capacity to plan and manage its
                         national water resources. A phased approach will be taken to plan integrated development of the
                         Ayeyarwady River, based on sufficient understanding of opportunities and risks and guided by
                         agreed Basin Development Objectives. Activities will include (a) development of the Ayeyarwady
                         Integrated River Basin Master Plan, the development of a DSS that will become the primary
                         knowledge asset of the HIC, and stakeholder consultations to identify Basin Development
                         Objectives, (b) implementation of groundwater and sediment surveys, and (c) implementation of a
                         Basin-wide Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA).

                         1.3 Preparation of Future Investments (USD 7 million): This sub-component will support preparation
                         activities for priority investments that may be financed under future phases of this Series of Projects.
                         It will finance feasibility studies, procurement and safeguards related activities, workshops and study
                         tours and other activities as agreed between the WBG and GoM. It will not finance detailed design
                         work. This financing will create an incentive to develop projects within the NWRC framework – to
                         identify, and prepare projects to international quality standards, within an integrated basin framework
                         and in accordance with basin wide development objectives. To be eligible for PFI funding, a project
                         must be consistent with the Ayeyarwady Basin Master Plan (Sub-component 1.2a) and with the
                         Bank’s engagement objectives in Myanmar.



                                                                      Page 2 of 20
                         1.4 Implementation Support (USD 4.5 million): This sub-component will provide funds for (a)
                         consultant and advisory services for the Project Management Unit (PMU) including for financial
                         management, procurement, safeguards and monitoring and evaluation, (b) incremental operating
Public Disclosure Copy




                         costs, and (c) project-related communications and outreach as well as the creation of a Stakeholder
                         Forum that will be an important mechanism for consultation during the implementation of this
                         Project and sustained thereafter as a platform for stakeholder engagement with the NWRC.

                         Component 2: Hydromet Observation and Information Systems Modernization (USD 30.15 million)

                         2.1 Institutional and Regulatory Strengthening, Capacity Building and Implementation Support (USD
                         6 million): This sub-component will support (a) institutional strengthening including the
                         development of a robust legal and regulatory framework, (b) capacity building and training for staff,
                         and (c) technical assistance in systems design, integration and operations as well as Component 2
                         management and monitoring.

                         2.2 Modernization of Observation Infrastructure, Data Management Systems and Forecasting (USD
                         17.1 million): This sub-component will support (a) technical upgrading of the hydro-meteorological
                         observation network, (b) modernization of operations centers, data management and
                         communications/IT systems, engineering and calibration facilities, (c) improvements in numerical
                         weather prediction systems and associated hydrological modeling systems, and (d) reconstruction
                         and refurbishment of offices and facilities.

                         2.3 Enhancement of Hydromet Service Delivery Systems (USD 7.05 million): This sub-component
                         will support the strengthening and delivery of hydromet information services in order to ensure
                         project benefits are realized across the range of stakeholders. This will likely include (a) creation of a
                         Service Delivery Platform for weather and hydrological services, (b) support for disaster risk
                         management (DRM) operations including expansion of "end-to-end" early warning systems in small
                         river basins with floods and flash floods, (c) development of an Agricultural and Climate Advisory
                         Service (ACAS), and (d) the creation of a National Framework for Climate Services.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Ayeyarwady River Navigation Enhancements (USD 37.85 million)

                         3.1 Navigation Improvements (USD 30.35 million): This sub-component will support navigation
                         improvements to increase water levels during the low water season for both passenger and cargo
                         vessels, primarily along the busiest stretches of the Ayeyarwady river. This sub-components
                         activities will include: (a) 1-dimensional and 2-dimensional river modeling to identify the scope of
                         works for river navigation enhancements, sedimentation modeling which is essential for effective
                         operations and maintenance, preparation of detailed design documents, cost estimates and bidding
                         documents, and supervision of construction work; (b) preparation of an Environmental and Social
                         Impact Assessment (ESIA), including site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans
                         (ESMPs), and if needed site-specific Resettlement Plans and Indigenous Peoples Plans, for the
                         proposed enhancement works; and (c) construction of the enhancement works. The scope of works
                         will initially focus on the Mandalay – Nyaung Oo section of the Ayeyarwady River and will be
                         expanded to other critical stretches between Nyaung Oo and Yangon.

                         3.2 Navigation Aids (USD 3.4 million): This sub-component will support (a) the purchase and
                         installation of navigation aids such as buoys, signage, modern GPS mapping, communications
                         systems (requiring survey boats, echo-sounding equipment and radar) and the installation of lighting
                         and signage systems to enable night time navigation on the Mandalay – Nyaung Oo section of the

                                                                       Page 3 of 20
                         River; and (b) a strengthened river pilot system to enhance safety and facilitate efficient navigation
                         along the Mandalay – Yangon section of the Ayeyarwady.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3.3 Water Quality Monitoring (USD 2 million). This component will support the design and piloting
                         of a water quality monitoring system.

                         3.4 Institutional Strengthening and Implementation Support (USD 2.1 million): This component will
                         support (a) Component 3 implementation costs, (b) a fleet optimization study to improve transport
                         efficiency by ensuring that fleet development is well suited to the river, and (c) capacity building,
                         training and communications and awareness raising activities related to the Project-sponsored river
                         improvements and new information, regulations and procedures.

                         Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response (USD 0 million)

                         This ‘zero component’ (initially without any allocated funding) will allow for the rapid reallocation
                         of funds from other components to provide emergency recovery and reconstruction support in the
                         event of a natural disaster, emergency and/or catastrophic event. Funds potentially reallocated to
                         Component 4 would be disbursed either against a positive list of critical goods and/or against the
                         procurement of works, and consultant services required to support the immediate response and
                         recovery needs of GoM. A Contingent Emergency Response Implementation Plan will be developed
                         to guide financial management, procurement, safeguard and any other necessary implementation
                         arrangements and procedures.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be located within the Ayeyarwady River Basin. The Ayeyarwady rises in the
                         Himalayas and bisects Myanmar from north to south, prior to emptying through a nine-armed delta
                         into the Bay of Bengal. While the Ayeyarwady tributaries host a number of multipurpose dams, the
                         mainstream has no significant structures on it.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Ayeyarwady River (also known as Irrawaddy; length 2170 km; drainage area 413,710 Km2) is
                         the largest river in Myanmar and has been described as the heart of the nation. The basin accounts for
                         over 60% of Myanmar’s landmass and accommodates 70% of its population. It is rich in natural
                         resources particularly forests, land and water in addition to biodiversity. The Ayeyarwady Basin is
                         home to numerous emblematic and endangered species including elephants, tigers, leopards, sea
                         turtles, crocodiles, a broad range of waterfowl and migratory birds, and the Irrawaddy dolphin.

                         In addition to a large number of Bamar ethnic communities, of which many are poor and who depend
                         on Ayeyarwady river basin resources for their livelihoods, the basin is home to many ethnic
                         minorities who are also dependent on the river for livelihoods and subsistence. The river traverses
                         Kachin ethnic state.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Juan D. Quintero (OPSOR)
                         Svend Jensby (OPSOR)
                         Pamornrat Tansanguanwong (GSURR)
                         Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (GENDR)
                         Satoshi Ishihara (GSURR)


                                                                      Page 4 of 20
                         6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes           The Project is proposed as category A for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                      Environmental Assessment due to its spatial
                                                                      extent, the richness and diversity of its ecology
                                                                      and extent of its resources and support to
                                                                      livelihoods, its focus on integrated river basin
                                                                      planning (Component 1) through the development
                                                                      of an Ayeyarwady River Basin Management Plan
                                                                      and studies, and civil works to be carried out
                                                                      under Components 2 and 3. The project also
                                                                      supports a diverse set of activities related to
                                                                      sustainable environmental management in
                                                                      Myanmar, including building a water resources
                                                                      information management system, strengthening
                                                                      the collection and analysis of hydro-
                                                                      meteorological data, designing and piloting a
                                                                      water quality monitoring system, improving river
                                                                      navigation, building institutional capacity for
                                                                      water resources management and relevant
                                                                      environmental and social safeguards, undertaking
                                                                      strategic studies and planning, and strengthening
                                                                      project management and emergency response.

                                                                      The detailed designs of the planned infrastructure
                                                                      investments will not be identified prior to project
                                                                      appraisal, therefore an Environmental and Social
                                                                      Management Framework (ESMF) has been
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      prepared to provide for screening and assessing
                                                                      environmental and social issues and preparing
                                                                      required safeguard instruments during project
                                                                      implementation.

                                                                      The project will also support the establishment of
                                                                      a Decisions Support System to provide the newly
                                                                      formed National Water Resources Committee
                                                                      with the information needed to better assess the
                                                                      complex impacts (including environment and
                                                                      social aspects) and tradeoffs of proposed
                                                                      developments on the Ayeyarwady River.

                                                                      The project will support the preparation of
                                                                      feasibility studies for investments that could be
                                                                      financed in future phases of the proposed series of
                                                                      projects (sub-component 1.3). These potential
                                                                      future investments (i.e., in irrigation, hydropower,
                                                                      navigation, delta management, municipal water
                                                                      supply or wastewater management systems) are


                                                              Page 5 of 20
                                 likely to have adverse environmental and social
                                 impacts. The Terms of References (TORs) of
                                 these studies will include screening of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 environmental and social safeguard risks,
                                 assessment of impacts (including cumulative
                                 aspects) and issues in line with relevant World
                                 Bank Group operational policies. In case the river
                                 basin planning process identifies priority
                                 investments for which feasibility studies will be
                                 supported by the project, ESIAs and other
                                 safeguard instruments (e.g. RAPs, IPPs), as
                                 needed, will be prepared for such investments
                                 according to the ESMF and Bank policies.

                                 River channel enhancement works are planned
                                 under the project to increase the 'least available
                                 depth' of the river during the low flow season;
                                 currently only small or lightly loaded vessels are
                                 able to pass through several sections of the
                                 busiest stretch of the Ayeyarwady (from
                                 Mandalay to Nyaung Oo) during the low flow
                                 season. The work is likely to involve the
                                 construction of groins within the riverbed and
                                 associated dredging that will serve to concentrate
                                 the dry season flow into a narrower and hence
                                 deeper section of the river bed in order to
                                 facilitate safe ship passage. These activities may
                                 impact downstream water quality and turbidity,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 aquatic habitats, aquatic flora and fauna, fishery,
                                 primary productivity and users of the river.
                                 Transport and disposal of dredged materials will
                                 also have impacts, and the works may have
                                 impacts on navigational traffic and safety.
                                 Unexploded ordinance (UXO) clearance works
                                 are not expected, however, if required they will
                                 be implemented in line with specific international
                                 standards of operations. During implementation,
                                 before channel enhancements begin, a feasibility
                                 study and ESIA will be carried out (see activity
                                 3.2) to assess environment and social impacts in
                                 detail and required safeguard instruments will be
                                 prepared, as needed.

                                 To enhance the project benefits and to address the
                                 potential environmental and social impacts, key
                                 elements of the project approach include:




                         Page 6 of 20
                                 1. An ESMF prepared by appraisal to establish
                                 the screening and assessment process of
                                 environmental and social impacts of various
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 activities including the Master Plan and Decision
                                 Support System (Component 1.2) including the
                                 Strategic Environment and Social Assessment
                                 (SESA), the feasibility and other studies under the
                                 preparation of future investments sub-component
                                 (1.3), the upgrading of hydromet stations
                                 (Component 2), the channel enhancement works
                                 (Component 3) and any Technical Assistance
                                 provided during project implementation.

                                 The ESMF specifies the type, level and depth of
                                 environmental and social impact assessments
                                 (ESIAs or ESMPs) required for each of the
                                 project activities based on the results of the
                                 screening and the relevant impacts. The ESMF
                                 was the subject of two rounds of public
                                 consultations and disclosure prior to project
                                 appraisal.

                                 2. During project implementation the following
                                 safeguard activities will be undertaken, as
                                 described in the ESMF:

                                 (i) ESIAs will be undertaken for the river
                                 navigation improvements to assess all
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 environmental (including potential cumulative
                                 impacts) and social impacts, and safeguard plans
                                 will be prepared as needed (e.g. RAP, IPP).

                                 (ii) TORs for proposed investments under the
                                 preparation of future investments sub-component
                                 1.3 will include detailed procedures for screening
                                 of environmental and social safeguard risks,
                                 mainstreaming of safeguard issues into the
                                 activity design, and, if needed, undertaking of
                                 ESIAs and preparation of safeguard instruments,
                                 such as ESMPs, RAPs and IPPs.

                                 (iii) In case the river basin planning process
                                 identifies priority investments for which
                                 feasibility studies will be supported by the
                                 project, screening of environmental and social
                                 safeguard risks will be undertaken, and ESIAs
                                 and other safeguard instruments (e.g. RAPs,



                         Page 7 of 20
                                 IPPs), as needed, will be prepared.

                                 (iv) A Strategic Environmental and Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Assessment (SESA) will be conducted to support
                                 the development of a long-term basin-wide
                                 perspective and institutional assessment to inform
                                 the development of the river basin master plan. A
                                 preliminary draft ToRs for the SESA, developed
                                 and annexed to the ESMF, includes
                                 environmental and social safeguard provisions
                                 and the need to take into consideration regional
                                 and cumulative effects. The preliminary ToRs for
                                 the SESA will be finalized and approved by the
                                 Bank during project implementation following an
                                 expert and stakeholder workshop.

                                 Furthermore, the River Basin Management Plan
                                 will contain the basic environmental and social
                                 data collection and mapping such as biodiversity
                                 areas, aquatic habitats, riparian habitats , water
                                 quality, river and riparian uses, livelihoods
                                 dependencies including the presence of ethnic
                                 minorities. Environment and social risks and
                                 potential impacts will be taken into account in all
                                 development scenarios. A TOR of the River
                                 Basin Management Plan will be provided at the
                                 beginning of project implementation to the
                                 Regional Safeguards Secretariat. It will identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 in detail the scope of the different environment
                                 and social aspects to be taken into account in the
                                 River Basin Management Plan. It will also
                                 indicate how the Strategic Environmental and
                                 Social Impacts Assessment (SESA) will be
                                 integrated into the River Basin Management Plan
                                 and how regional and cumulative effects will be
                                 taken into account.

                                 3. The safeguard capacity of the institutions
                                 involved in project implementation and river
                                 basin management will be enhanced through
                                 training and learning-by-doing activities. A
                                 detailed safeguards institutional capacity and
                                 capacity building plan will be developed and
                                 agreed upon with counterparts at the beginning of
                                 project implementation in order to provide the
                                 support required to implement the different
                                 safeguards activities related to this project.



                         Page 8 of 20
                                                                         All safeguard instruments developed during
                                                                         implementation, whether assessments or plans,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         including ToRs and the final SESA, will be
                                                                         shared with the Regional Safeguards Secretariat
                                                                         for review and clearance to ensure timely and
                                                                         efficient advice that is consistent with the Bank’s
                                                                         safeguard policies. The environment and social
                                                                         content of the TOR for the River Basin
                                                                         Management Plan will also be reviewed and
                                                                         cleared by the Regional Safeguards Adviser.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           This policy is triggered because of the positive
                                                                         impacts that are anticipated as a consequence of
                                                                         better management of the river’s water resources.
                                                                         At the same time, however, project activities may
                                                                         have negative impacts on natural habitats, for
                                                                         example channel enhancement works or works
                                                                         associated with the upgrading of the hydromet
                                                                         system could potentially affect aquatic and
                                                                         riparian habitats. Furthermore, Projects included
                                                                         in the sub-component for preparation of future
                                                                         investments, such as irrigation and hydropower,
                                                                         are likely to trigger the policy.

                                                                         The ESMF provides for the screening of potential
                                                                         project impacts and how safeguard issues under
                                                                         4.04 should be addressed during project
                                                                         implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes           No activities financed under this Project (first
                                                                         phase of the series of projects envisioned) are
                                                                         anticipated in forest areas. However, the policy is
                                                                         triggered because projects included in the sub-
                                                                         component for preparation of future investments,
                                                                         such as irrigation and hydropower, are likely to
                                                                         trigger the policy. Detailed assessment and
                                                                         relevant safeguards instruments will be prepared
                                                                         as part of project implementation, if needed, in
                                                                         order to comply with this policy provision.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           The project activities are not expected to use
                                                                         pesticides, nor lead to increased usage of
                                                                         pesticides. However, this policy will be screened
                                                                         in future investments supported by sub-
                                                                         component 1.3 and appropriate instruments
                                                                         (Integrated Pest Management Plans) would be
                                                                         prepared as needed.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The project will carry out civil works under the
                         BP 4.11


                                                                 Page 9 of 20
                                                                        channel enhancements and hydromet
                                                                        modernization sub-components. The channel
                                                                        enhancement activities will be carried out mainly
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        within the river bed and hydromet modernization
                                                                        activities will upgrade existing facilities. As a
                                                                        consequence, no PCRs impacts are anticipated,
                                                                        however, this cannot be ruled out until the
                                                                        detailed designs have been prepared.

                                                                        Furthermore, projects included in the sub-
                                                                        component for preparation of future investments,
                                                                        such as irrigation and hydropower, may also
                                                                        trigger the policy. The policy is triggered, and the
                                                                        ESMF includes guidelines for addressing OP
                                                                        4.11, including “Chance Finds Procedures”.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10   Yes            The Ayeyarwady basin is home to diverse groups
                                                                        of ethnic minorities who meet the eligibility
                                                                        criteria of OP 4.10 and are dependent on the river
                                                                        for livelihoods and subsistence. The river also
                                                                        traverses Kachin ethnic state. OP 4.10 is thus
                                                                        triggered.

                                                                        Overall, the project is expected to generate
                                                                        positive impacts on livelihoods, including for
                                                                        ethnic minorities. However, activities associated
                                                                        with the river channel enhancement works
                                                                        (Component 3) may result in temporary economic
                                                                        disruptions and hydromet modernization activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        (Component 2) may be carried out in areas where
                                                                        ethnic minorities are present. Projects included in
                                                                        the sub-component for preparation of future
                                                                        investments may also include areas with ethnic
                                                                        minorities.

                                                                        An Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (IPPF)
                                                                        was developed as part of the ESMF to guide the
                                                                        design of mitigation measures and to provide
                                                                        mechanisms to ensure the meaningful
                                                                        participation of ethnic minorities in the Project.
                                                                        Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPP) will be developed
                                                                        if necessary during implementation for specific
                                                                        project activities based on a social assessment and
                                                                        free, prior and informed consultation process with
                                                                        affected ethnic minorities when the exact scope
                                                                        and scale of project impacts become known.

                                                                        Development of the river basin management plan



                                                               Page 10 of 20
                                                                         will also have implications for ethnic minorities.
                                                                         The basin-wide SESA will assess among other
                                                                         things issues, risks, and opportunities concerning
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         ethnic minorities. Ethnic minorities and their
                                                                         representative organizations will be engaged in
                                                                         the SESA and consultation process during project
                                                                         implementation, and stakeholder forums will be
                                                                         established which will help promote
                                                                         communications with and outreach to broad
                                                                         stakeholders including representatives of ethnic
                                                                         minorities.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes            While the overall project impact is expected to be
                         4.12                                            positive, civil works to be financed under
                                                                         Components 2 and 3 could affect people who use
                                                                         the Ayeyarwady riverbanks, and potential
                                                                         investments examined under the project
                                                                         preparation facility (Component 1) will involve
                                                                         future land and other property loss. This policy is
                                                                         therefore triggered.

                                                                         The ESMF includes a Resettlement Policy
                                                                         Framework (RPF) to address any land acquisition
                                                                         and other involuntary resettlement issues that may
                                                                         arise from project activities during project
                                                                         implementation. Resettlement Action Plans
                                                                         (RAP) will be prepared as needed for specific
                                                                         activities that require involuntary resettlement.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        Yes            The Project will not finance any activities related
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         to the construction of dams nor affect operations
                                                                         of existing dams or affiliated reservoirs.
                                                                         However, projects included in the sub-component
                                                                         for preparation of future investments, such as
                                                                         irrigation and hydropower, may trigger the policy.
                                                                         Implementation of the policy provisions (i.e., due
                                                                         diligence of linked dams, proposal of any
                                                                         necessary corrective measures to address possible
                                                                         safety risk) will be evaluated and relevant
                                                                         instruments prepared during implementation if
                                                                         needed with any studies of the sub-component
                                                                         1.3.
                         Projects on International        Yes            The Ayeyarwady rises in the Himalayas, bisects
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            Myanmar from north to south and empties
                                                                         through a nine-armed delta into the Bay of
                                                                         Bengal. A portion of the catchment areas that
                                                                         feed two of the tributaries of the river (the
                                                                         Maykha which is referred to as the Daying in
                                                                         China, and the Malikha which is referred to as the


                                                                Page 11 of 20
                                                                                  Jiang in China) are located in China. The Malikha
                                                                                  tributary in turn is fed by a sub-tributary
                                                                                  originating within India. This meets the definition
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  of an International Waterway as stipulated in
                                                                                  paragraph 1 of the World Bank’s Operational
                                                                                  Policy 7.50 on International Waterways, although
                                                                                  the combined flow outside of Myanmar is
                                                                                  estimated to be less than 1%. The planned
                                                                                  investment activities involve minor additions or
                                                                                  alterations to an ongoing scheme of river training
                                                                                  and protection, feasibility studies for potential
                                                                                  future investments in the river basin and water
                                                                                  resource/groundwater surveys. Although
                                                                                  modeling and the environmental assessment have
                                                                                  yet to be done, it is not anticipated that the
                                                                                  construction or rehabilitation works proposed
                                                                                  under the project will adversely change the
                                                                                  quality or quantity of water flowing in the river
                                                                                  and the project will not be appreciably affected by
                                                                                  other riparians’ possible water use. On this basis,
                                                                                  the Bank has determined that the proposed project
                                                                                  does not require riparian notification in
                                                                                  accordance paragraphs 7(a) and 7(b) of OP 7.50.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   Based upon the information provided, no
                            7.60                                                  activities are planned in any disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment: the project is rated as environmental assessment category
                              A due to its spatial extent, the richness and diversity of its ecology and extent of its resources and
                              support to livelihoods and its focus on integrated river basin planning (Component 1) through the
                              development of a Ayeyarwady River Basin Management Plan and because of the river-related
                              infrastructure works under Components 2 and 3, as well as the technical studies to be undertaken
                              in Component 1 which could potentially lead to investments that have significant impacts on the
                              river system as well as site-specific safeguard impacts.

                              The project is expected to have overall positive environmental and social benefits by (a) enhancing
                              water resources management thereby contributing to the delivery of more reliable and better
                              quality water to all users, (b) strengthening disaster risk management efforts related to flood,
                              drought and storm risks by improving predictions of the timing and severity of weather extremes
                              and delivering more effective warnings to at-risk (and generally predominantly poor)
                              communities, and (c) enabling safer, more efficient inland water transport.

                              The project will target integration of gender dimensions in key assessments and planning exercises
                              including the Basin Master Plan and the SESA; as well as in all communications and outreach


                                                                         Page 12 of 20
                         activities including the dissemination of disaster warnings and agricultural advisories. The project
                         will also ensure that male and female staff of relevant agencies and communities have equal
                         opportunities to participate in capacity building and training support from the Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Negative environmental impacts may arise in the course of the construction of the proposed river
                         channel enhancements. Dredging and river training works can influence the water regime in rivers
                         and swamp areas in the wider Ayeyarwady catchment area. This is a slow process that will
                         develop over the years after completion of works. As a result of reduced water flow in the lateral
                         branches and minor flooding, changes in groundwater levels can be expected. This can negatively
                         affect the functioning of wetlands, which are important refuges, hatching grounds and habitats of
                         plants, birds, fish, amphibians and other animals. In addition, dredging and the disposal of dredged
                         materials can also potentially lead to turbidity, siltation and sedimentation, reduced primary
                         productivity, substrate disturbance and scouring, all of which can have cumulative impacts on
                         downstream users of the river.

                         The project will also support the construction of small works (e.g. the construction or
                         refurbishment of a National Water Resources Committee (NWRC) Secretariat and Hydro-
                         Informatics Center headquarters facility, the modernization of Observation Infrastructure, Data
                         Management Systems and Forecasting and establishing of Navigation Aids from Mandalay to
                         Yangon). The impacts of these small works are expected to be localized and can be prevented or
                         reduced to acceptable levels by applying international construction practices and planning. Such
                         potential impacts are related to: (i) air pollution/dust, noise, vibration, and access restriction, (ii)
                         improper disposal of construction related waste; (iii) temporary pollution of soil and surface
                         waters due to accidental spillage of fuel from construction activities; (v) safety hazards including
                         worker safety; (vi) damage to natural habitats, aquatic fauna, or existing vegetation, and (vii)
                         impacts to physical cultural resources. These impacts should be properly managed during the
                         construction phase by the contractor and closely supervised by the Project Management Unit
                         (PMU), the Project Implementation Team and the supervision engineer.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The AIRBM project will support technical assistance to inform river basin management including:
                         (i) the preparation of a River Basin Master Plan and associated Decision Support System, and (ii)
                         technical studies such as the basin groundwater survey, sedimentation survey, fleet optimization
                         study, and Ayeyarwady river navigation strategy. It is envisioned that the Master Plan and
                         technical activities will suggest investments or management options that could have associated
                         environmental and social risks and impacts. A SESA will be carried out during implementation in
                         order to better understand the environmental and social dynamics and impacts of the potential
                         development and management options in the Ayeyarwady basin. Furthermore, it is envisioned that
                         the Master Plan will suggest priority investments to manage the river basin. The regional and
                         cumulative impacts of these investments will be assessed in the SESA or as part of the relevant
                         ESIAs. The AIRBM, under the sub-component 1.3, will finance advisory support for planning or
                         feasibility studies linked to some of those suggested investments.

                         At this point of the project, the potential investments or their likely environmental and social
                         impacts are not known. Therefore, the AIRBM project will carry out environmental and social
                         assessments commensurate to the potential impacts and risks of the investments that will be
                         considered as either Category A or B projects based on the results of screening

                         In order to study the potential impacts of the project and to propose related mitigation measures to
                         address such impacts, the Borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management

                                                                     Page 13 of 20
                         Framework (ESMF) to meet the OP/BP 4.01 requirements and project appraisal conditions. The
                         ESMF covers all investments and activities financed by or involving the Bank and sets out the
                         process based on which the related ESIA/ESMPs, as well as any RAPs or IPPs needed, will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         developed during project implementation once the detailed designs and other relevant technical
                         studies are prepared. The ESMF summarizes investment options analysis; reviews existing
                         legislative and organizational structures for environmental management; briefly describes existing
                         environmental and social conditions and anticipated impacts from known project activities at this
                         point; outlines environmental impact mitigation and monitoring actions; and describes the public
                         consultation process during project preparation and implementation. It also includes a preliminary
                         draft ToR for the SESA that will be developed in parallel with and integrated into the Basin
                         Master Plan. It also describes the process for ESIAs and/other specific safeguard instruments or
                         ToRs preparation relevant to future subprojects (sub-component 1.3), if required.

                         OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats will apply since channel enhancement works and monitoring station
                         upgrades could affect river-dependent ecosystems and habitats; activities supported under the
                         preparation of future investments sub-component may also trigger the policy as well as activities
                         related to the Master Plan and SESA. The ESMF identifies potential impacts that will be analyzed
                         in detail during project implementation when ESIAs will be undertaken to produce site specific
                         analyses and mitigation options in parallel with detailed design.

                         OP/BP 4.36 Forests is triggered. No activities financed under this Project (first phase of the series
                         of projects envisioned) are anticipated in forest areas. However, the policy is triggered because
                         projects included in the sub-component for preparation of future investments, such as irrigation
                         and hydropower, are likely to trigger the policy.

                         Similarly, OP 4.37 (Safety of Dams) and OP 4.09 (Pest Management) are triggered since future
                         investments, such as irrigation and hydropower, may need to comply with these policies
                         provisions. This Project will not finance any activities related to irrigation schemes or the
                         construction of dams nor affect operations of existing dams or affiliated reservoirs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP 4.10 is triggered since ethnic minorities who meet the eligibility criteria of OP 4.10 are known
                         to be present in the Ayeyarwady river basin; the basin also traverses Kachin ethnic state. Some
                         activities associated with the river channel enhancement works (Component 3) may result in
                         temporary economic displacement of some ethnic minorities. Also, changes in the management of
                         the Ayeyarwady basin may result in the short/ mid-terms negative impacts on their livelihoods,
                         and potential investments to be prepared (Sub-component 1.3) may be carried out in areas where
                         ethnic minorities are present. An Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (IPPF) was developed as
                         part of the ESMF to provide guidance on the design of mitigation measures and develop
                         mechanisms to ensure the meaningful benefits and participation of ethnic minorities in the
                         different project activities. If needed, Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPP) will be developed during
                         implementation based on a social assessment and free, prior and informed consultation process
                         with affected ethnic minorities when the exact scope and scale of the specific project impact
                         becomes known. The SESA, which will inform the master plan, will also assess among other
                         things issues, risks and opportunities concerning ethnic minorities, and engage ethnic minorities in
                         assessment and consultation exercises.

                         OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources will apply as a precautionary measure given
                         Myanmar’s wealth of cultural heritage. There are numerous pagodas andreligious sites along the
                         river, including in the Mandalay-Nyaun Oo section of the river, and chance find procedures are

                                                                   Page 14 of 20
                          included in the ESMF and will be included in construction contracts. In addition to following
                          national laws on cultural heritage, a Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) Management Plan will be
                          prepared, if needed, during the ESIA/detailed design stage based on the PCRs assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                          undertaken during the preparation of the ESIAs.

                          OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is triggered. While the overall project impacts are expected
                          to be positive, civil works to be financed under Components 2 and 3 could affect people who use
                          the Ayeyarwady riverbanks, and potential investments examined under the preparation of future
                          investments sub-component (1.3) could involve future land and other property loss. The ESMF
                          includes a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to address any land acquisition and other
                          involuntary resettlement impacts that may arise once detailed project activities are identified
                          during project implementation. This includes the preparation of Resettlement Action Plans, if
                          needed.

                           OP/BP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways policy is triggered since the Ayeyarwady is an
                           international waterway. However, an exception to notification has been requested.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           At this point, no irreversible or long term adverse indirect impacts are anticipated from these
                           project activities. However, the ESIAs and the SESA will seek to identify and propose measures
                           for future and cumulative risks in the project area, for example anticipated increases in water
                           pollution or wastewater discharge loads for development plans and priority activities that might be
                           identified as part of the Ayeyarwady Master Plan (Component 1).
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           In terms of the overall project design, an alternative that was considered included a watershed
                           management component rather than the current navigation enhancements component. In
                           discussions with government it was agreed that it would be very difficult to implement the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           watershed management component within this project because it would have been implemented by
                           a different Ministry, the Ministry of Environment Conservation and Forestry. It was therefore
                           decided that for this first project activities would be focused in a single Ministry. With regard to
                           specific project activities, alternatives will be examined in the Master Plan, the SESA and project
                           specific ESIAs as described in the ESMF, as well as the final designs of the hydromet system and
                           navigation enhancements.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The government, the executing Ministry of Transport and other involved entities have no or very
                           limited experience in World Bank safeguard policies as well as in conducting consultations and
                           public disclosure. The government also has no or very limited experience to date in managing
                           environmental and social impacts based on international good practice and it lacks updated
                           legislation, professionals with experience preparing safeguard instruments in line with World
                           Bank requirements, and the basic infrastructure for monitoring and laboratory analysis (especially
                           linked to water, sediment and air quality).

                          The Bank will assist and guide the Borrower with the implementation of the provisions of the
                          ESMF and other relevant safeguard instruments. Capacity building on safeguards will be
                          undertaken as part of Component 1.1 on institutional development and implementation support


                                                                    Page 15 of 20
                          (Component 1.4) and includes funds for consultant and advisory services for safeguards. A
                          detailed safeguards institutional capacity and capacity building plan will be developed and agreed
                          upon with counterparts at the beginning of project implementation in order to provide the support
Public Disclosure Copy




                          required to implement the different safeguards activities related to this project.

                           Based on input from the stakeholder consultations and the results of the preliminary assessments
                           of existing environmental and social data relevant to the project, the project ESMF was developed
                           and includes guidance on screening for safeguards impacts, preparation of site-specific ESIAs and
                           ESMPs, a Resettlement Policy Framework to address any land acquisition and other involuntary
                           resettlement impacts, and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework to address issues
                           concerning ethnic minorities who may be affected, whether positively or adversely, from project
                           activities in areas with ethnic minorities.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders of the project include the National Water Resources Committee, the
                           Directorate of Water Resources and Improvement of River Systems (DWIR), the Department of
                           Meteorology and Hydrology (DMH) and over 30 additional water-related government agencies, as
                           well as river transport providers and users, communities that derive their livelihoods from water-
                           dependent sectors and those that are vulnerable to water-related hazards.

                          Consultations have been undertaken with key Ministries, relevant Parliamentary committees, the
                          River Users Association, and a broad group of NGOs and CSOs with interests in water,
                          environment, natural resources management and disaster risk management, including consultations
                          and public disclosure regarding the ToR for the preparation of the ESMF in May 2014 and the
                          draft ESMF in September 2014. The ESMF has been finalized subsequent to the public
                          consultations and describes the issues raised and how they have been responded to and addressed.

                          Public consultations will continue and be expanded throughout project implementation, either as
Public Disclosure Copy




                          part of environmental and social assessment processes or as part of the SESA and Stakeholder
                          Engagement activities

                          The ESMF includes specific measures for consultation and public disclosure during project
                          implementation, including particular measures for consulting with ethnic minorities as described
                          in the IPPF for site-specific activities in areas with ethnic minorities. Moreover, the SESA will
                          include a consultation process to engage all relevant stakeholders, including ethnic minorities, in
                          the preparation of the river basin master plan. The draft ESMF was submitted to the Bank’s
                          Infoshop on August 13, 2014 and its Executive Summary to the Board on August 15, 2014. After
                          translation, the draft ESMF was publicly disclosed in country in Myanmar language and English
                          on September 4, 2014 prior to consultations held in Yangon and Mandalay on September 18 and
                          19, 2014
                          .
                          The Project will also support the creation of: (i) a Stakeholder Forum to ensure engagement of key
                          stakeholders from the public sector, private sector, NGOs and CSOs, (ii) a local grievance
                          mechanism aimed at resolving possible community concerns on the Project promptly, in an
                          impartial, understandable and transparent process tailored to the specific community, and (iii) a
                          Communication Strategy to ensure that stakeholder engagement is informed in a manner
                          accessible to communities, project affected people, and other key stakeholders.



                                                                    Page 16 of 20
                           The PMU will continue disclosing relevant project environmental and social information in a
                           manner accessible to affected communities and other stakeholders during implementation.
                           Relevant project information includes all environmental and social assessment documents (e.g.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ESIA, EMP, SESA) produced under the AIRBM project. The Client will also provide periodic
                           reports to the affected communities and other relevant stakeholders on the implementation status
                           or any modification to environmental and social management plans.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02-Oct-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              13-Aug-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 15-Aug-2014
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Myanmar                                                     04-Sep-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02-Oct-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              13-Aug-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Myanmar                                                     04-Sep-2014
                           Comments: A Resettlement Policy Framework is a separate annex included in the ESMF.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02-Oct-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              13-Aug-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Myanmar                                                     04-Sep-2014
                           Comments: An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework is a separate annex included in the
                                         ESMF.
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?              NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              NA
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level

                                                                    Page 17 of 20
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?




                                                                     Page 18 of 20
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                             Have dam safety plans been prepared?                             Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                             Bank?
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Greg J. Browder
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                             Date: 11-Nov-2014
                            Advisor:



                                                                      Page 19 of 20
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Ousmane Dione (PMGR)    Date: 12-Nov-2014
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           Page 20 of 20
