                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                        Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSR1059
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Morocco                                      Project ID:           P117081
                            Project Name:     Integrating Climate Change in the Implementation of the Plan Maroc Vert
                                              (P117081)
                            Task Team         Gabriella Izzi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       16-Mar-2011                                    Estimated   17-May-2011
                            Appraisal Date:                                                Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GFADR                                           Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                           Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              Climate change
                            Area:
                            Sector:           Agricultural extension and research (40%), Public administration- Agriculture,
                                              fishing and forestry (30%), Crops (15%), Irrigation a nd drainage (15%)
                            Theme:            Climate change (100%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        31.30           Total Bank Financing:                                           0.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                 Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                            26.95
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                    4.35
                              Total                                                                                               31.30
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Global Environmental Objective(s)


                                                                                Page 1 of 5
                         The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to integrate climate change adaptation measures into
                         the planning and implementation of selected agricultural project                             s in
                         targeted areas. Indicators are: (i) Increase in percentage of PMV projects
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in the targeted areas having a climate change component; and (ii) Increase in pe
                         rcentage of farmers adopting climate change adaptation technologies in the targe
                         t area.
                         Proposed New GEO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to integrate climate change adaptation measures into
                         the planning and implementation of selected agricultural project                             s in
                         targeted areas. Indicators are: (i) Increase in percentage of PMV projects
                         in the targeted areas having a climate change component; and (ii) Increase in pe
                         rcentage of farmers adopting climate change adaptation technologies in the targe
                         t area.
                          3. Project Description
                         The project includes the following two components:

                         Component 1: Development of the capacities of public and private institutions to integrate climate
                         change adaptations in projects directed to small farmers in five target regions: Component 1 aims to
                         develop the capacities of selected staff of public and private institutions involved in the planning and
                         implementation of Government-funded projects targeting small farmers (so-called Pillar II Projects
                         under the national agricultural strategy of the Plan Maroc Vert, PMV) for integrating climate change
                         adaptation measures. As a result, Component 1 will allow the PICCPMV to influence the screening
                         mechanism of Pillar II Projects in a climate change adaptation perspective.

                         Component 2: Dissemination of climate change adaptations among small farmers in five target
                         regions: Component 2 aims to disseminate climate change adaptations among selected small farmers
                         in the five target regions. For each PICCPMV Sub-project, farmers will benefit from goods, small-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         scale civil works, and services for the implementation of the climate change adaptation measures,
                         training, and awareness activities. This Component includes ten PICCPMV Sub-projects. The
                         climate change adaptation measures considered are: (i) improved crops and varieties, and certified
                         seeds; (ii) direct seeding; (iii) change in seeding dates and/or seeding density; (iv) supplemental
                         irrigation; (v) rainwater harvesting; and (vi) good agronomic practices.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The regions targeted by the PICCPMV are the following: Gharb-Chrarda-Beni Hssen, Rabat-Salé-
                         Zemmour-Zaër, Chaouia-Ouardigha, Doukkala-Abda, and Tadla-Azilal.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Ruma Tavorath (GENDR)
                         Fatou Fall (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                          BP 4.01




                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             Yes

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project has the potential to bring substantial environmental benefits, by helping to make
                              agriculture more resilient to climate change. The project is expected to have significant positive
                              social impacts too. By focusing on marginal areas, it addresses small farmers, traditionally
Public Disclosure Copy




                              characterized by high poverty rates, a low level of education, and low agricultural productivity.
                              Under the project, beneficiaries will benefit from goods, small-scale civil works, and services for
                              the implementation of the climate change adaptation measures, training, and awareness activities.
                              Many of these activities, which also include the use of pesticides, could have marginal adverse
                              environmental footprint, if they not well managed. The project therefore triggers the World Bank’s
                              Operational Policy on Environmental Assessment Policy (OP 4.01) and on Pest Management (OP
                              4.09). Other environmental and social safeguards are not triggered.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                               N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                               The implementing entities are paying due attention to the potential environmental and social
                              impacts of the project. Considering the programmatic nature of the Project, characterized by ten
                              sub-projects, a framework study of the environmental and social impacts (Etude Cadre des


                                                                        Page 3 of 5
                           Impacts Environnementaux et Sociaux, ECIES) has been developed. The ECIES establishes a
                           framework for individual environmental and social impacts assessment for each sub-project (Etude
                           des Impacts Environnementaux et Sociaux, EIES). The ECIES provides indications on which data
Public Disclosure Copy




                           should be recorded, the consultation process to be carried out, and the definition of potential
                           mitigation measures. It also details the institutional arrangements as well as the capacity-
                           strengthening measures needed to ensure proper follow-up. Each EIES has been prepared prior to
                           the implementation of each sub-project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The ECIES has been reviewed by the World Bank for disclosure prior to appraisal. The EIES of
                           each sub-project have been finalized, reviewed by the World Bank, and disclosed prior to the
                           beginning of the implementation of the sub-project. For each sub-project, consultations are held
                           with relevant stakeholders, such as farmers and representatives of local organizations. In order to
                           facilitate the local ownership of the results of the impacts assessments, documents are produced in
                           French.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       25-Feb-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    03-Mar-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    No
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       15-Sep-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    15-Sep-2011
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?


                                                                     Page 4 of 5
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Gabriella Izzi
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Nina Chee (RSA)                                 Date: 09-Oct-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Practice Manager/   Name:                                                 Date:
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 5 of 5
