                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC1090

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Dec-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Dec-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Romania                          Project ID:       P149785
                            Project Name:      Integrated Social Services Project (P149785)
                            Task Team          Christian Bodewig
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          18-May-2015                      Estimated         30-Jul-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSPDR                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other social services (40%), General education sector (30%), Sanitation (15%),
                                               Health (15%)
                            Theme(s):          Other social protection and risk management (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    126.67                      Total Bank Financing:        126.67
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        126.67
                              Total                                                                        126.67
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to strengthen integrated social service delivery for marginalized
                           communities and households with a focus on those with children.

                           Social service delivery is expected to be strengthened through more effective outreach to households
                           and communities by public social work staff and community workers and through community-led
                           investments in essential social services including education, health and other. An integrated, Roma-
                         sensitive approach combining intensive household-focused social work (counseling, referrals, etc.)
                         and community mobilization and investments is expected to help address multiple barriers to
                         opportunities for children in poor and socially excluded families. It is consistent with the conceptual
Public Disclosure Copy




                         framework for social inclusion put forward by the World Bank 2013 flagship study "Inclusion
                         Matters" and the three drivers of social inclusion of markets, services and spaces.
                         C. Project Description
                         Focusing particularly on families with children, the SIBS project would focus on developing an
                         intervention that can help break the intergenerational cycle of poverty and exclusion by strengthening
                         local social service delivery to reach out to poor and marginalized communities and families, and
                         connect them to services. The project would support a model of an integrated approach to service
                         delivery at the local level involving simultaneous interventions both on the demand and the supply
                         side to tackle a multitude of drivers of inequality of opportunity faced by the poor and marginalized
                         in Romania, especially children.

                         The program would be implemented in select marginalized communities in urban and rural areas
                         across Romania for a period of five years between 2016 and 2021 under the auspices of the Ministry
                         of Labor, Family, Social Protection and Elderly and with the involvement of Ministries of Health,
                         Education and the Romania Social Development Fund (RSDF). The aim is to develop an integrated
                         social inclusion model which could be scaled up with parallel financing from EU Structural Funds.
                         The proposed design is based on the assessment that the traditional approach to social inclusion,
                         especially for Roma, has (i) been fragmented and has rarely combined multiple complementary
                         interventions in one place, and hence failing to cater to the needs of the highly marginalized, and (ii)
                         underplayed the role of social workers/mediators as mobilizers of demand and intermediaries to link
                         beneficiaries to available services.

                         The proposed integrated service approach would first bring to the forefront the role of the social
                         workers and aim at strengthening their function such that they become "actively" engaged in
                         developing solutions jointly with communities/households/families in need. The focus of their work
Public Disclosure Copy




                         would then shift to accurate identification of the needs of a vulnerable/poor household as a unit and
                         resolving them through locally generated and implemented solutions. The backbone of the approach
                         would be, first, intensive local facilitation and outreach via community workers ("social mediators")
                         that would be organized through Community Consultative Structures (CCS) in charge of tackling the
                         various dimensions of social inclusion. Second, it would involve local action by community groups
                         ("Local Initiative Groups"-LIGs) who, in collaboration with local authorities, would choose and
                         oversee the implementation of an integrated service package that would draw from a positive list of
                         elements such as (i) Basic Health and Education – investments to expand and improve inclusive early
                         childhood development (e.g. parenting programs), education (kindergarten) and basic health (e.g.
                         public health sensitization/promotion for children and mothers, recreational activities) services; (ii)
                         Earning Opportunities – employment promotion programs for parents (e.g. literacy programs,
                         counseling, etc.); (iii) Community Infrastructure – investments to improve accessibility and quality
                         of basic services.

                         The proposed approach for the Integrated Social Services project (ISSP) is entirely consistent with
                         and complementary to the one adopted for EU Structural Funds financing under the OPs Human
                         Capital and Regional Development, including for the Community-Led Local Development (CLLD)
                         instrument. The project would develop and finance detailed models of provision of integrated social
                         work services and community-led priority investments which could be adapted for Structural Fund
                         financing in localities beyond those supported by ISSP. As such the project would have the potential
                         to help enhance the use of Structural Funds for effective social inclusion interventions.

                         It would build on recommendations from the World Bank-supported preparation of a Draft National
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Strategy and Action Plan on Social Inclusion and Poverty Reduction. The project would incorporate
                         lessons learned and would build on the successful interventions implemented at community level
                         under the previous World Bank-supported Romania Social Inclusion Project and other RSDF
                         projects and the successful experiences of programs such as “A Good Start” (Roma Education Fund),
                         “Priority Intervention Program” (RSDF), “A Place for Everyone” (UNDP), “Helping the Invisible
                         Children” (UNICEF), “Making Most out of EU Funds for Roma” (Open Society Institute) and others
                         in the region and elsewhere (e.g. Central and Latin America). The project would also benefit from
                         recent work in the education sector, especially for the Romania Strategy to Reduce Early School
                         Leaving.

                         Component 1: Social Service Delivery (ca. 95 percent of the Loan volume)

                         Sub-Component 1.1 “Strengthening Public Social Work Services” would provide financing to
                         municipalities/communes through the RSDF for the adoption and implementation of annual
                         integrated social work plans which would prioritize activities targeting families with children. The
                         municipality/commune could request financing of activities including:
                         •        Consolidation of the existing or formation of a new Community Consultative Structure
                         (CCS) consisting of social worker, community nurse, general practitioner, school principals or
                         teachers, Roma health and education mediators, police, private sector representatives, local
                         councilors and others, as needed ;
                         •        Adoption of terms of reference (TOR) for this group’s operation in line with the TORs of the
                         PSAS, e.g. with social work protocols;
                         •        A social census and participatory needs assessment to establish the profile of vulnerabilities
                         in any project-supported marginalized community, especially from the perspective of children;
                         •        Support for participatory appraisal of needs and provision of priority social services in
                         communities;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        An annually updated integrated social work plan to guide the committee’s outreach and
                         social work activities (e.g. identify, based on the census, priority cases) and expected results to be
                         achieved;
                         •        Implementation of a list of social service activities (e.g. after class activities for youth) based
                         on the integrated social work plan.
                         •        Monitoring of progress towards achieving expected results (e.g. decrease in child
                         abandonment, decrease in school drop-out, expansion in vaccination, increase in preschool enrolment
                         etc.).

                         The project will finance technical assistance, capacity building and, where necessary, human
                         resources on a contractual basis (e.g. social and community workers) to facilitate the implementation
                         of the above activities. A positive menu of core as well as eligible activities and expenditures will be
                         confirmed during appraisal.

                         Sub-Component 1.2 ”Investing in Community-Led Priority Social Services” would seek to
                         complement activities under 1.1 by empowering communities to take part in the choice,
                         implementation and monitoring of basic social services. Building on the participatory needs
                         assessments, it would finance the implementation of community-led priority social services which
                         will be chosen from an eligible menu of activities supporting an integrated social service package
                         (such as small community infrastructure improvements; equipment and materials; provision of basic
                         training for community based services, start-up costs for establishing home-based or community
                         based services for ECD or other recreational/educational activities, community monitoring of
                         services, etc.) to include education, health, and basic social services investments. The selected
Public Disclosure Copy




                         community-led activities will be complementary to those included in the annual integrated social
                         service plan presented by the CCS/PSAS. The sub-component would rely on CLLD-consistent
                         methodologies for its identification and implementation.

                         RSDF would be in charge of the facilitation, administration and coordination of funding for local
                         activities under both sub-components.

                         Component 2: Project Management (ca. 5 percent of the Loan amount) would support central-level
                         activities including:

                         •        Project administration: The project would finance relevant activities related to the
                         administration of the project.
                         •        Advisory work on strengthening the system governing social work service provision, e.g.
                         formulation of regulatory changes to promote enhanced social work.
                         •        Project monitoring and evaluation: The project would fund any costs related to program
                         monitoring, including, and as needed, strengthening data monitoring platforms and support to local-
                         level monitoring efforts as desc ribed above. It would emphasize innovative and participatory
                         monitoring mechanisms such as community service scorecards alongsi de traditional program
                         monitoring. Beneficiary satisfaction surveys would be implemented at least twice during the
                         implementation period. An impact evaluation or a process evaluation could also be conducted around
                         one or two research questions to be determined.
                         •        Communications: The project would finance costs of a communication campaign targeted to
                         the selected localities and communities and other communication efforts as needed. The campaign
                         will emphasize outreach and information dissemination via multiple channels accessible to the target
                         populations. It would also finance facilitation of knowledge exchange and regular peer learning of
                         social workers/PSAS at regional and/or national level.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Both MoLFSPE and RSDF would play a role in managing Component 2.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project activities would be carried across the country, with a particular focus on poor rural areas
                         and urban marginalized areas . The population targeted includes various vulnerable groups: from
                         Roma communities or other ethnic minorities; from low income families; living in rural areas; living
                         in urban marginalized areas; confronted with lack or low access to quality education, health and
                         social assistance services. No social or cultural issues are envisaged, but some topics related to Roma
                         traditions, including customs, may require due diligence during the community mobilization phase.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The proposed Project implementation would be coordinated by two key stakeholders: the MoLFSPE
                         and RSDF. The local authorities identified as beneficiaries of the grants would implement the Project
                         under a decentralized approach, but with technical assistance of specialists supported by the Project.
                         The RSDF has extensive experience and satisfactory performance in the administration of funds
                         supporting the implementation of CDD type projects, and will be responsible for the implementation
                         of the Component 1 of the project. The existing Project Management Unit (PMU) of the MoLFSPE
                         was involved in the implementation of the previous Social Inclusion Project (finalized July 2014),
                           and will be responsible for the implementation of Component 2 under ISSP, leading a strategic role
                           in providing methodological support and oversight and supporting the implementation of any
                           regulatory changes to promote enhanced social work. Both entities have the adequate capacity to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           carry out day-to-day project management activities including those related to environmental and
                           social protection.
                           The RSDF’s capacity and performance in implementation the Bank safeguard policies have also been
                           assessed satisfactory by various audits conducted in the past. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
                           capacity of the RSDF is also adequate.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Cesar Niculescu (GENDR)
                           Mihai Magheru (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The ISSP project is likely to be an
                           BP 4.01                                            environmental category B project, with a partial
                                                                              environmental assessment required. It is
                                                                              anticipated that all sub-projects funded under
                                                                              the ISSP project will not trigger a full-scale
                                                                              environmental impact assessment (EIA)
                                                                              process. The project will have limited negative
                                                                              environmental and social impacts, as physical
                                                                              works will be undertaken to only construct/
                                                                              rehabilitate local facilities. The expected
                                                                              temporary environmental impacts and
                                                                              inconvenience to the surrounding areas during
                                                                              construction are limited and typical to small/
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              medium scale construction works, such as
                                                                              generation of dust, noise and vibration;
                                                                              movement of the construction vehicles and
                                                                              machinery; piling of construction materials; and
                                                                              accumulation of demolition/construction waste.
                                                                              Some associated risks include improper disposal
                                                                              of construction waste, asbestos, minor
                                                                              operational or accidental spills of fuel and
                                                                              lubricants from the construction machinery, and
                                                                              improper reinstatement of construction sites
                                                                              upon completion of works. A general
                                                                              Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
                                                                              including the mitigation measures for most type
                                                                              of construction works will be prepared at the
                                                                              project level, and will be followed by derived
                                                                              site-specific Environmental Management Plans
                                                                              (EMPs) that will be prepared for each sub-
                                                                              project that will be implemented.
                                                                              Very effective measures have been put in place
                                                                                                                                 under the previous Social Inclusion Project
                                                                                                                                 (finalized July 2014) to address safeguards
                                                                                                                                 issues, and they are being applied and closely
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 monitored by the RSDF. These were laid out in
                                                                                                                                 the detailed Guidelines for Environmental
                                                                                                                                 Analysis of Sub-Projects, which will also be
                                                                                                                                 part of the Operational Manual of ISSP project.
                                                                                                                                 Each sub-project will be reviewed for
                                                                                                                                 environmental and social risks in line with the
                                                                                                                                 OP4.01. No category A projects are likely to be
                                                                                                                                 financed.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            The environmental screening process will
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         screen for the presence of physical cultural
                                                                                                                                 resources. In addition, chance find procedures
                                                                                                                                 will be included in all works contracts.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The involuntary resettlement will not be
                                 4.12                                                                                            triggered despite the inclusion of
                                                                                                                                 infrastructure works under the project because
                                                                                                                                 the legal agreements will exclude any financing
                                                                                                                                 of subprojects involving land acquisition.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Apr-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      n.a.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Christian Bodewig

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 04-Dec-2014
                                 Coordinator:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Andrew D. Mason (PMGR)   Date: 05-Dec-2014
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
