                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC8331

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Myanmar                          Project ID:       P149960
                            Project Name:       Myanmar Towards Universal Health Coverage (P149960)
                            Task Team           Hnin Hnin Pyne
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                            Estimated         10-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASHH                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Health (85%), Other social services (15%)
                            Theme(s):           Health system performance (85%), Other social protection and risk management
                                                (15%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    115.00                       Total Bank Financing:        100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                               0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                    100.00
                              Health Results-based Financing                                                  15.00
                              Total                                                                          115.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the proposed operation is to increase access to essential health services, with a focus
                           on progress towards MDGs related to maternal, newborn and child health (MNCH).

                           The proposed project is the first phase in the program of support that aims to advance Myanmar
                         towards UHC goals of equitable access to quality essential health services and enhanced financial
                         protection.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A.      Project Concept

                         To advance towards the UHC goals of equitable access to quality essential health services and
                         enhanced financial protection, Myanmar would need a program of support that delivers: (i) service
                         delivery readiness, quality, and performance; (ii) sustainable and equitable health financing; and (iii)
                         strong governance and stewardship of the health sector. The proposed operation is the first phase of
                         this program of support, which would focus on service delivery readiness, quality and performance at
                         the Primary Health Care (PHC) level and also provide capacity-building and program support and lay
                         the ground-work for Phase II.

                         To facilitate smooth and timely implementation, the proposed operation, to be financed by IDA
                         credit and Health Results Innovation Trust Fund Grant, would be complemented by a coherent and
                         well aligned program of technical assistance (TA) – finances for which would be mobilized from
                         other development partners with shared interests.

                         Component 1: Strengthening Primary Health Care Delivery and Utilization. A priority for achieving
                         UHC is making the delivery of a basic package of services of good quality available to the entire
                         population. In order to achieve this, the Government would need to make sure that medical supplies
                         including pharmaceuticals and other consumables, are regularly supplied to primary care facilities to
                         prevent any stock-outs, that staff in the facilities are well trained, be present in sufficient numbers
                         and treat patients in a friendly and respectable manner. The facilities would need to be well
                         maintained. These efforts would need to take into account existing service delivery models in the
                         country, such as social franchised networks of General Practitioners, NGOs, and faith-based
                         organizations in the ethnic and border areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         While long-term sustainable financing mechanisms are being developed, in parallel, urgent measures
                         are needed to empower local level health care managers to ensure the smooth operation of health
                         services. In order to achieve the MDGs 4 and 5, in the immediate-term, the supply of MNCH
                         services at the PHC level need to be of acceptable quality, with adequate coverage and utilization.
                         Enhanced service utilization will also need effective communication efforts to inform and empower
                         communities – both to improve health-care seeking behaviors and to be able to demand services from
                         the providers and provide feedback.

                         To assist Myanmar in realizing the above short-term strategy, World Bank financing would support:

                         •      Channeling funds through MOH to Township levels and below for operational costs, medical
                         consumables and minor maintenance. Grants would be provided to TMOs, for onward disbursement
                         to RHC and SC levels based on Standard Operating Procedures, for eligible expenditures
                         •      Strengthening FM capacity at Township and Central levels, which could encourage other
                         development partners to channel funds through Government systems
                         •      Health Care Waste Management and social safeguard compliance activities
                         •      Community empowerment: Building on existing mechanisms, such as Village Health
                         Committees, communities will be informed and empowered to demand services, provide feedback
                         and community oversight.
                         •      Results-Based Financing: Phase I will be used for sensitization of policy-makers, planners
                         and implementers to the concepts of RBF, and for designing and developing the pilot interventions.

                         Component 2: Program support, capacity building and Phase-II ground-work. The component
Public Disclosure Copy




                         would provide management support to the program, and finance the development of strategies,
                         guidelines and operational manuals (e.g., Health Financing Strategy, Definition of Essential Package
                         of Health Services, Quality Assurance and Accreditation Systems, Health Care Waste Management
                         Guidelines, Social Assessment, Standard Operating Procedures for fund-flow). It would strengthen
                         fiduciary systems so as improve efficiency in the sector and create more transparency, accountability
                         and a smooth flow to frontline services. The Bank funds would support consultation workshops,
                         training programs, South-South exchanges, and independent verification of Disbursement Linked
                         Indicators achievements through third party monitoring and make funds available for training.

                         Progress in this focus area would be further bolstered by leveraging USAID technical support
                         program on supply chain management, and service availability and readiness assessments funded by
                         GAVI Health systems strengthening project and 3MDG Fund.

                         Proposed Instrument

                         The proposed operation would use Investment Project Financing with Disbursement Linked
                         Indicators. DLI progress will be reviewed annually and will be subject to independent verification.
                         The arrangements for the review, its financing as well as its timing will be decided with Government
                         during project appraisal, so that IDA disbursements can be made at a proper time in the
                         Government’s budget cycle.

                         World Bank plans to mobilize additional financial support in the form of international and national
                         technical assistance to be focused on monitoring and evaluation of the programs and capacity
                         building to enhance program implementation towards achievement of DLI targets.

                         The project is conceived as the first phase of a larger program of support to the sector, which would
Public Disclosure Copy




                         include health financing and broader sector reforms. Such program will be prepared in the coming
                         year and may run contemporaneously with this first phase.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is nation-wide in scope, exact scope and roll-out will depend on minimum capacity
                         criteria being met, in particular financial management and data.

                         The support to frontline service delivery is expected to increase the utilization of health services by
                         target populations and may generate incremental health care waste, such as sharps or contaminated
                         waste, which needs to be handled properly. Eligible expenditure items may include minor
                         renovations and repairs of existing facilities. Specific environmental safeguard mitigation measures
                         would be applied under the project.

                         It will be important that these basic services are available in an equitable manner to the entire
                         population including remote populations and ethnic minorities. The implication of fee-exemption
                         schemes and other possible financial protection measures also need to make sure equitable
                         application across different social groups. Specific social safeguard measures would be applied
                         under the project.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           No past experience with World Bank funded operations or relevant safeguard policies. There is a
                           lack of legal requirements and limited institutional capacity for ensuring effective safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           preparation and implementation. The institutional capacity to address safeguard policies will be
                           further assessed during project preparation, and measures will be identified to build capacity and
                           support the Ministry of Health in the implementation of the safeguard instruments (Environmental
                           Management Plan and Community Engagement Planning Framework). Specific training on project
                           relevant activities such as medical waste management including medical waste tracking and
                           treatment recording as well as safe work practices in medical facilities will be proposed and costs
                           estimated in the Health Care Waste Management Plan developed as part of the EMP and followed
                           during project implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Svend Jensby (EASDE)
                           Pamornrat Tansanguanwong (EASTS)
                           Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (EASER)
                           Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project is expected to provide direct
                           BP 4.01                                             financing to existing operational budget linked
                                                                               primarily to operation and maintenance of
                                                                               health care facilities; No new construction or
                                                                               expansion of existing health facilities will be
                                                                               financed. However, the project may include
                                                                               financing for small-scale rehabilitation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               existing health care facilities within the same
                                                                               foot print (if budget permits) or financial
                                                                               support for new health care equipment for
                                                                               primary care use (e.g., syringes). Such support
                                                                               might generate minor temporary site-specific
                                                                               environment impacts (e.g., dust, noise) and/or
                                                                               contribute indirectly to increased health waste,
                                                                               which needs proper management and disposal.
                                                                               Consequently, the project has been proposed as
                                                                               category B since all physical works will take
                                                                               place within footprint of existing facilities with
                                                                               minor impacts.
                                                                               In order to address the OP 4.01 requirements,
                                                                               the client will prepare before project appraisal
                                                                               implement an Environmental Management Plan
                                                                               (EMP) adapted to the project that will include:
                                                                               (i) specific ECoPs to address impacts linked to
                                                                               planned minor refurbishment works (e.g., wall
                                                                               painting, window repairs) and (ii) anHealth Care
                                                                Waste Management Plan (HCWMP) adapted to
                                                                the project that will ensure addressing properly
                                                                health care waste management impacts, as well
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                as those linked to minor refurbishment works.
                                                                The HCWMP will include, among other
                                                                aspects, info on: characteristics and hazards
                                                                profile of health care waste (solid, liquid,
                                                                infectious, pathological, sharps, pharmaceutical,
                                                                radioactive and mixed); medical waste
                                                                containment and storage requirements and
                                                                locations; treatment, disposal and transportation,
                                                                including options; emergency actions;
                                                                responsibilities for health care waste
                                                                management, and training. The EMP including
                                                                the ECoPs and the Health Waste Management
                                                                Plan will be annexed to the Project Operational
                                                                Manual, and will be disclosed in country and
                                                                Infoshop before project appraisal as the
                                                                instrument to implement the OP 4.01 provisions
                                                                for this operation. One public consultation will
                                                                be held on the draft EMP before project
                                                                appraisal. During project implementation, the
                                                                project also intends to support the development
                                                                of national health care waste management
                                                                guidelines (which will represent one of the DLI
                                                                targets). A social assessment will be undertaken
                                                                during project preparation to assess potential
                                                                social impacts and risks as per OP 4.01 and OP
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                4.10, and measures to address such impacts
                                                                during project implementation will be addressed
                                                                in the Community Engagement Planning
                                                                Framework as well as Community Engagement
                                                                Plans.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No   The project will not finance construction of
                                                                new, or expansion of existing, health facilities
                                                                and will not impact natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No   The project will not finance activities that will
                                                                affect forest, forest health and forest-dependent
                                                                communities.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No   The project activities will not support or finance
                                                                the use of pesticides, such as for control of
                                                                vector-borne diseases such as malaria and
                                                                dengue.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No   There are no known important cultural
                         BP 4.11                                resources in health facilities which could be
                                                                affected by the project. As such, the project will
                                                               not adversely affect sites with archeological,
                                                               paleontological, historical, religious, or unique
                                                               natural values.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10   Yes   Specific project areas have not been identified
                                                               and will not be identified prior to project
                                                               appraisal. However, the project is national and
                                                               will include areas with ethnic minorities that are
                                                               covered under OP 4.10. Myanmar is made up
                                                               of 135 officially recognized ethnic groups,
                                                               grouped into 8 “ethnic races” including the
                                                               majority Bamar. In the absence of exact census
                                                               figures, it is estimated that Ethnic minorities
                                                               account for one third or more about 30% of the
                                                               total population, and live mainly in the 7 Ethnic
                                                               States (Kayah, Kayin, Kachin, Chin, Mon,
                                                               Rakhine, and Shan) in the border areas.
                                                               The provision of health services supported by
                                                               the project is not expected to have adverse
                                                               impacts on ethnic minorities. However, the
                                                               project presents issues related to equity in
                                                               access and culturally appropriate delivery of
                                                               services and their quality in areas with ethnic
                                                               minorities as well as other vulnerable
                                                               population groups. A social assessment (SA)
                                                               will be undertaken during project preparation,
                                                               and will include consultations with
                                                               organizations representing and working with
                                                               ethnic minorities. The SA and consultations will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               inform the preparation of an implementation
                                                               framework that will go beyond OP 4.10 and
                                                               address social issues and potential impacts for
                                                               all communities for engaging local communities
                                                               while addressing particular issues concerning
                                                               ethnic minorities and other vulnerable groups.
                                                               The Framework will include an Indigenous
                                                               Peoples Planning Framework as required under
                                                               OP 4.10. It will contain namely procedures for
                                                               practical and site-specific social assessments,
                                                               consultations and culturally appropriate
                                                               measures that will be contained in Community
                                                               Engagement Plans (equivalent of Ethnic
                                                               Minority Plans) to be developed during project
                                                               implementation. The Community Engagement
                                                               Plans may go beyond OP 4.10 and address
                                                               social issues and potential impacts for all
                                                               communities, however, with clear provisions for
                                                                                                                                 addressing particular issues in cases where
                                                                                                                                 ethnic minorities are present.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The project will not finance construction of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 4.12                                                                                            new, or expansion of existing, health facilities
                                                                                                                                 and will therefore not involve any land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The Project will not finance any activities
                                                                                                                                 related to the construction of dams nor affect
                                                                                                                                 operations of existing dams or affiliated
                                                                                                                                 reservoirs.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project will not affect international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             No activities are planned in any disputed areas.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 02-Jun-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      During project preparation, the Task Team (TT) will work with the Ministry of Health (MoH) in
                                      assessing potential environmental impacts and issues related to the project and existing policies
                                      and mechanism for addressing such issues, particularly concerning management of health care
                                      waste. Relevant ECoPs and a simple Health Waste Management Plan will be prepared prior to
                                      appraisal for project specific activities that may have environmental impacts, such as rehabilitation
                                      of health facilities and generation of health-care related waste.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      The TT will work with the MoH in the undertaken of the social assessment and consultations
                                      during project preparation. The TT will also support the preparation, prior to appraisal, of the
                                      implementation framework for engaging local communities and addressing particular issues
                                      concerning ethnic minorities and other vulnerable groups, including the required elements of an
                                      IPPF.
                                      To be specified at PAD stage.

                                      Public disclosure and consultations will be undertaken concerning the EMP, SA and the
                                      Community Engagement Planning Framework prior to project appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Hnin Hnin Pyne

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 08-May-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Toomas Palu (SM)                                                                                                     Date: 08-May-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
