                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC1332

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Pacific Islands                  Project ID:      P130592
                            Project Name:       Pacific Regional Connectivity Program 2:Palau-FSM Connectivity Project
                                                (P130592)
                            Task Team           Natasha Beschorner
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       20-Oct-2014                          Estimated        22-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GTIDR                                 Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Telecommunications (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Infrastructure services for private sector development (85%), Regulation and
                                                competition policy (15%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     72.50                      Total Bank Financing:         47.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   47.50
                              Asian Development Bank                                                        25.00
                              Total                                                                         72.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the Project is to reduce the cost and increase the availability of ICT
                           services needed to support social and economic development.
                           C. Project Description
                         PROJECT IN FSM

                         Component 1. Submarine cable system for Palau-Yap-Guam ($5 million). IDA financing will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         on-lent to an SOE (representing the Government’s participation in the CCC) to finance a spur from
                         the state of Yap to the proposed Palau-Guam cable. Fer, the IDA financing will finance the
                         membership of the SOE in the CCC in exchange for a set of rights including the use of a certain
                         amount of capacity on the Guam – Palau cable. Following market liberalization, the Government
                         intends to sell down its ownership interests in the SOE to the private sector pursuant to robust
                         ownership and governance arrangements that will ensure open and nondiscriminatory access to
                         international cable capacity. The Government of FSM will also implement regulatory arrangements
                         to ensure that the domestic market in FSM is guaranteed access to international capacity on an open
                         and nondiscriminatory basis.

                         Component 2. Chuuk and Kosrae communications backbone subsidy ($15 million) will support the
                         establishment of a universal access fund under the new Communications Law, to provide stimulus
                         funding for backbone infrastructure for Chuuk and Kosrae. Funding will be offered through a
                         competitive bidding process for “least cost” subsidy. Details of the funding mechanism and
                         implementation support will be developed under technical assistance provided in Component 3.

                         Component 3. Technical Assistance includes technical assistance ($2 million) for:
                         (a)      Assessing options for improved connectivity for Chuuk and Kosrae and developing a
                         universal access scheme:: (i) assessing options for submarine cable or improved satellite
                         connectivity for Chuuk and Kosrae; and (ii) designing and implementing a universal access scheme
                         to provide access for virtually all FSM citizens to voice calling and Internet access services;
                         (b)      Sector regulation and regulatory capacity development. Complementing the TA Project
                         which is more short-term in nature, this component will finance medium-term technical assistance
                         for the new sector regulator to develop and implement regulatory policies and procedures, establish a
                         licensing procedure for all operators, design processes for the resolution of disputes between service
Public Disclosure Copy




                         providers, and the protection of consumers against unfair or misleading practices by service
                         providers.

                         Component 4. Project management support ($0.50 million) will finance Project financial
                         management, audit, general Project reporting, and monitoring and evaluation.

                         PROJECT IN PALAU

                         Component 1. Submarine cable system for Palau-Yap-Guam ($12.5 million). IBRD financing will
                         be on-lent by the Government of Palau to PNCC, or to a specially designated SOE, for membership
                         in the CCC in exchange for a set of rights including the use of a certain amount of capacity on the
                         cable. The Government of Palau will implement arrangements to ensure that the domestic market in
                         Palau is guaranteed access to international capacity on an open and non-discriminatory basis.

                         Component 2. Project management support ($0.5 million) includes support for Project financial
                         management, audit, general Project reporting, and monitoring and evaluation.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will involve a submarine cable between Palau and Guam with a spur to Yap (FSM). At
                         the Palau and Guam ends, the cable will be connected to existing landing stations. At the Yap end,
                           the cable will be connected to a new landing station. The land identified as the site for the Yap
                           landing station is owned by the State of Yap (TBC). For a Chuuk submarine cable, a new landing
                           station would be required in Chuuk. The marine environment between these locations sustains many
Public Disclosure Copy




                           sensitive ecosystems and is home to many fauna but there are no proposed or established protected
                           areas documented along the oceanic portions of the cable route . An Environmental Impact
                           Assessment will determine the area of influence of the project. In addition to potential small-scale
                           land acquisition, the laying of the submarine cable and associated infrastructure may have physical
                           and economic impacts on local livelihoods, primarily fishing. Finally, it should be noted that the
                           Project is located in countries where the majority of beneficiaries are indigenous peoples.
                           The exact cable route will be determined by a marine survey that will also map out the locations of
                           all the sensitive ecosystems and the laying of the cables will be done by a specialized ship guided by
                           sonar and other systems. The final cable route will be chosen to avoid sensitive ecosystems such as
                           hydrothermal vents and seamounts given that the geophysical conditions at these locations could also
                           destroy the cable. The use of sonar may be a nuisance to cetacean communities but this risk will be
                           mitigated by adoption of industry best practice protocols. Given these considerations, the Project is
                           unlikely to significantly impact the marine environment and sensitive ecosystems and species during
                           the laying of the cable (i.e., the construction phase). Therefore, any impacts that occur are likely to be
                           short-term, and will not lead to induced and/or cumulative impacts.
                           The Project will take into account the implementation experience of the recently-commissioned
                           Tonga-Fiji cable, cofinanced by the World Bank and Asian Development Bank. No adverse social or
                           environmental impacts were experienced during marine operations or landing at Suva or Nuku'alofa.
                           The Project will use the applicable safeguards policies of the World Bank. The World Bank, in
                           consultation with prospective cofinanciers, will take primary responsibility for review and clearance
                           of safeguards instruments.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Limited capacity on the Government side so support will be required during implementation. It is
                           noted that the telecom operators (PNCC and FSMTC) have previous experience of implementing
                           US-government financed telecoms infrastructure investments including domestic backbone (PNCC
Public Disclosure Copy




                           fibre-optic backbone) and international submarine cable (Pohnpei-Guam HANTRU-1 cable system).
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Knut Opsal (GSURR)
                           Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (GENDR)
                           Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              This Project will finance the laying of a
                           BP 4.01                                                submarine fiber-optic cable system in FSM and
                                                                                  Palau that will likely include the conduct of a
                                                                                  marine survey, plant and equipment, terminal
                                                                                  station and equipment (landing station or
                                                                                  connection to existing landing stations), cable
                                                                                  deployment and maintenance for an agreed
                                                                                  contractual period, and contingency, associated
                                                                                  marine and land based infrastructure. Potential
                                                                 adverse environmental impacts may include
                                                                 temporary site-specific disturbance of marine
                                                                 ecosystems (including habitats and species) and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 coastal areas and communities during laying,
                                                                 operation and maintenance of the cable, and
                                                                 construction of the land and marine based
                                                                 infrastructure, which are expected to be mostly
                                                                 temporary and/or short term but are also
                                                                 expected to be readily manageable. The Project
                                                                 has been initially assigned a category "B"
                                                                 consistent with the nature of these impacts and
                                                                 the requirements of OP4.01 and a full
                                                                 Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                                                                 (ESIA) and corresponding Environmental and
                                                                 Social Management Plan (ESMP) for the known
                                                                 sites will be prepared by the Project team to
                                                                 address these issues. As part of this process
                                                                 consultations will be undertaken with all
                                                                 stakeholder groups in potentially affected
                                                                 communities--NGOs and research groups with
                                                                 interest and experience in the Pacific. Since
                                                                 there are other specific sites that still have to be
                                                                 determined an ESMP will be prepared and
                                                                 together with an environmental code of practice
                                                                 disclosed locally in country and also at the
                                                                 World Bank’s Infoshop.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   An assessment of the impact of the laying of
                                                                 submarine cables on the marine ecosystem is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 required. Palau, Yap and FSM are important
                                                                 marine ecosystems with high marine
                                                                 biodiversity. It may also be the route of
                                                                 migrating fish and marine mammals. The EIA
                                                                 should assess the impacts on the marine life and
                                                                 the coastal ecosystems and propose proper
                                                                 mitigating measures. Based on the Tonga-Fiji
                                                                 cable deployment experience, limited impacts
                                                                 were observed.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                TBD   The landing stations might be situated in
                                                                 mangrove areas. The EIA will assess any likely
                                                                 impacts on existing mangrove areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    There will be no use of pesticides in this project.

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Based on the locations of the landing stations,
                         BP 4.11                                 an assessment of the PCR in these sites should
                                                                 be done in the EIA.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   This policy is triggered since the majority of
                                                                 beneficiaries are indigenous peoples. However,
                                                                a stand-alone IPP/IPPF is not required. Instead,
                                                                and in accordance with OP 4.10, the elements of
                                                                an IP Plan and/or planning framework will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                integrated into the project design. These shall
                                                                include the following: a) Free, prior, and
                                                                informed consultation (FPIC) leading to broad
                                                                community support conducted during project
                                                                preparation. Consultations materials should be
                                                                translated to local languages and disclosed
                                                                locally to ensure that there is widespread
                                                                understanding of the project, its objectives and
                                                                timeline; b) A Community Consultation
                                                                Framework (CCF) will be incorporated into the
                                                                final Project Operations Manual to ensure that
                                                                communities will be informed and consulted
                                                                about any changes in the project; c) A culturally
                                                                appropriate grievance redress mechanism,
                                                                which should be explained during the FPIC
                                                                consultation; and d) Measures for disclosing key
                                                                Project documents. An executive summary in
                                                                non-technical language of EMP and EMF will
                                                                be translated into local languages and disclosed
                                                                locally.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   Locations for the landing stations will need to
                         4.12                                   be confirmed; these may be colocated with
                                                                existing facilities owned by PNCC or FSMTC.
                                                                The extent of construction will need to be
                                                                determined. Due diligence will be undertaken
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                to determine whether or not there are legacy
                                                                issues (such as involuntary displacement,
                                                                grievances of lost assets etc). In the event of any
                                                                legacy issues a strategy to address them will be
                                                                prepared. If involuntary land acquisition and/or
                                                                resettlement are confirmed and specific Project
                                                                areas are known prior to appraisal a
                                                                Compensation and Resettlement Plan will be
                                                                prepared. When land acquisition and/or
                                                                involuntary resettlement are not confirmed or
                                                                specific Project areas are unknown prior to
                                                                appraisal, a Land Acquisition and Resettlement
                                                                Framework will be prepared.
                                                                Although any impacts are likely to be minimal/
                                                                temporary, there is potential for the customary
                                                                use right owners (land, fisheries) to be entitled
                                                                to compensation payments due to any temporary
                                                                interrupted access to their fishing grounds as a
                                                                result of the laying of the cable. ). The issue of
                                                                                                                                 linkage will be investigated to determine if
                                                                                                                                 there are linked activities as defined by the
                                                                                                                                 World Bank’s OP4.12, clause 4. If there are, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Task team and the Project Implementing Entity
                                                                                                                                 will agree on a due diligence approach and
                                                                                                                                 agree on how best to address any issues that
                                                                                                                                 might arise.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This policy is not trigerred

                                 Projects on International                                         No                            Submarine cable systems will be deployed in
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            the ocean, not in shared waterways (rivers,
                                                                                                                                 lakes).
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 29-Nov-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Draft TORs completed by client November 30, 2012. Revised TOR to be prepared by June 2013
                                      Commencement of Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Mitigation Plan: July 2013
                                      Draft report: October 2013
                                      Final report and disclosure: November 2013
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Natasha Beschorner
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Josefo Tuyor (RSA)                                                                                                   Date: 27-Oct-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Carlo Maria Rossotto (PMGR)                                                                                          Date: 27-Oct-2014
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
