                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA10297
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Feb-2014, 30-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:    P133116
                            Project Name:      China-Qinghai Xining Water Environment Management Project (P133116)
                            Task Team          Ximing Zhang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          20-Mar-2014                        Estimated   25-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEDDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Wastewater Collection and Transportation (60%), General water, sanitation and
                                              flood protection sector (30%), Agricultural extension and research (5%), Water
                                              supply (5%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (60%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service
                                              Delivery (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     246.60           Total Bank Financing:                 150.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   96.60
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     150.00
                              Total                                                                                     246.60
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to reduce water pollution and pilot potential sustainable reuse
                           of wastewater in Xining Municipality.



                                                                       Page 1 of 13
                         3. Project Description
                         The project will be implemented over a period of five years and will finance priority investments in
                         Xining Municipality. The project will consist of the following five components with a total
Public Disclosure Copy




                         estimated project base cost of US$ 237.5 million and total financial required USD$246.6 million,
                         including an International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loan of US$150
                         million: (a) construction of stormwater and wastewater collection systems; (b) comprehensive
                         stormwater management and river-bank environment restoration; (c) integrated gully and canal
                         improvement; (d) demonstration of treated wastewater reuse; and (e) project management and
                         capacity building. Annex 2 shows the detailed project description. Annex 7 shows the map of the
                         project activities.

                         Component A: Construction of stormwater and wastewater collection systems (estimated cost US
                         $139.8 million). This component will reduce water pollution by construction of 128 km of
                         wastewater and rain water collection pipes along rivers and urban wastewater distribution networks,
                         including (i) construction of 34 km of stormwater and wastewater collection pipes (DN800-DN1000)
                         from Datong Wastewater Treatment Plant to Ningda Road toll gate along Beichuan River for No. 5
                         Wastewater Treatment Plant; and construction of 16 km of stormwater and wastewater collection
                         pipes from Yangjiawan Village to Duoba along Xichuan River for No. 4 Wastewater Treatment
                         Plant; and (ii) construction of 34 km of wastewater collection pipes for No. 3 Wastewater Treatment
                         Plant, and the affiliated access road and other urban facilities , and construction of 44 km of
                         stormwater collection pipes in Beichuan Area.

                         Component B: Comprehensive stormwater management and river-bank environment restoration
                         (estimated cost US$ 35.9 million). This component will apply “Low-Impact Development”
                         strategies, greening and landscaping, to increase natural infiltration and reduce peak run-off and non-
                         point source of pollution to Beichuan River. The targeted area is a core urban area but with no sound
                         wastewater collection system and no environmental protection facilities. Many of the river banks
                         have been turned into waste disposal sites with building rubble, waste soils, and garbage being
Public Disclosure Copy




                         dumped causing serious pollution inflows to the Beichuan River during the rainy season, particularly
                         during the first sets of heavy rains. A systematic approach is being adopted to treat this area through
                         a set of project activities including (a) LID storm water management in Beichuan Area; and (b)
                         River-bank environment restoration along the banks of Beichuan River. Typical LID features, such
                         as increased vegetation covers, vegetative swales, bio-retention basins, permeable pavements, and
                         water re-use, will be incorporated into the storm-water management and rainwater harvesting system.
                         These investments are in line with the recent directives issued by the Ministry of Construction
                         (MOC) that requires the introduction of “low impact development” (LID) strategies to manage
                         stormwater when possible. Typical stream-bank restoration work includes residue soil cleaning, and
                         planting of diversified native vegetation along stream-banks; construction of porous walk path,
                         access roads and green byways; installation of lighting systems, environment sanitation facilities,
                         greening of the water supply catchment areas; and other environmental amenities. This will further
                         enhance the water quality in the receiving water body of Beichuan River.

                         Component C: Integrated gully and canal improvement (estimated cost US$28.7 million). This
                         component will stabilize gully/canal bank slopes and reduce BOD, COD, and TSS discharge into
                         surface water by improving the environment along canals and gullies. The main project activities
                         include (i) integrated improvement of 10.4 km Chaoyangdian Canal with wastewater collection
                         pipes, access road, affiliated structures and environment sanitation facilities; (ii) integrated
                         improvement of 0.9 km Liujia Gully with channel normalization, slope protection, and box culvert


                                                                      Page 2 of 13
                         construction; and (iii) integrated improvement of 0.9 km Shengou Gully with canal normalization,
                         slope protection, wastewater collection pipe construction, and environment sanitation facilities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component D: Wastewater reuse (estimated cost US$1.8 million). This component will pilot the
                         reuse of treated wastewater by construction of a transfer station and pipes, as well as Technical
                         Assistance (TA) in the areas of reclaimed wastewater policies and technologies. The project
                         activities will include: (i) construction of treated wastewater pumping station and affiliated
                         monitoring facilities with a capacity of 5,000 m3/day at No.5 Wastewater Treatment Plant (under
                         construction, to be commissioned in 2014) and approximately 5 km of water transmission pipes; and
                         (ii) technical assistance for study on economy and policy schemes for stimulating reclaimed
                         wastewater reuse, and study on impact of reclaimed wastewater reuse on domestic soil and
                         vegetation. This component is important to the province and municipality in taking the lead in the
                         determination of the most cost effective methods of reclaiming water in such a water scarce region.
                         With the ever widening gap between water resources and water demands in this region, it is
                         extremely important to assist the municipality in developing its roadmap towards water reclamation
                         and reuse, in line with the 2030 objectives set out in the Urban Development Strategy.

                         Component E: Project management and capacity building (estimated cost US$31.3 million). This
                         component is intended to improve Xining’s capacity in integrated water environment management.
                         This component includes (i) project management activities: construction supervision, and
                         Management Information System (MIS); (ii) consulting services: study on Monitoring and
                         Evaluation (M&E); technical support on integrated water and environmental management, reclaimed
                         wastewater policies, regulations and technical issues; and technical and management workshops ;
                         and (iii) domestic and overseas training and study tours.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project is located in Xining, the capital of Qinghai Province in the western part of
                         China.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Xining is located in the eastern part of Qinghai province and in the Huang River Valley of the
                         Qinghai-Tibet Plateau with an average altitude of over 2,200 meters. Huangshui River arises in
                         Haiyan County of Qinghai Province and discharges through Qinghai and Gansu before confluences
                         with the Yellow River on Hekou Town of Gansu. The total length of Huangshui River is 374 km.
                         Huangshui River flows through Xining from west to east. Beichuan River is a tributary of Huangshui
                         River, which is originated from Datong County of Qinghai Province and flows into the Huangshui
                         River at Xining, with a total length of 154 km. The urban population is about 1.2 million
                         concentrating on the built up areas in a total size of 104 km2. All the physical activities are in the
                         urban and peri-urban area of the Xining Municipality. The project will not involve any international
                         river.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Songling Yao (GURDR)
                         Yongli Wang (GURDR)
                         Feng Ji (GENDR)
                         Yan Sun (GWADR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)


                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes           See section II A(1)
                         BP 4.01
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            A review of the critical natural habitats, including
                                                                         protected wetlands in Qinghai Province has
                                                                         indicated that all the national and provincial listed
                                                                         significant natural habitats are well far away from
                                                                         project affected area and that no critical natural
                                                                         habitat will be affected by the project activities.
                                                                         The riverine areas where the environmental
                                                                         restoration activities and wastewater collection
                                                                         pipelines are to be constructed do not support
                                                                         important aquatic habitats or fish species that are
                                                                         economically or ecologically significant and do
                                                                         not contain any significant wetlands. The project
                                                                         design includes infrastructure design measures to
                                                                         ensure that impacts to these areas are minimized.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            This project will not have impacts on the health
                                                                         and quality of forests; nor affect the rights and
                                                                         welfare of people and their level of dependence
                                                                         upon or interaction with forests, nor aim to bring
                                                                         about changes in the management, protection, or
                                                                         utilization of natural forest or plantations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           See section II A(1).

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The project will not adversely affect sites with
                         BP 4.11                                         archeological, paleontological, historical,
                                                                         religious, or unique natural values. Chance finds
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         during construction might occur and relevant
                                                                         clauses are included in all construction contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           Although most project activities are located in
                                                                         urban Xining city, a few ones will and would go
                                                                         to Datong and Huangshui counties, where there
                                                                         are ethnic minority villages. So the policy is
                                                                         triggered.

                                                                         Because specific locations of these activities, like
                                                                         some sewers, are not clear or subject to change in
                                                                         the next stages, the particular impacts on any
                                                                         ethnic minority villages could not be identified at
                                                                         this stage. Therefore, an ethnic minority
                                                                         development framework (EMDF) was prepared to
                                                                         guide any possible ethnic minority development
                                                                         plan (EMDP) in the project implementation.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The four project components involve physical
                         4.12                                            activities, which need land acquisition. The
                                                                         activities consist of construction of reclaimed


                                                                 Page 4 of 13
                                                                             water plant, roads, installation of sewers and
                                                                             reclaimed water pipe, rehabilitation of river bank,
                                                                             as well as treatment of some gullies. Furthermore,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             five activities, linking to the project, entail land
                                                                             related issues. So Involuntary Resettlement will
                                                                             be triggered.

                                                                             Most resettlement impacts by the project and
                                                                             linkage activities can be clearly now scoped,
                                                                             investigated, planned or reviewed, for which a RP
                                                                             was prepared. At the same time, resettlement
                                                                             impacts for some sewers and stormwater pipes
                                                                             could not be determined and so a RPF was
                                                                             developed.

                                                                             The RP not only cover resettlement to be done in
                                                                             next stage, but also resettlement completed or
                                                                             ongoing currently, for which resettlement
                                                                             planning, due diligence review or monitoring
                                                                             were conducted in the project preparation.

                                                                             The project directly acquired land 2.4 mu
                                                                             permanently and 403 mu temporarily and will not
                                                                             cause any house or structure demolition.
                                                                             However, the linkage activities have resulted in
                                                                             permanent land acquisition by 3615 mu with
                                                                             impacts on 6761 persons, including relocation of
                                                                             1348 households with 6495 persons.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No             This is an environmental project, the project will
                                                                             not finance construction of new or rehabilitation
                                                                             of any existing dams (or related facilities) as
                                                                             defined under this policy.
                            Projects on International         No             No project activities will be located in
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                             international waterways. The policy is not
                                                                             triggered and no actions are required.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No              No project activities will be located in disputed
                            7.60                                             areas. The policy is not triggered and no actions
                                                                             are required.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is classified a Category A project, and triggers Environmental Assessment (OP4.01)
                              and Pest Management (OP4.09). EA and EMP have been prepared in accordance with Chinese EA
                              regulations and the Bank safeguards policies.


                                                                     Page 5 of 13
                         Environmental Assessment (OP4.01): Xining PMO has engaged an EA consulting institute (i.e.
                         Lanzhou University which is accredited the First Class in EA) to conduct the environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                         assessment in accordance with Chinese EA regulations and the Bank safeguards policies. The EA
                         shows that there is no ecological sensitive (e.g. nature habitat, nature reserves etc.) or culturally
                         sensitive site in the project area of influence. The EA includes analysis on construction related
                         impacts, operational impacts, potential risks, cumulative and indirect impacts. The project will
                         bring about overall environmental and social benefits, such as (i) leading to reduction of sediments
                         and pollution loads discharging into Huangshui River; (ii) conserving water resources by the use
                         of reclaimed water; (iii) reducing non-point sources pollution by the application of LID practices;
                         and (iv) contributing to the improvement of public health and visual quality. With respect to the
                         cumulative impacts, the project itself is a set of mitigation measures to address the existing
                         environmental problems (i.e. water pollution, and lack of water resources). Key Valued Ecosystem
                         Components under consideration include water quality and water resources. The EA determines
                         that the project will not adversely affect these VECs, but alleviate the pollution discharged to the
                         rivers.

                         Adverse impacts during construction are related to construction activities such as disposal of spoil,
                         soil erosion, nuisance of dust and noise, and disturbance to traffic and local communities etc. The
                         construction related impacts will be short-term, temporary and site-specific, and can be readily
                         managed with good construction management. Adverse impacts during operation mainly include
                         traffic noise nuisance, vehicle emission, and road safety associated with the newly built roads. The
                         improvement of environment and infrastructure may increase land value, and accelerate
                         urbanization process in the project areas, especially the Beichuan Area. Risk assessment covers
                         leakage of sewer pipelines, and road safety, but these risks are minor. The pilot use of reclaimed
                         water may have some concerns on public health, soil salinization, toxicity of heavy metals, and
                         nutrients overload into groundwater. But these impacts are not considered significant and can be
                         effectively reduced to acceptable levels through good design and specific mitigation measures
                         proposed in the EMP(see II.A(4) below).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management (OP4.09). The re-vegetation of Beichuan River Bank and the gullies likely
                         result in the use of pesticides, although none will be procured as part of the project. This raises
                         issues of improper use of pesticides. A Pest Management Plan, as part of the ESMP, has been
                         developed.

                         Social side

                         The project will generates environment benefit for the citizens and directly promote social capital
                         and physical capital of the citizens, via providing sanitary services, using reclaimed water,
                         channeling rain water, improving roads, promoting riverside landscape, etc. On the other hand, the
                         project probably results in some adverse impacts such as land acquisition and resettlement will be
                         entailed by construction of the above activities, and further social disturbance during construction
                         period, etc. Further in some project areas there are ethnic minority villages, which may get impacts
                         from the project. So the Involuntary Resettlement and Indigenous people policies were triggered.

                         The four project components involving physical activities need land for construction. Component
                         1, Construction of storm water and wastewater collection systems, and Component 3, Integrated
                         gully and canal improvement, will need land acquisition, while Component 2, Comprehensive
                         Stormwater management and river-bank environmental restoration, and Component 4, Promotion

                                                                    Page 6 of 13
                          of treated wastewater reuse, will use land acquired in linkage activities. The project directly
                          acquired land 2.4 mu permanently and 403 mu temporarily and will not cause any house or
                          structure demolition. However, there are five linkage activities consisting of NO.3, 4, and 5
Public Disclosure Copy




                          WWTPs, Yinjiagou Landfill and Beichuan Plot Development Project, which have resulted in
                          permanent land acquisition by 3615 mu with impacts on 6761 persons, including relocation of
                          1348 households with 6495 persons.

                           Furthermore, the project probably to some extent generates social disturbance in project
                           construction period, i mpacts on gender and other vulnerable groups.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The improvement of environment and infrastructure may increase land value, and accelerate
                           urbanization process (e.g. attract people and future investments for recreation, residential,
                           commercial buildings) in the project areas, especially the Beichuan Area.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Alternative analysis has been conducted in the EA and feasibility study, including storm water
                           treatment options, scale of reclaimed water facility, and the “without-project” situation.

                           Measures to avoid or minimize resettlement impacts were adopted in the project preparation stage,
                           including pipe-jacking technology to avoid house demolition, sewer/pipe installation by section to
                           minimize construction disturbance scope and period, utilization of unused land to avoid farmland
                           use, etc.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environmental Measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Based on the EA, a stand-alone Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been
                          developed to avoid, minimize, mitigate and compensate the potential adverse impacts. The ESMP
                          specify mitigation and enhance measures for the project activities, including that (i) Environmental
                          Code of Practices (ECOPs) for civil work contractors will be included into the bidding documents
                          and civil work contracts; (ii) LID practices for storm water management and road safety design
                          have been incorporated into the project design; (iii) the induced impacts such as waste and
                          wastewater generated in the Beichuan Area have been taken into account in the project design and
                          in the ESMP. The land use plan for Beichuan area has been updated and approved by local
                          government; and (iv) with respect to the concerns on the pilot use of the reclaimed water, the water
                          will be used for watering the areas along the newly built roads. The potential negative impacts will
                          be mitigated to an acceptable level by adopting the well-proved wastewater treatment technology
                          for the WWTPs and by equipping with disinfect units. The WWTP effluent will meet strict water
                          quality standards (e.g. TP, TN, TDS) after disinfection. A specific TA activity –impacts of
                          reclaimed water on soil and vegetation is included in the project. Monitoring on the effect of the
                          reclaimed water on the soil and vegetation is included in the ESMP. This arrangement is
                          considered adequate.

                          Three WWTPs (one in operation, two under construction) will receive sewage collected via sewers
                          to be financed under the project. As part of EA process, due diligence for the WWTPs and their
                          sludge disposal at the existing Yinjiagou Sanitary Landfill have been conducted confirming that


                                                                    Page 7 of 13
                         the WWTPs are in compliance with Chinese regulations.

                         With respect to the Pest Management, the Project will (i) be vegetating the areas using non-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         invasive species; and tree species selection procedures have been developed; (ii) promote the use
                         of biological or environmental control methods; and (iii) improve local capacity to apply
                         knowledge to minimize use and to safely and properly apply pesticides.

                         ESMP implementation will be managed by Xining PMO. An environmental and social
                         management unit will be established in the PMO with dedicated safeguards staff. Civil work
                         contractors and supervision companies will be required to assign qualified environmental staff to
                         their team to ensure effective implementation of the ESMP. PMO, under assistance of on-site
                         environmental supervisors, local EPB and external monitoring institution, will supervise the
                         implementation of ESMP. To improve local capacity, the ESMP proposes capacity training
                         activities for civil work contractors, PMO, environmental supervisors, and monitoring institutions
                         etc.. The ESMP also specifies monitoring plan, environmental supervision and the budget for the
                         ESMP implementation.

                         Social Measures

                         With Hohai university assistance, the PMO has prepared a RP/RPF, an EMDF, and a social
                         assessment report to handle potential social issues. For the resettlement related issues under the
                         five linkage activities, due diligence review was conducted and documented in the RP for
                         resettlement undertaken prior to Bank involvement in the project. Further for the ongoing
                         resettlement implementation in a linkage activity, Beichuan Plot Development Project, an external
                         resettlement monitoring report was prepared also. All the documents were reviewed by the Bank
                         TT several times and the final draft versions are found compliant with the Bank requirements.

                         Involuntary Resettlement: Resettlement to be done under the Component 1 and 3. Only some land
                         will be used for the project construction, among which 2.4 mu collective land will be permanently
Public Disclosure Copy




                         acquired with impacts on 35 households, and 329 mu collective land and 75 mu state-owned land
                         will be temporarily acquired, with impacts on 91 households by the collective land use. For the
                         permanent land acquisition, resettlement measure provide for full replacement cost which includes
                         cash compensation based on latest land price determined by Qinghai Provincial Government. As
                         for the temporary land use, compensation for collective land covers annual land output
                         compensation plus land restoration fee and compensation for state-owned land is to restore the
                         land after use. There is no need to provide social security program for the affected due to minor
                         land loss.

                         Component 2 and 4 will use land previously acquired by two linkage activities, resulting in
                         permanent land acquisition by 3420 mu with relocation of 1382 households, among which one
                         activity, the Fifth WWTP, almost completed its resettlement. A due diligence review in the RP
                         was conducted and concluded that 64 mu collective farmland was acquired in early 2013 and
                         affected 34 households with 135 persons in Shuansupu Village, and that resettlement packages,
                         covering cash compensation, on job training and social security program, was completed, and that
                         the interviewed villagers were satisfied with the resettlement implementation. The review
                         identified the social security program was not fully completed, and suggested to continue
                         monitoring in the RP and in the project external monitoring arrangement.

                         On the ongoing resettlement in the Beichuan Plot Development Project, a due diligence review in

                                                                   Page 8 of 13
                         the RP was conducted and found that the total resettlement under the activity consists of 3357 mu
                         collective land acquisition with impacts on 6495 persons in 1348 households, and on 38 small
                         businesses, who will lose all their farmland, house and business, that 1343 houses, 724 mu land
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and 38 small businesses were acquired or demolished. The report also indicated that all the
                         affected households will obtain replacement residential house by 50 m2 per person plus
                         commercial building areas by 20 m2 per person within the residential areas helping livelihood
                         restoration. The remaining resettlement work covers relocation of 5 households, land acquisition
                         for 2633 mu, social security program for all the affected and replacement house construction. For
                         ensuring full restoration of the affected, an external resettlement monitor was required to start
                         external resettlement monitoring on this activity, and the first external resettlement monitoring
                         report was prepared as a document of social preparation package. The monitoring report done to
                         date by Hohai University concluded that all the affected was fully investigated and consulted, that
                         the compensation was compliant with relevant laws and was fully disbursed to the affected
                         villages in a transparent manner, that the land taking and house demolition was done only after the
                         full payment, and that relevant job training program for those who lost land were freely provided.
                         At the same time, the monitoring also indicated that social security program for those who lost
                         land should be started as early as possible, that land compensation should be paid to the affected
                         households as soon as possible from the village committees, that the PMO should ensure timely
                         completion and transparent reallocation of the replacement houses, and that the PMO should
                         provide restoration choice for the affected businesses, moving to development zone or rebuilding
                         in other places. These recommendations have been adopted and committed by Xining Government
                         in its commitment letter. The monitor will follow up these issues in next stage.

                         As for the other three linkage activities, due diligence reviews were also conducted and
                         documented in the RP, which found that: i) 133 mu collective land for No.3 WWTP was acquired
                         prior to 2000 and the relevant resettlement was fully done and there is no pending issues found; ii)
                         Yinjiagou Landfill utilized unused stated-owned land and there is no resettlement issue; iii) No. 4
                         WWTP acquired 62 mu land covering 52 mu collective land with impacts on 32 households with
                         131 persons and 6 agencies. The review concluded the resettlement was satisfactory with except of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         social security program, and that the external resettlement monitoring should cover the
                         implementation of the social security program in next stage.

                         Monitoring and grievance redress arrangement: Monitoring mechanism including internal and
                         external monitoring was designed and agreed in the RP, with contents such as institutional
                         arrangement, monitoring indicators/frequency, monitoring report format, etc.. On the ongoing
                         resettlement under Beilun Plot Project, Hohai University has been entrusted and started and will
                         continue the external monitoring. A complete grievance redress system was designed in the RP
                         including elements such as responsible agencies, contact information, etc..

                         Ethnic Minority: There are ethnic minority villages present in project areas, especially in suburb of
                         Xining City, but the particular impacts on any ethnic minority villages could not be identified at
                         this stage because specific locations of such activities as some sewers are not clear at this stage or
                         subject to change in the next stages.. Therefore, an ethnic minority development framework
                         (EMDF) was prepared to guide any possible ethnic minority development plan (EMDP) in the
                         project implementation.

                         Other social issues: the standalone SA focused on evaluation on affordability of wastewater fee,
                         gender issue, among others. The evaluation indicated water related to fee takes about 1.56 percent
                         of average household income, which is affordable, but for poor households the percentage is about

                                                                    Page 9 of 13
                          2.44. So the SA recommended that the subsidies for poor households should be maintained after
                          the project. On the gender issue, the SA in its Chapter 8 described baseline information of women,
                          identified demand of and impacts/risks on women in the project construction and operation, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                          prepared an action plan on women issue. The action plan includes employment opportunities
                          provision for women, right protection for women in resettlement process and provision of lighting
                          and other facilities in the project for women.

                          Xining has an ongoing Bank financed project. For this proposed project, a Project Leading Group
                          (PLG), which is chaired by the Mayor of Xining and comprises senior officials from relevant
                          municipal agencies, has been established to oversee the preparation and implementation of the
                          Project. A Project Management Office (PMO) has been established in Huangshui River Integrated
                          Management Committee in Xining. The PMO will be responsible for project management,
                          detailed designs, social and environment safeguard preparation, monitoring and evaluation etc. in
                          accordance with Bank guidelines. The PMO will include adequate dedicated staff for overall social
                          and environment management. The PMO and its consultants received safeguard trainings in the
                          project preparation, and will continue to receive more training and technical guidance during
                          project implementation.

                           The social work under the project involves several components managed by various government
                           authorities, so the coordination among the involving stakeholders is quite important. Therefore, a
                           division chief was required to be assigned to effectively coordinate the social work. Further a
                           resettlement information system covering all the components will be established to assist
                           resettlement supervision and monitoring. Training programs on project preparation were
                           conducted in the project preparation, and relevant training on resettlement issues were covered in
                           the RP and will be conducted in next stage, expended to relevant staff from involved authorities
                           such as bureaus of Land, House, Labor to enable them understand the WB policy and adequate
                           resettlement implementation. Further, Hohai University was engaged to work on the social
                           aspects, which provided valuable assistance and guidance to the PMO in the social document
                           preparation and capacity building. Still another, in project implementation stage, an experienced
Public Disclosure Copy




                           external resettlement monitor will be entrusted to provide more technical assistance to help the
                           PMO strengthen its capacity of resettlement implementation and monitoring.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders include projected affected people, experts, and government agencies.
                           During the EA preparation, two rounds of public consultation were undertaken: the first round at
                           the beginning of EA preparation (EIA TOR) in May 2013, and the second round in September
                           2013 after the first draft EA and ESMP were prepared. Consultations were carried out through
                           questionnaires, interviews and meetings with project affected people, experts, and government
                           agencies. Local people generally supported this project and provided specific comments, such as
                           (i) construction impacts on local communities; and reclaimed water quality. Main feedback and
                           concerns from the public have been addressed in the project design and the ESMP’s mitigation
                           measures. In accordance with the Bank’s information disclosure policy, prior to project appraisal,
                           the latest safeguards documents, including EA and ESMP, were made available in the project
                           areas (e.g.village committees) and are accessible at PMO. The documents were disclosed on the
                           website of the Xining municipal government on December 5, 2013, and at the Bank InfoShop on
                           Dec 24, 2013.

                          All stakeholders related to the project were engaged in consultation process in the EMDF


                                                                    Page 10 of 13
                           development, resettlement planning and social assessment, via media, information sheet, meetings,
                           group discussion, questionnaires, etc. All the documents, especially resettlement plan, were
                           explored based on the consultation process, disclosed among the affected, and modified in line
Public Disclosure Copy




                           with feedbacks. The documents were locally disclosed with an announcement on local newspaper
                           on Dec 18, 2013, and sent to Infoshop on Dec 24, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      17-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            05-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      17-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            18-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      17-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            05-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment


                                                                   Page 11 of 13
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?



                                                                    Page 12 of 13
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Ximing Zhang
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                          Date: 29-Aug-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Ousmane Dione (SM)                           Date: 30-Aug-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 13 of 13
