                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC6388

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                            Project ID:      P148604
                            Project Name:      Accelerating Universal Access to Early and Effective Tuberculosis Care
                                               (P148604)
                            Task Team          Patrick M. Mullen
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                           Estimated        14-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: SASHN                                Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Health system performance (30%), Tuberculosis (70%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       200.00               Total Bank Financing:           100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          100.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 100.00
                              Total                                                                       200.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           To expand access to and improve diagnosis and treatment of drug-sensitive and drug-resistant
                           tuberculosis for patients who seek care from the public and private sectors.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed IDA financing will contribute to India's National Strategic Plan for TB Control,
                           comprising three components:
                         Component 1 (New strategies to reach more tuberculosis patients with earlier and more effective care
                         in the public and private sectors): This component will support new strategies designed to boost the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         number of TB patients who receive timely and effective care, including: (i) supporting patients who
                         seek care in the private sector; (ii) expanding urban TB services; (iii) improving ease of access to
                         diagnosis; (iv) leveraging information technology; and (v) improving knowledge of TB in India.

                         Component 2 (Scale-up and improve diagnosis and treatment of drug-resistant tuberculosis): This
                         component will support expansion of multi-drug resistant TB (MDR-TB) diagnosis and treatment
                         services, including: (i) increasing capacity to manage and deliver MDR-TB services; (ii) expanding
                         MDR-TB diagnostic capacity; (iii) improving the quality of MDR-TB care through better diagnosis;
                         and (iv) developing MDR-TB treatment services.

                         Component 3 (Expand public tuberculosis services integrated with the primary health care system):
                         This component will focus on expanding and improving public sector TB services closely integrated
                         with the government primary health care system. The national TB program will become fully aligned
                         with the National Health Mission's implementation structure within state health systems. This will
                         mean increased management and service delivery capacity so that public TB services become more
                         available and that the new strategies, notably expansion of MDR-TB care, can be effectively
                         managed at decentralized levels.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented country-wide, in the 28 states and 7 union territories of India.
                         Because socially vulnerable, poor and tribal populations are more at risk of TB, the TB program will
                         disproportionately benefit such groups. The TB program has taken special measures to support TB
                         services in districts with large tribal and poor populations and plans to expand TB services for the
                         urban poor during the project period. TB diagnostic and treatment services are integrated in the
                         primary health care system and follow medical waste management policies and procedures of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         general health system. Treatment of multi-drug resistant TB (MDR-TB) includes inpatient care for
                         which the program is supporting establishment of MDR-TB wards in tertiary care hospitals. This
                         includes airborne infection control measures for the protection of health care staff and other patients.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Revised National Tuberculosis Program (RNTCP) is a part of the National Health Mission
                         (NHM), previously known as the National Rural health Mission (NRHM), and TB diagnostic and
                         treatment services are integrated in the government health system nationwide. As such, TB services
                         subscribe to the Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS) (1) and Infection Management and
                         Environment Plan (IMEP) (2) prescribed by the NHM for all its disease control programs
                         implemented in public health facilities. RNTCP is also applying guidelines on airborne infection
                         control in inpatient settings. (3) Monitoring mechanisms to review implementation of the IPHS and
                         IMEP are institutionalized by way of ongoing review missions and periodic third party assessments
                         including annual joint missions involving international partners. In 2012, the program did an
                         assessment of biomedical waste management implementation in a sample of states and TB services.
                         RNTCP has prepared and disseminated detailed guidelines and training manuals for staff and
                         workers, and these were successfully implemented during the current ongoing project, as found
                         during the assessment undertaken. These activities will be further strengthened over the current
                         project.
                           RNTCP, as part of the National Health Mission, has required systems in place to plan and implement
                           social management plans as a part of the overall NRHM program. RNTCP continues to implement a
                           Tribal Action Plan adopted in 2005, (4) and has undertaken social assessments in 2005 (5) and 2011
Public Disclosure Copy




                           to update its social action plans for the proposed IDA financing. The updated social acton plan which
                           will include the IP framework is primarily based on the the RNTCP's 2012 National Strategic Plan
                           which focuses on equitable provision of services to all sections of the society and contains specific
                           measures to improve TB services for marginalized and vulnerable groups, including the poor, tribal
                           groups and urban slum dwellers. Towards this, the program has allocated larger resources to reach
                           the poor and vulnerable, introduced innovative mechanisms for improved targeting and incentives for
                           strengthening demand for services.

                           (1) http://nrhm.gov.in/about-nrhm/guidelines/indian-public-health-standards.html
                           (2) http://nrhm.gov.in/about-nrhm/guidelines/nrhm-guidelines/infection-management-and-
                           environment-plan-imep.html
                           (3) http://www.tbcindia.nic.in/pdfs/
                           Guidelines_on_Airborne_Infection_Control_April2010Provisional.pdf
                           (4) http://www.tbcindia.nic.in/pdfs/RNTCP%20II%20Tribal%20Action%20Plan_10th%20May%
                           2005.pdf
                           (5) http://www.tbcindia.nic.in/pdfs/Social%20Assessment%20Study%20for%20RNTCP%20-%
                           20Final%20Report%20-%20ORG%20CSR.pdf
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Ruma Tavorath (SASDI)
                           Satya N. Mishra (SASDS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             Environmental and infection control issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                           BP 4.01                                             associated with tuberculosis stem from clinical
                                                                               and infectious waste materials (primarily sharps
                                                                               including needles and slides and sputum cups)
                                                                               generated from diagnosis and treatment
                                                                               services. Inpatient treatment of MDR-TB
                                                                               requires airborne infection control measures.
                                                                               These issues are well defined, site-specific and
                                                                               easily mitigated if implemented in a systematic
                                                                               and sustained manner during service delivery
                                                                               activities. However, with inadequate attention
                                                                               and poor management, these issues can pose as
                                                                               a severe public health risk.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                           BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     Yes                           The project aims to support equitable provision
                                                                                                                                 of diagnosis and treatment services to all
                                                                                                                                 sections of the society while reaching out to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 marginalized and vulnerable groups, who are
                                                                                                                                 more vulnerable to the disease due to their
                                                                                                                                 health and socio-economic conditions and suffer
                                                                                                                                 maximum adverse consequences due to high
                                                                                                                                 costs of disease treatment and productivity loss.
                                                                                                                                 It is essential to address socio-economic,
                                                                                                                                 cultural and health system barriers that affect
                                                                                                                                 utilization of diagnostic and treatment services
                                                                                                                                 by these populations, including in poor/
                                                                                                                                 backward/tribal districts and urban slum
                                                                                                                                 dwellers. OP 4.10 is triggered in view of the
                                                                                                                                 impact on tribal populations and accordingly a
                                                                                                                                 Tribal Action Plan is prepared and implemented
                                                                                                                                 with supplementary social inclusion measures
                                                                                                                                 for other vulnerable groups such as those
                                                                                                                                 affected by HIV/AIDS, urban slum dwellers,
                                                                                                                                 and others.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The TB program may support minor
                                 4.12                                                                                            rehabilitation of existing health facilities, with
                                                                                                                                 no impact on their footprint, so that the project
                                                                                                                                 will have no involuntary resettlement impact.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 22-Nov-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Consultations are being held during November 2013 to update safeguards assessments done in
                                      2011-12 as part of preparation of additional financing to the previous project.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Patrick M. Mullen

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Zia Al Jalaly (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 26-Nov-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Julie McLaughlin (SM)                                                                                                Date: 26-Nov-2013



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
