                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA1061
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Dec-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Togo                               Project ID:    P149277
                            Project Name:      Togo: Mining Governance and Development Project Preparation - Phase I
                                               (P149277)
                            Task Team          Brigitte Marie Khadidja B
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       08-Dec-2014                           Estimated   26-Feb-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GEEDR                                  Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other Mining and Extractive Industries (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Other environment and natural resources management (40%), Managing for
                                              development results (35%), Other public sector governance (20 %), Export
                                              development and competitiveness (5%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      15.00           Total Bank Financing:                  15.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 15.00
                              Total                                                                                       15.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To strengthen the capacity of key institutions to manage the minerals sector, improve the conditions
                           for increased investments in and revenues from mining, and facilitate an effective and efficient
                           spending of mining revenues.

                                                                       Page 1 of 12
                         The specific development objectives and activities of a possible second project would be defined on
                         the basis of the experiences and lessons learned from the implementation of this Project.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project's design is well informed by prior policy dialogue and several analytical studies as well
                         as preparatory work completed by the Government, independently and with Bank support. The
                         proposed project is consistent with the overall objective of developing the mining sector in a context
                         of transparency and good governance. The implementation of the project will contribute ultimately to
                         a major overhaul of the mining sector in its quest to be one of the main pillars on which the
                         government intends to use to achieve the objectives of boosting growth on a sustainable basis.

                         Project phasing is expected to encompass the following broad principles:(i) implementation in the
                         first 18 months of the Project of activities for which ToR and Technical Specifications have largely
                         been completed during Project preparation, such as Mining Cadastre, GIS and PIC components, the
                         setting-up of a Mineral Production Monitoring and Oversight Committee, ASM support, transaction
                         advisory services for mining, SESA and others as mentioned; (ii) implementation at mid-term of the
                         cross-sectoral components and follow-up activities, such as follow-up to Mineral Sector Master Plan
                         (which is expected to be completed in 2017); and (iii) implementation of activities such as
                         transaction advisory services and technical support for Government agencies and departments early
                         in the Project and continuing throughout the Project under retainer contracts with firms (time-based
                         contracts for the duration of the Project).

                         The project has four components, each with sub-components. The components are (A) Mining
                         Governance Capacity Building and Reform; (B) EI Sector Institutional Management Capacity
                         Building; (C) Promoting Shared Prosperity and Sustainability; and (D) Project Management and
                         Coordination. The total cost of the project is US$15M. The project is entirely funded from IDA
                         resources.

                         Component A: Mining Governance Capacity Building and Reform (total cost US$3.40 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component is the fundamental barriers to promotion of mining activities in Togo. The objective
                         of this component is to support first set of indebt reforms in Togo’s mines and minerals sector to
                         optimize sector revenues and including through the following:

                         A.1 Mining Cadastre and National Geological Database (US$1.00 million): Setting-up a modern
                         mining cadaster, cadastral procedures and integrating the mining cadastral database and GIS system
                         including building capacity and modernizing title registry system at the central cadastre office in
                         Lome. The project will assist the Ministry of Mines in establishing a national database (i.e.,
                         Geological Information System, GIS) that will allow for storage, management and assessment of the
                         geological information. Actual funding of the geophysical and geological surveys over selected areas
                         as well as the production of thematic geologic and metallogenic maps of Togo will be funded during
                         Phase II or by other donors. It will assist the Ministry of Mines in establishing a national database (i.
                         e., Geological Information System, GIS) that will allow for storage, management and assessment of
                         the geological information of Togo; and in ( ii) developing a modern mining cadastre. The two
                         services will be offered as a One-Stop-Shop for the Investor, by the MME.

                         A.2. Transaction Advisory Services for Large-Scale Mining Operations and Related Infrastructure
                         (US$700,000): Provision of technical, legal economic and financial advice to the Recipient's
                         representatives, including review of feasibility studies, production plans, for mining and associated


                                                                       Page 2 of 12
                         infrastructure development plans, drafting of mining and ancillary infrastructure development
                         agreements.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A.3. Mineral Assets Evaluation and Tendering (US$400,000): Setting up detailed procedures for
                         mineral assets assessments and tendering procedures including criteria for selecting appropriate
                         targets for tendering.

                         A.4. Revenue Generation and Management (US$500,000): Design and implementation of a technical
                         support plan for Ministry of Finance and the Revenue Authority.

                         A.5. Creation of Public Information Center on Extractives in Togo (US$800,000): The application of
                         international principles and standards of transparency and accountability would increase the
                         likelihood of the sector contributing to Togo’s development. This requires involvement,
                         participation, and a sustained commitment on the part of citizens to obtain and manage information
                         on operations in the sector and their impact. Access to information is a key factor in development.
                         The aim of the present work is to prepare a development plan for the creation of an extractive
                         industries public information center in Togo. The center would be based in Lome and would
                         encourage interested citizens, companies, and civil society groups to obtain information on the
                         extractive industries, their impact, and best practices. The center could also provide information on
                         EI contracts, mining titles, and include the mining cadaster and would be hosted in the One-Stop-
                         Shop along with the Cadaster and the National Geological Database. The proposed PIC would make
                         available information on the social impact of the industry, including the impact on living
                         environment; and on the development of mining communities and other effects of the mining sector.
                         The center could provide maps of mining areas, socio-economic indicators, mineral reserves, etc.It
                         could provide printed materials, mineral and related sciences, law, CSR and economics books (as
                         well as information on-line (internet, database). The center would constitute an ideal forum for
                         dialogue and training.

                         The project will fund the feasibility study (development plan) that will include a cost estimate and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         technical and financial proposals for the actual establishment of the center. The study will also
                         provide a description of the roles and responsibilities of the various parties and the different products
                         and services to be provided, including some user-pay products that will support the sustainability of
                         the center. From an operational standpoint, the types of tools needed for the center will require the
                         definition of terms and conditions that will ensure sound technical, operational, and financial
                         management. As well, the project will provide an estimate of the annual budget needed to ensure the
                         long-term maintenance of the center.

                         Component B: EI Sector Institutional Management Capacity Building (total cost US$3.30 million)

                         This component will address the limited capacity of the current Government's sector management,
                         monitoring its governance performance and enforcement of rules of law. In this regards, the project
                         aims at: (i) carrying on with a re-organization and clear definitions of roles and respective functions
                         of public institutions in charge of the daily management of mining activities (ii) building capacity for
                         contract negotiation and portfolio’s management, and (iii) strengthening the Ministry of Mines
                         ability to better coordinate and to monitor SNPT’s activities., and (iv) developing human resources in
                         the mining sector through targeted training. Particularly regarding human resources capacity, the
                         project will build on the existing Earth Sciences Faculty at the University of Lomé and aim at
                         improving the course curriculum to strengthen the mine development functions. Also, the project
                         plans to train nationals in environmental monitoring and supervision of mine’s activity in order to

                                                                       Page 3 of 12
                         strengthen ANGE’s capacity in this regard.

                         The objective of Component B is to support strengthening the capacity of the Recipient's major
Public Disclosure Copy




                         institutions engaged in development and governance of the mining sector to allow them to execute
                         their mandates in a way that is conducive to investments while ensuring that safeguards and safety
                         standards are met in accordance with international standards, including through the following.

                         B.1 Capacities Building for Technical Departments of MME (US$600,000): Under this sub-
                         component, capacity building and technical assistance to key oversight public institutions will be
                         based on a thorough organizational audit financed under the Project Preparation Facility (PPF).
                         Follow-up support will comprise restructuring, revision of administration and communication
                         procedures; and staffing programs, works, equipment, and training. The program will mainly support
                         the MME and key institutions (DNGM, DNDP, etc.) by providing them with organizational re-
                         engineering (when needed), capacity building, and light infrastructure rehabilitation. This component
                         will also aim at:

                         •       Reinforcing the MME’s function of reviewing and reporting on activities by license holders
                         and their compliance with the agreed work plans.
                         •       Enhancing performance of MME's function of managing the State participation in EI
                         developments
                         •       Revising the definition of MME's mandate and functions as stated above and building its
                         capacity to assess and manage the risks associated with its participation in mining concessions in
                         accordance with its mandate.

                         B.2. Improving MME’s Coordination of SNPT’s Activities (US$300,000): Improving the SNPT's
                         capacity to manage the core functions within its mandate, including equipping and building capacity
                         of the operations and office in SNPT’s headquarter office in the city of Kpeme and SNPT’s mining
                         sites.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B.3.Strengthening SNPT’s Capacity to Support Governance Reform (US$600,000): Assisting SNPT
                         in the formulation and implementation of policy decisions, and in the preparation for investment
                         decisions, to support the Recipient's vision for the development of SNPT’s phosphate assets.
                         Updating SNPT’s phosphate development policies; and (c) building MME’s capacity for assessing
                         and structuring potential PPP arrangements for SNPT’s infrastructure development.

                         B.4. Strengthening Tax Collection Mechanisms (US$500,000): The current institutional set-up in
                         Togo would require great reinforcement of the government tax administration departments and
                         strengthening of tax collection and revenue collection mechanisms in order to improve institutional
                         governance and revenue management transparency by the State. As other donors are already
                         supporting this link of the EITI++ value chain, the proposed Project will complement them where
                         needed and fill the gaps. Initial activities include linking up with the new Mining Legislation Review
                         technical commission and EITI MSG to gather an inventory of mining sector related taxes and
                         procedures and to complete a modeling of fiscal projections for specific mine and EI sites, including
                         SNPT. A future project could provide additional support to tax collection agencies to address
                         identified main capacity building and resource needs.

                         B.5. Enhancing Environmental and Social Management of Mining Industries (US$800,000): The
                         project will support the strengthening of the management of social and environmental issues in the
                         mining sector. To that effect, the proposed project will immediately upon inception, undertake a

                                                                      Page 4 of 12
                         Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA). Next, the project will (a) implement the
                         main recommendations of the SESA for mining and EI sectors; (b) update relevant regulations that
                         affect the sector, including involuntary resettlement, (c) increase Recipient's capacity to manage
Public Disclosure Copy




                         EIAs and Social Impact Assessments (SIAs) and to address disputes/grievances, and (d) setting up
                         robust monitoring systems for EIAs and SIAs. This sub-component will specifically seek to improve
                         the coordination by ANGE’s of mining operations.

                         The Project would also assess existing environmental liabilities (SESA) resulting from past and
                         current EI activities in Togo, identify the sites most hazardous to human health and safety, and
                         propose monitoring actions as well as possible remediation measures that might be implemented with
                         the support of future projects. This sub-component will also enhance coordination between CSOs/
                         NGOs and the private sector through the implementation of innovative community engagement and
                         social accountability mechanisms.

                         B.6 Improving Government’s Capacity to Manage Artisanal and Small Scale Mining (US$500,000):
                         As regards management of the artisanal mining sector, the project will undertake formalization of
                         artisanal miners, i.e. Officially recording them and providing them with legal status by making them
                         pay an affordable registration fee to the Central public treasury.

                         Component C: Promoting Shared Prosperity and Sustainability (total cost US$2.85 million)

                         C.1. Human resources development in the mining sector (US$800,000): Developing human resources
                         in the mining sector through targeted training. Particularly regarding human resources capacity, the
                         project will build on the existing Earth Sciences Faculty at the University of Lomé and aim at
                         improving the course curriculum to strengthen the mine development functions. Also, the project
                         plans to train nationals in environmental monitoring and supervision of mine’s activity in order to
                         strengthen ANGE’s capacity in this regard.

                         The project institutional audit will further permit an estimate of available competencies and the skill
Public Disclosure Copy




                         gap to be filled in the mining sector of Togo An adequate training program for capacity building to
                         improve governance and management would include state officials as well as those of state
                         companies such SNPT will be developed and implemented by the project.

                         C.2 Capacity building for negotiation and portfolio management (US$200,000): This sub-component
                         will build capacity in contract negotiation and other mining business skills, by providing dedicated
                         training (legal, financial, mining, processing, etc.) to government staff responsible for managing
                         State participation in mining contracts. Complementary assistance could be provided through the
                         Bank‘s Extractive Industries Technical Advisory Facility (EI-TAF), which was also created to
                         provide rapid-response advisory services and capacity building for extractive industry resource
                         policy frameworks and transactions in developing countries.

                         C.3.Strengthening Upward and Downward Economic Linkages of Mines Production and Recipient’s
                         Cross Sector Platform (US$700,000): The objective of this sub-component is to support
                         strengthening of the Recipient's capacity in integrating the mining and EI sector into its broader
                         economy, including through the carrying out of studies and provision of transaction advisory services
                         to optimize the economic value derived from development of EI resources by creating an
                         environment in which the industry serves as a springboard for additional economic activities.

                         C.4. Creation of a Mineral Production Monitoring and Oversight Committee (US$300,000): The

                                                                      Page 5 of 12
                         Government’s commitment to improve phosphate production to reach historical high past annual
                         records and SNPT’s output levels of 3 million tons per annum have not materialize to date despite its
                         official adoption of a new Phosphate Development Strategy. Substantial increases in official statistics
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of SNPT regarding its output and export levels were officially announced starting Year 2012. No
                         substantive change in production pattern has yet materialized in the official public records
                         concerning phosphate production by SNPT. Many reasons have been advanced for that. However,
                         one recurrent theme since, has been the need for SNPT to increase expenditures to invest more and
                         more on equipment purchases to fill the production gap. Despite sizeable and mounting investment,
                         no significant improvement in phosphate production has been officially recorded. EITI has attempted
                         to capture some of the production data, but by its very nature, it establishes a time lag of 2 years in
                         information gathering and hence disclosure, which does not favor adequate monitoring of mineral
                         production in Togo.

                         The project will establish a Mineral Production Monitoring and Oversight Committee comprised of
                         multi stakeholders prior to effectiveness.

                         C.5. Building Capacity for Women in Mining (US$300,000)

                         Mining and related activities can potentially transform life in resource-rich developing countries.
                         They can help drive economic growth. They can create jobs. They can reduce poverty. For women in
                         particular, extractive industries can provide opportunities for a better life, including increased
                         employment opportunities, access to revenues, and expanded investment in the local community.
                         Ensuring that men and women have equitable access to the benefits of resource development, and
                         that neither are disproportionately placed at risk, requires commitment to understanding and acting
                         on the gender dimensions of the sector. This means including women in community-level project
                         consultations, and national-level policy dialogues on extractive industries. The Bank is developing
                         new opportunities to engage with Governments and the private sector to ensure that women, who are
                         now a part of the global development dialog across multiple sectors, are not excluded from the
                         extractive industries, for the sake of better opportunities, reduced poverty, and shared prosperity.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         To achieve the stated objectives, the project will particularly focus on two aspects of the program on
                         Gender as described below: (i) to undertake a detailed assessment of the current situation of women
                         and girls, including the assessment of all existing and relevant initiatives, women's groups , CSOs
                         and other organizations whose activities are related to gender ( women) the mining sector of Togo;
                         and (ii) to design a country-specific institutional framework in consultation with all key stakeholders.
                         The project will go one step further and will assist Togo in the establishment of a national structure
                         (whose generic name could be somewhere along the line of FEMINTO), with the objectives and
                         mandate to implement a roadmap that extends to medium term, with clear objectives defined.

                         C.6. Strengthening Civil Society Organization’s and Participation in Extractives (US$300,000):
                         Specific tools will be designed and implemented to ensure that the project’s activities contribute
                         strongly to increased citizen oversight for transparency and good governance in the extractive
                         industries and increased knowledge and public awareness on the characteristics of the exploitation of
                         mineral and EI resources. Long-term benefits of strengthening CSOs capacity include the sustained
                         impact achieved by this project as the activities to be carried out will be driven by the organizations
                         themselves and implemented by a consortium of Togolese CSOs. It is expected that civil society also
                         develop strong ownership of the project’s activities from implementation start-up considering that the
                         project, especially if CSOs are made to be involved from the start-up of operations. Other benefits to
                         CSO representatives include: (i) improved ability to learn and debate issues regarding EI data such as
                         the need for disaggregated revenue information by region, and (ii) EI company to insure that local

                                                                      Page 6 of 12
                         communities receive their fair share of mining revenues and suggestion to improve the tax collection
                         mechanism and inter-agency revenue flow for citizens to better understand the share of EI revenues
                         they are owed at the sub-national level. CSOs in Togo have expressed their interest to go beyond
Public Disclosure Copy




                         central Government revenue monitoring and start monitoring revenue use by local (communes)
                         governments. In this regards, alternative channels will be explored, which include the creation of
                         tripartite community development platforms to contribute to the generation of broad-based socio-
                         economic development and coordinate related EI revenue investment decisions at the national level.
                         A specific program will aim to increase CSO’s knowledge on the significance of EITI on the EI
                         value-chain including concepts such as contract transparency, exploration licenses, fiscal regime in
                         EI, best practices in environmental and social monitoring, and corporate social responsibility.

                         The project will allow groups (grassroots civil society members) who are removed from policy
                         discussions to interact with more active CSO representatives, local leaders and with representatives
                         from a mining/EI company as well as to increase their capacity to interpret and use EI information/
                         data to increase accountability. Considering the importance of CSOs participation in the national EI
                         debate, the project will catalyze donor’s funding around the development of an effective
                         communication process among CSOs (beyond the project) and mechanism to communicate the
                         concerns of grassroots communities to the Government.

                         C.7. Setting-up Accountability and Community Development Platforms (US$250,000): To improve
                         governance and minimize the potential effects of the resource curse, in addition to strengthening
                         public institutions and developing transparency processes, it is critical to set up stronger
                         accountability mechanisms. Accountability includes the relationships between the mines (private and
                         public, formal and informal) and Government (provincial and central); among Government and
                         parliament and civil society more broadly; and between the mines and the local communities in
                         which they are located. To increase demand for accountability and transparency across key segments
                         of the value chain, and ensure the participation and empowerment of all stakeholders, including civil
                         society, media, think tanks, unions, professional associations, faith-based organizations, and
                         members of Parliament, the Project will develop and implement a platform for continued dialogue
Public Disclosure Copy




                         around mining issues. This platform should also enhance the participation of nationals and a better
                         inclusion of the gender dimension in mining benefit sharing. The legal framework (and structure)
                         surrounding the Accountability and Community Development platform will be defined and officially
                         established prior to actual start-up of project’s activities. The structure of this platform will be
                         defined in close coordination with EITI and other existing entities and forums. The development and
                         implementation of an information and communication strategy would once again facilitate the
                         sharing of sector knowledge and help to create the conditions for a meaningful dialogue among
                         stakeholder.

                         This component of the project will also help to create a pilot accountability and community
                         development committee in the Southern part of Togo where there is a strong concentration of mine
                         both private and public to oversee development interests for populations in the vicinity of the mines
                         area and ensure redistribution of revenues and actual development takes place in those communities.
                         The second phase of the project will target the replication of such platforms at different locations
                         throughout the country.

                         D. Component D: Project Coordination and Management (total cost US$2.45 million)

                         This component will support the Project Implementation Unit, based in the Ministry of Mines, in the
                         management of fiduciary activities, project monitoring and evaluation and the implementation of

                                                                     Page 7 of 12
                         activities. This component will support (a) Project coordination and management of procurement,
                         financial management, and disbursement; and (b) monitoring and evaluation of project
                         implementation, including reporting, audits and assessment of safeguards policies. A Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established under the PPF, composed of staff of the MME. In
                         addition to the financial management and procurement units, the PIU will include a small technical
                         group composed of consultants as staff. The PIU is under the authority of the Minister of Mines and
                         Energy but is supervised by (a) multi-stakeholder Accountability and Community Development
                         Platform (a sort of Technical Monitoring Committee) that will deal specifically with implementation
                         aspects and impact of the project in the designated project area; and (b) a high level Strategic
                         Coordination Committee (SCC) on policy aspects.

                         Project Preparation Facility Refinancing Category (US$2.00 million, all IDA). The Credit includes a
                         Project Preparation Advance (PPA) of US$2.00 million. The PPA supports the setting up of the PMU
                         (key functions only), procurement of office equipment for the PMU, safeguards measures, the
                         establishment of the Mineral Production Monitoring Committee and the High-Level Strategic
                         Oversight Committee, the Accountability and Community Development Platform Committee, and
                         the TORs of the baseline studies cited above, all f ound satisfactory to the Bank. The preparatory
                         steps for Project Implementation, include the preparation of the Project Operations Manual, first year
                         Annual Work Plan and Budget and commencement of Project procurement.

                         Contingency Allowance (US$ 1 million). Allowance is made for unforeseen additional costs that
                         may occur during project implementation. However, the contingency allowance will be restricted to
                         project activities not related to the following: PIU’s activities and operating costs, any of the
                         oversight committee’s activities and operating costs, workshops, training or equipment purchase.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         To be determined at a later stage
Public Disclosure Copy




                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (GSURR)
                         Abdoulaye Gadiere (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The proposed project is Technical Assistance
                          BP 4.01                                            (TA) aimed at strengthening the legal, regulatory
                                                                             and institutional framework, as well as at
                                                                             improving capacity, governance, and planning in
                                                                             the mining sector. The project does not involve
                                                                             civil works or land acquisition. However, future
                                                                             mining development activities are expected to
                                                                             build on the TA activities and will have
                                                                             environmental and social adverse impacts that
                                                                             would be regulated under the strengthened legal
                                                                             and institutional framework. OP 4.01 is triggered
                                                                             to cover the preparation of the SESA.
                                                                             To this end, the GoT has prepared terms of
                                                                             reference for a Sectoral Environmental and Social


                                                                     Page 8 of 12
                                                                           Assessment (SESA), which have been validated
                                                                           at a national workshop held in Lomé 9/5/2014,
                                                                           subsequently approved by the World Bank and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           disclosed both in-country 10/1/14 online and
                                                                           10/2/14 in a national newspaper and at the
                                                                           InfoShop on 10/8/2014. This sectoral assessment
                                                                           will be carried out as part of the project
                                                                           implementation. Infoshop prior to Appraisal. The
                                                                           SESA will examine the current situation in the
                                                                           sector in terms of environmental and social
                                                                           management and describe potential
                                                                           environmental and social impacts in the sector,
                                                                           including site-specific and cumulative impacts,
                                                                           pollution, health and safety, and social issues (e.g
                                                                           inclusion, gender, vulnerable groups, land
                                                                           administration/Management, labor issues,
                                                                           conflict, etc.). This assessment will draw on
                                                                           extensive consultations with stakeholders and
                                                                           include discussions on community participation in
                                                                           the sector, governance, transparency and conflict
                                                                           resolution.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No           The project does not involve any civil work or
                                                                           any activity entailing direct or indirect habitat
                                                                           conversion
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No           The project does not involve any activity that will
                                                                           affect forest ecosystems.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No           The project will not support procurement of any
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           pesticide, and no activity is expected to increase
                                                                           the use of agrochemicals.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No           The project does not involve or affect physical
                            BP 4.11                                        cultural resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                           area.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No           The project does not involve any civil works, land
                            4.12                                           acquisition and/or resettlement or subsequent loss
                                                                           of assets or access to resources.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No           Not applicable

                            Projects on International        No            Not applicable
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No            Not applicable
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues


                                                                   Page 9 of 12
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           Since the proposed project is technical assistance (TA) by nature, no direct adverse environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                           or social impacts are foreseen. The project does not involve any civil works or land acquisition.
                           The Operational Policy on Environmental Assessment, OP 4.01, is triggered to cover the
                           preparation of the Sectoral Environmental and Social Assessment, SESA.
                           The GoT has prepared terms of reference for a Sectoral Environmental and Social Assessment
                           (SESA), which have been validated at a national workshop in Lomé on 9/5/2014 and approved by
                           the World Bank. The ToR have been disclosed publicly in-country, online at www.republicoftogo.
                           com and www.togomines.com on 10/1/2014 and in the newspapers Togo Press on 10/2/2014 and
                           L’Union on 10/3/2014; and at the World Bank’s InfoShop on 10/8/2014. The proposed SESA will
                           cover the following issues: (i) examine the current situation of the mining sector in terms of
                           environmental and social issues and their management; (ii) describe potential environmental and
                           social impacts in the sector, including site-specific and cumulative impacts, pollution, health and
                           safety, and social issues (e.g inclusion, gender, vulnerable groups, land administration/
                           management, labor issues, conflict, etc.); (iii) identify gaps and risks in the existing management
                           systems for environmental and social issues; (iv) provide recommendations for improvement of
                           the regulatory legal and institutional framework and overall management of environmental and
                           social impacts as well as address capacity building needs.
                           This assessment will draw on extensive consultations with various levels of stakeholders,
                           including discussions on community participation in the sector, as well as topics such as
                           governance, transparency and conflict resolution.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Even though the current project does not finance any ''hard'' investments, future mining
                           development activities will eventually have adverse environmental and social impacts. These will
                           be regulated under the improved legal and institutional framework, which this TA aims to
                           strengthen.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Togo is currently significantly challenged in the environmental and social management of the
                           mining sector because of the inadequately staffed and/or trained personnel in key ministries,
                           including the Ministry of Mines and the Ministry of Environment.
                           The safeguards team (both social and environment) will work closely not only with the Ministry of
                           Mines and the Ministry of Environment’s Task teams on mining issues, but also with civil society
                           and communities at the vicinity of mines.
                           The ongoing revision of the Mining legislation puts special emphasis on environmental issues. As
                           such, the capacity of the relevant institutions will be deemed appropriate to handle the new project
                           once the new Mining Law is passed. Meanwhile the project will conduct a detailed assessment of
                           existing tools in place to monitor environmental and social issues related to mining.
                           In sum, the project is designed to assist the Government of the Republic of Togo (i) to put in place
                           the appropriate legal, regulatory and fiscal frameworks, as well as updated social, environmental
                           and other relevant standards and guidelines; (ii) to build capacity to increase oversight for
                           technical, economic, environmental, health and safety compliance of the sector; (iii) to promote


                                                                    Page 10 of 12
                           transparency and build accountability mechanisms; and (iv) to stimulate further socio-economic
                           benefits particularly for vulnerable groups.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders include the relevant ministries (mining, environment), the national
                           environmental agency, private sector and mining companies, communities living in the vicinity of
                           mining areas as well as working in the mining sector (including particulalrly women), NGOs
                           involved in extractives and mining industry and civil society at large. These groups have
                           participated in the validation of the ToRs for the SESA, and their engagement will continue during
                           the preparation of the SESA.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Oct-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Togo                                                             01-Oct-2014
                           Comments: Published on-line at www.republicoftogo.com and www.togomines.com on
                                         10/1/2014 and in the newspapers Togo Press on 10/2/2014 and L’Union on
                                         10/3/2014.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?



                                                                    Page 11 of 12
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Brigitte Marie Khadidja B
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 01-Dec-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Christopher Gilbert Sheldon (PMGR)           Date: 03-Dec-2014
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
