                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                           ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                    Report No.: ISDSA10550

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Sep-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Jun-2014, 24-Jun-2014, 06-Oct-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Burkina Faso                     Project ID:    P149556
                                                      Parent         P106909
                                                      Project ID:
   Project Name:     Urban Water Sector Project - Additional Financing (P149556)
   Parent Project    Urban Water Sector Project (P106909)
   Name:
   Task Team         Matar Fall
   Leader:
   Estimated         09-Sep-2014                      Estimated   11-Nov-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    GWADR                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                      Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Water supply (100%)
   Theme(s):         Urban services and housing for the poor (100%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:         80.00               Total Bank Financing: 80.00
   Financing Gap:               0.00
     Financing Source                                                                   Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                    0.00
     IDA Grant                                                                            80.00
     Total                                                                                80.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)



                                            Page 1 of 8
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The overall objective of the project is to increase access to sustainable water and sanitation
   services in selected urban areas. This will contribute to achievement of the water and sanitation
   MDGs. The project will achieve the objective through: (a) facilitatingaccess to services through
   programs for constructing social water service connections, public standpipes, and on-site
   sanitation facilities; and (b) consolidating the achievements of the urban water supply sub-sector
   reforms and strengthening capacities to deliver and manage services. The project will help to
   provide clean water to 527,000 additional people and to provide improved sanitation services to
   246,000 additional people."
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
The proposed project comprises three components: (i) urban water supply in four cities; (ii) urban
sanitation in Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso; and (iii) capacity strengthening to improve the sub-
sectoral’s performances and to warrant the efficiency of investments. The three components will be
implemented by the relevant departments of ONEA.

Component 1 - Urban water (US$139.52 million): includes the following activities.

•       Ouagadougou. This subcomponent will be implemented by the Maître d’ouvrage de Ziga
(DMOZ), ONEA’s department in charge of Ouagadougou water investments. It will help to: (i)
expand the distribution networks by 175 km; and (ii) expand access by installing 25,000 household
connections and 50 standpipes. Additional activities for Ouagadougou to be implemented by DMOZ
under the proposed Additional Financing are the following:

(i)      Provision and installation of 40 km of water transmission mains; ductile cast iron, diameter
1600mm to 1200m (US$56.30 million);
(ii)      Expansion of the water storage capacity by 4,000 m3 and construction of 4 water pumping
stations (US$7.88 million);
(iii)    Expansion of the secondary and tertiary water distribution networks by 340 km, installation
of 26.100 household connections and 80 public standpipes, and supply of 52,200 water connections
kits (US$12.88 million);
(iv)     Consultant services for the supervision of the above mentioned civil works (US$2.9 million);

•        Bobo-Dioulasso. This subcomponent will be implemented by the Department of Investment
Programming (DPI), ONEA’s department in charge of water investments outside of Ouagadougou. It
will help to (i) expand the water production and storage capacity (two new production boreholes, one
new treatment unit and two elevated water tanks); (ii) expand the distribution system (new pumping
stations and 428 km distribution networks); and (iii) expand access by installing 30,000 household
connections and 120 standpipes.

•       Koudougou. This subcomponent will be implemented by DPI and will help to (i) reinforce
the water production and storage capacity (rehabilitation of water intake, new electricity supply line
and one elevated water tank); (ii) expand the distribution system (80 km of distribution networks);


                                             Page 2 of 8
and (iii) expand access by installing 2,500 household connections and 10 standpipes.

•        Dedougou. This subcomponent will be implemented by DPI and will help to (i) expand the
water production and storage capacity (two new production boreholes and one elevated water tank);
(ii) expand the distribution networks by 40 km; and (iii) expand access by installing 200 household
connections and 20 standpipes.

Component 2 - Access to sanitation (US$29.2 million): This component will be implemented by the
Sanitation Department of ONEA (DASS) and includes the following activities.

•        Ouagadougou. This subcomponent will help to: (i) expand access by installing 18,000
household latrines and 27,000 household washing facilities; (ii) provide improved water and
sanitation in 250 schools by connecting them to the water system and installing blocks of latrines;
and (iii) provide adequate disposal of effluents by installing two sludge treatment plants.

•        Bobo-Dioulasso. This subcomponent will help to: (i) expand access by installing 10,000
household latrines and 15,000 household washing facilities; (ii) provide improved water and
sanitation in 100 schools; and (iii) provide adequate disposal of effluents by installing two sludge
treatment plants.

•       Technical Assistance. This subcomponent will help to: (i) mobilize the population, manage
contracts and supervise works through NGOs and the private partners; (ii) train local masons and
contractors; and (iii) support activities with media campaigns, hygiene education and training in
maintenance of facilities.

Component 3 - Institutional support and capacity building (US$3.51 million): This component will
be implemented by the Human Resources Department of ONEA (DRH) and includes the following
activities.

•        Institutional Support. This subcomponent will help to: (i) assess the performances and
viability of ONEA (technical audits and assistance to the implementation of the financial model); (ii)
transfer know-how (partnerships with performing utilities); and (iii) review the impact and suitability
of access options proposed to households (mid-term surveys and assessments of pilot programs).

•       Strengthening of capacities. This subcomponent will help to: (i) improve reliability and
accountability (strengthening the Internal Audit Department); (ii) improve customer management
(technical assistance and procurement of advanced technologies (portable billing stations, remote
metering and prepayment); and (iii) improve staff skills (training in project management,
procurement and technical management).

Component 4 – Environmental and social management (US$0.68 million equivalent. This component
will be implemented by the Environmental and Social Unit of DMOZ and include the following
activities.

•       Land Acquisition and Indemnification (xx million equivalent). This subcomponent will be
financed by ONEA and will help to: (i) purchase land required for the few facilities which will not be
located on ONEA’s existing premises or which will not use existing rights of way; and to (i)
compensate losses of property and revenues.



                                              Page 3 of 8
•       Coordination and Monitoring. This subcomponent will help to coordinate and monitor
implementation of the ESMF and the RPF and help to prepare the ESIAs, ESMPs and RAPs that will
be required by specific activities.

•        Strengthening of Capacities. This subcomponent will help to strengthen the capacities of the
entities involved in the implementation of this component.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
For urban water supply, the project will focus on four cities, namely the capital city Ouagadougou,
Bobo-Dioulasso, Koudougou and Dedougou. As regards urban sanitation, the project focusses on
Ouagadougou and Bobo-Dioulasso. However, specific areas of intervention in the said cities will be
determined by technical studies.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Maman-Sani Issa (GENDR)

 6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              OP 4.01 is triggered because of the potential
 BP 4.01                                             environmental and social impacts of the project
                                                     activities. Based on the lessons learned from the
                                                     original project, the environmental and social
                                                     negative impact are expected to be minor and site
                                                     specific, and largely outweighed by the positive
                                                     outcomes in sanitation, improved quality of life,
                                                     etc. As the AF consist in an expanding of
                                                     component 1 of the original project, the existing
                                                     safeguard documents (the ESMF and the RPF)
                                                     have been updated and disclosed in-country and
                                                     at the Bank infoshop prior to appraisal.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No               The project activities will be located in urban and
                                                     peri-urban area. No natural habitat will be
                                                     threatened.
 Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No               The project will not finance activity related to
                                                     forest exploitation, nor it will induce indirect
                                                     pressure on forest.
 Pest Management OP 4.09            No               The project finances no activity which deals with
                                                     pesticide acquisition or use.
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No               None of the expected activity locations is known
 BP 4.11                                             as being archeological site or hosting sacred
                                                     resources. However, the ESMF will include a
                                                     ‘’Chance find mechanism’’ to insert in civil
                                                     works contract clauses.
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No               There are no indigenous people in the project
                                                     intervention area.
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes              ONEA own most of the new pumping station
 4.12                                                sites, thus not requiring land expropriation.



                                             Page 4 of 8
                                                       However, expanding water distribution networks
                                                       may lead to some temporary disturbance of
                                                       economic activities and/or land acquisition
                                                       though not significant. The Resettlement Policy
                                                       Framework (RPF) of the original project has been
                                                       updated and disclosed in-country and at the Bank
                                                       Infoshop prior appraisal. It will guide simple
                                                       compensation or the preparation and execution of
                                                       RAP at any time case arises during project
                                                       implementation.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              The project activities are not related to dam
                                                       construction of the use of dam facilities or water.
   Projects on International           No              The project will not draw water from international
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                waterways nor will it intervene in building
                                                       infrastructure on such waterways.
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 The project intervention areas are not under
   7.60                                                dispute.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The safeguard responsibility of the original has been transferred to the sector unit. The overall
     implementation of the safeguard measures was rated satisfactory by the implementation support
     missions carried out by the Bank because almost all the due diligences have been completed such
     as: (i) regular screening of activities; (ii) elaboration, processing and execution of specific
     safeguard instruments (ESIA, RAP) of the 06 eligible sub-projects supported (secondary water
     connection channels in Bobo Dioulasso, Kedougou and Koudougou communes; boreholes in Bobo
     Dioulasso and Dedougou; and transmission line in Kedougou); (iii) periodic environmental and
     social safeguard monitoring reports sent out to the Bank; (iv) a good documentation of the
     safeguard track records including the title of lands where stations and boreholes are built.

     The proposed additional activities (laying water transmission pipes, construction of water
     reservoirs, expansion of water distribution networks and installation of household water
     connections and public standpipes) are of the same nature as water works included in the original
     project. Then, the AF does not trigger any new safeguard policy and the environmental category is
     similar to the original project (category B). As regard the environmental and social aspects of the
     original project, no significant environmental and social negative impact is feared under this
     additional financing. Instead, positive social aspects (access to potable water, improved hygiene
     and sanitation condition, decreased prevalence of water related diseases) are expected to be
     significant.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     N/A
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.


                                               Page 5 of 8
  N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The ESMF and RPF of the original project have been updated and re-disclosed at the Bank and in
  country before appraisal. The Environmental and social aspects of the additional activities will be
  dealt with in the same manner as for the works completed under the original project; for any
  subproject or activity subject to ESIA or RAP as a result of the screening, the appropriate
  document (ESMP, RAP) has been prepared in consultation with the relevant stakeholders, gotten
  approved by the national bureau of EA (BUNEE), then implemented and evaluated. The overall
  implementation of the safeguard measures of the original project was rated satisfactory by the
  implementation support missions carried out by the Bank.

  Likewise, the updated ESMF provides environmental guidelines to ensure that any new activity
  undergoes an appropriate procedure of environmental and social screening, and then if eligible, be
  subject to the preparation and approval of an ESIA/ESMP and/or RAP prior its implementation.
  The RPF outlines the principles and procedures to be followed in the event of land acquisition,
  impact on assets and/or loss of livelihoods. Any specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
  prepared in accordance to the screening result will be negotiated, approved on with all the
  stakeholders then fully executed before the concerned activity starts. An amount of $0.68M is
  earmarked in the project budget to ensure the implementation of the safeguard measures.

  The Implementing entity (ONEA) has set up a permanent environmental and social unit managed
  by two competent senior staff, and equipped with sampling and analysis capacity. Further the
  institution is endeavored to mainstreaming sustainability in its own strategies and operations as
  evidenced by the ongoing process of quality-safety-environment (QSE) certification. Capacity to
  supervise social and environmental aspects has been satisfactory under the original project and
  institutional support and training has been delivered to the staff of ONEA’s Environmental Unit
  which is well experienced with Bank safeguard instruments and procedures.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Appropriate consultation has taken place Dec 14 – 31, 2008 for the development of the ESMF and
  the RPF as per the guidelines and the level of consultation is commensurate with the two
  instruments. Affected populations and local Government were informed of the objectives, the
  scope and potential impacts of the project and their views have been fully reflected in the reports.
  The ESMF and the RPF were approved by the Bank and the Government and have been widely
  disclosed in Burkina Faso on January 30, 2009 and June 5, 2014 and made available to the public
  at the World Bank’s Info Shop on February 6, 2009 and June 5, 2014. As for the original project,
  the updated ESMF and RPF has been consulted upon with the appropriate stakeholders before
  disclosure.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                         15-May-2014
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                      05-Jun-2014
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors



                                             Page 6 of 8
"In country" Disclosure
  Burkina Faso                                                     05-Jun-2014
  Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-May-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Jun-2014
"In country" Disclosure
  Burkina Faso                                                     05-Jun-2014
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
 related to safeguard policies?


                                            Page 7 of 8
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:      Name: Matar Fall
   Approved By
   Sector Manager:        Name: Alexander E. Bakalian (SM)                Date: 06-Oct-2014




                                             Page 8 of 8
