                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA6731
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          India                             Project ID:    P144447
                            Project Name:     India: Elementary Education III (P144447)
                            Task Team         Shabnam Sinha
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         16-Dec-2013                       Estimated   20-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    SASED                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Primary education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     29662.00           Total Bank Financing:  400.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                   29198.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                            400.00
                              EC European Commission                                                                  64.00
                              Total                                                                                29662.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The PDO is to improve school outcomes of elementary school children through quality-oriented
                           interventions.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                     Page 1 of 15
                         The project is a Special Investment Lending (SIL) on a SWAp and will finance states’ annual work
                         programs and a small number of activities at the national level. As under SSA I and II, the project
                         will support the whole program and the present project will finance a share (1.3%) of the overall
Public Disclosure Copy




                         program. Financing decisions for Districts and States are made based on the Annual Work Plan and
                         Budget (AWP&B) process which are approved by the Project Approval Board (PAB) of the MHRD,
                         GOI, the workings of which are outlined later in this section and detailed in Annex 2.

                         Some continuing gaps in access in some states will need to be filled through minor civil works (for
                         example, building toilets for girls and additional classrooms to respond to demand), upgrading
                         schools, annual school grants, transparent merit and need-based recruitment of teachers, salaries of
                         teachers and staff for implementation, and provision of textbooks and other teaching/learning
                         materials.

                         The support to SSA III will focus on the key goals of SSA namely: access, equity, quality and
                         institutional reform. However, the shift in activities from SSA II will be seen through two key thrust
                         areas which will be financed under SSA III are (I) Improving quality for enhancing learning
                         outcomes; (II) strengthening monitoring and evaluation for enhanced accountability and (III)
                         Enhancing access and retention for disadvantaged children. Annex 1 presents the results chain
                         linking input to outputs to outcomes. Key new thrust areas for support include:

                         I.      Improving Quality and Enhancing Learning Outcomes

                         The project will provide special attention to quality improvement with inherent accountability
                         measures through the special components that will inform the SSA program in all its dimensions,
                         including access and equity. The following areas will receive special attention:

                         1.1     Development of grade level learning indicators for students: The project will support,
                         through provision of consulting services and training, the development of grade and subject specific
Public Disclosure Copy




                         learning indicators to measure children’s progress in acquiring expected knowledge and skills at
                         different grade levels. The NCERT will develop the model and illustrative indicators at the national
                         level. While a few states have developed indicators suited to specific state curriculum, the national
                         indicators will be a ready reference for other states to adopt or adapt. These learning indicators will
                         be used as performance standards for all assessment tools supported under the project, at classroom,
                         state and national level.

                         1.2      Early grade reading and mathematics: Children in early grades (1 and 2) should achieve
                         foundational skills in reading and mathematics leading to both improved retention and learning. At
                         the national level, NCERT will develop guidelines and quality standards for early grade learning.
                         Each state will use the national guidelines to develop or extend its own state-specific early grade
                         learning program along with the state academic authority and begin implementation in the 2013-14
                         academic year. MHRD will monitor implementation, while NCERT will provide capacity building.
                         Specific academic and relevant pedagogical approaches will be followed to develop customized
                         learning assessment tools for grades 1 and 2.

                         1.3      Upper primary math and science learning: The grade and subject learning indicators
                         established by NCERT will be used by states in their strategies to improve science and math teaching
                         in upper primary schools. There will be specialized teacher trainingprograms (using appropriately
                         developed special training modules). This will be supplemented by follow up and on-site support


                                                                      Page 2 of 15
                         through the Block Resource Centers (BRCs) and Cluster Resource Centers (CRCs). Specific
                         approaches have been identified for enhancing math and science teaching standards at the upper
                         primary level like the use of math and science kits, worksheets, computer-aided learning modules,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         assignment of projects to students, and setting up of libraries and laboratories.

                         1.4     School leadership development and school performance assessment: To improve
                         management competence of school headmasters and educational administrators, a new National
                         Centre for School Leadership (NCSL) within the National University of Educational Planning and
                         Administration (NUEPA), will be established, through technical assistance. The NCSL will develop
                         a school leadership program and support its implementation in states, including the development of
                         standards and a framework for assessment of school performance in elementary schools. The
                         program has already been initiated in Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh,
                         Kerala, Mizoram, and Uttar Pradesh, and will be extended to all states during the project period.

                         1.5      Teacher training and provisioning: The project will finance the strengthening of pre-service
                         teacher training, in line with the centrally-sponsored Teacher Education Scheme. This will ensure a
                         greater number of professionally trained teachers in the school system. The project will also support
                         annual in-service training of teachers, to allow for continuous upgrading of knowledge and teaching
                         skills. This will be done through (i) identification of teacher training needs; (ii) annual review of
                         teacher training packages; (iii) long-term and sustainable plan for preparation of master trainers; and,
                         (iv) research and development for teacher training. Recognizing the importance of providing
                         adequate number of teachers, the project will finance systems that facilitate the (i) achievement of the
                         prescribed Pupil Teacher Ratio (PTR) for each school; (ii) ensuring that no school has a teacher
                         vacancy of more than 10% (through effective redeployment of surplus teachers); and, (iii) provision
                         of subject specific teachers, head teacher and part time instructors for art, health and work education
                         in upper primary schools. The practice of recruiting at least 50% women teachers will be encouraged
                         as part of the fund arrangement for teacher salary in accordance with the Centre-States fund sharing
                         formula. The project will finance teachers recruited through a process that takes into account the
                         minimum qualifications as laid down by the designated academic authority, namely the Nation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Council for Teacher Education (NCTE).

                          
                         II.     Strengthening monitoring and evaluation for improved accountability

                         II.1     Monitoring learning outcomes: The project will support a three tier strategy for assessment
                         of learning outcomes for enhanced accountability, through provision of consulting services, training
                         and learning materials:

                         �        NAS conducted by NCERT: While the technical rigor of the NAS has greatly improved,
                         only one grade (Grade 5) has been assessed with the new methodology. The project will support
                         continued capacity building of NCERT to extend the methodology to other grades and to
                         demonstrate reliability over time for a given grade. Moreover, the next challenge is to promote the
                         use of NAS results for remedial action at the policy level and to improve the teacher education
                         system. This will require new skills in qualitative analysis as well as articulation and dissemination
                         of results. Finally, the project will support expansion of the coverage of NAS to include CWSN in
                         their home and school environment. The project will support these activities through technical
                         assistance (TA) including minor civil works, purchase of equipment and procurement of goods and
                         services.
                         �        State Learning Achievement Survey (SLAS): While at the national level the NCERT has

                                                                      Page 3 of 15
                         been conducting NAS, States/Union Territories (UTs) need more disaggregated data on student
                         outcomes at district and sub-district levels for remedial action and corrective measures. States/UTs
                         will be supported, through consultant services and training, in conducting their own SLAS, learning
Public Disclosure Copy




                         from the experiences of states like Bihar, Gujarat and Tamil Nadu. While the NAS is an important
                         tool for highlighting the national and state level picture, what needs as much focus is assessment and
                         analysis of the learning levels at district and sub-district level. The proposed funds would support this
                         effort, in order to create and strengthen a culture of measuring children’s learning across states. As a
                         measure to link learning outcomes with budgetary approvals, GOI will link budgetary allocations to
                         state efforts at learning assessments through the AWP&B process. School-level classroom based
                         assessments through the further development of Continuous and Comprehensive Evaluation (CCE)
                         of pupils. The project will fund teacher training, technical assistance, and procurement of learning
                         materials to improve classroom processes with approaches that integrate evaluation having child-
                         friendly approaches and efficient record keeping.
                         �         In addition, there will be efforts to strengthen impact evaluation of various aspects of the
                         program. As a first step, the Bank has submitted three proposals to the Strategic Impact Evaluation
                         Trust Fund (SIEF), to conduct rigorous evaluations addressing core issues relating to learning at the
                         elementary level. These evaluations focus on interventions that: (i) build parental and teacher
                         capacity to improve school accountability and learning outcomes; (ii) minimize the learning deficits
                         children of seasonal migrants suffer due to periodic relocation; and (iii) provide access to low-
                         income children to non-state schools (across the cost spectrum), and compare learning gains in these
                         schools relative to government schools. The SSA program will also make available resources to the
                         states for research and monitoring under the Research Evaluation, Supervision and Monitoring
                         (RESM) grant through which the states will undertake quality research and evaluation research
                         activities. These research inputs will also feed into program implementation.

                         11.2     Evolving performance standards for teachers’ accountability: NCERT will develop, through
                         appropriate provision of training and support, teacher performance standards. NCERT has developed
                         a framework for Performance Indicators for Elementary School Teachers (PINDICS) that is based on
                         norms and standards as enunciated in various studies and statutory orders of the government. (See
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Annex 2) These performance standards define the criteria expected when teachers perform their
                         major tasks and duties. Under each performance standard there will be specific tasks which teachers
                         are expected to perform- termed as specific standards. These are further delineated as performance
                         indicators that can be used to observe progress and to measure actual result compared to expected
                         result. These performance standards define the criteria expected when teachers perform their major
                         tasks and duties. These are further delineated as performance indicators that can be used to observe
                         progress and to measure actual result compared to expected result. NCERT will also develop and
                         pilot instruments to measure teacher competence under PINDICS. PINDICs will eventually evolve
                         as the framework for effective teacher performance for effective monitoring and benchmarking
                         across the country.

                         11.3     Social accountability: The RTE Act, 2009, supports the concept of social accountability and
                         community participation through its various provisions. Every school must have a School
                         Management Committee (SMC) consisting of representatives of the local authority, parents and
                         guardians of children at the school and teachers. Three-quarters of SMC members should be parents/
                         guardians, with proportionate representation from weaker sections/disadvantaged groups and 50%
                         should be women. SMCs monitor the working of the school; prepare a school development plan; and,
                         monitor utilization of grants. Continuous capacity building efforts are needed to strengthen SMCs.
                         The project will support strengthening of this grassroots social audit tool for enhancing social
                         accountability to the community for a well-functioning school. In the context of RTE, the process of

                                                                      Page 4 of 15
                         social audits will be deepened to engage a multitude of stakeholders at multiple layers in the delivery
                         of education and in the process of Shiksha Samvad (Education Dialogue).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         11.4     Unified District Education System for Education (UDISE): The project will finance the
                         Educational Management Information System (EMIS) unit that has been established for every district
                         in the country. The school-based information system called the District Information System for
                         Education (DISE) and household survey reports are both key data systems of the EMIS. The project
                         will finance further strengthening and professionalizing data compilation through the DISE for
                         school-based planning. Annual data collected on infrastructure, access, retention, quality, teacher-
                         related issues will feed into planning process, as well as M&E, allowing for informed, data-supported
                         mid-course corrections, as needed. DISE collects data from all types of schools—recognized, un-
                         recognized, government or private. The project will support the implementation and phased roll-out
                         (in academic year 2013-14) of a unified data system, which was developed by MHRD. The Unified
                         DIES (UDISE) was developed to minimize duplication in data collection and limit the multiplicity of
                         agencies collecting data from the same schools. UDISE will now consolidate data across the school
                         education sector covering elementary (Classes I-VIII) and secondary (Classes IX-X) segments.
                         UDISE systems will surmount concerns that have emerged around inconsistency in data gathering,
                         overlapping of information sources at the upper primary level especially in case of composite schools
                         (upper primary and secondary schools). The nodal agency, NEUPA will take over the responsibility
                         of unified system for collection of school education statistics. State level nodal agencies will be
                         identified to coordinate activities relating to collection, collation and dissemination of data under
                         unified system. Data quality assurance measures will be supported for the strengthening systems for
                         collection of duly filled in data collection formats (DCFs), better checking for errors and missing
                         information, training of teachers, training CRCs in collection of data, and digitalisation of report
                         generation to improve data dissemination. Integrated data sets covering all schools at primary, upper
                         primary, secondary and higher secondary levels will be received from all states and hosted at the
                         NUEPA website: schools-www.schoolreportcards.in

                         11.5     Special Focus Districts: The project will finance special interventions for educationally
Public Disclosure Copy




                         backward districts that are allocated significant SSA Program funds. Low-income states (and within
                         them the majority of the special focus districts) are generally the large spending states and will be
                         provided special attention under the project for addressing concerns of out of school children,
                         enhancing transition (especially for children from special focus groups and migrant children) and for
                         quality improvement efforts. Special focus districts are those with high concentration of the SCs and
                         STs, a large minority population, large number of out-of-school children and high gender gap.
                         Funding priority has traditionally been given given to these districts, for providing access, teacher
                         recruitment and special efforts to equity issues. The project will finance quality improvement efforts
                         especially in the large spending states with large populations of SC/ST and minority children.
                         NUEPA has developed an Educational Development Index (EDI) to track progress of States towards
                         Universal Elementary Education (UEE). The project will finance the strengthening of the EDIs for
                         the district and sub-district levels for effective ranking of states based on their performance on
                         developmental indicators. The ranking will encourage states and districts to improve their
                         performance and focus more attention on both inputs and outputs for better outcomes. EDIs for each
                         district will be taken under consideration when preparing the district AWPBs and their appraisals for
                         more effective targeting of resources to the neediest regions. The project will encourage
                         performance-linked fund releases. An educationally backward district that does not utilize its
                         resources in the manner intended is unlikely to continue to receive funds on a priority basis.

                         11.6    Institutional strengthening at different levels: The project will support institutional

                                                                       Page 5 of 15
                         strengthening with greater decentralization for autonomy in planning. The quality of the planning
                         process will be further augmented by the involvement of CRCs and BRCs that will be carefully
                         nurtured to then work with SMCs to ensure effective planning. Institutional reforms that allow local
Public Disclosure Copy




                         communities to participate effectively in the school affairs through the SMCs will help transform the
                         school system into a principal institution for community partnership.

                         III.    Enhancing access and retention for disadvantaged children

                         III.1    Provision of schooling and maintenance: While impressive gains have been made to improve
                         access and make it almost universal (98% of children have access to a primary school), there is a
                         small proportion of children especially from the marginalized and most advantaged communities
                         who are out of school. In addition, at the upper primary level, enrolments are still relatively low. The
                         coming phase of SSA will continue to make special provisions to enroll the marginalized children
                         through special training centers to prepare them for grade and age appropriate mainstreaming.
                         Community mobilization campaigns for the awareness of RTE Act will be made more widespread to
                         increase enrolment especially at the upper primary level. GIS mapping will be completed to identify
                         unserved habitations for schooling provision. The ratio of primary to upper primary schools/sections
                         will be brought down through increased provision of upper primary schools/sections. Importantly, to
                         ensure quality of infrastructure for the long-term, resources will also be put into ensuring that
                         infrastructure is well maintained. Further, there will be enhanced focus on increasing drinking water
                         and toilet facilities for girls and boys.

                         •        III.2    Enhancing participation and retention of girls, SC, ST, minority children, and
                         CWSN: There will be increased focus to improve the share of enrolment of girls, SC, ST, minority
                         and CWSN in schools vis-à-vis their share in the population. The process and timeliness for the
                         distribution of free entitlements like textbooks; uniforms; scholarships especially for girls, SC, ST
                         and minority children; and aids and appliances for CWSN will be strengthened to improve retention
                         rates of these children in schools. The SSA III project will help design specific strategies for CWSN,
                         especially for those with severe physical impairment and learning disabilities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         India, covering 28 States and 7 Union Territories. The Sarva Skisha Abhiyan (SSA) is being
                         implemented in partnership with State Governments to cover the entire country and address the needs
                         of about 200 million children.
                         Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) is Government of India's program for achievement of Universalization
                         of Elementary Education (UEE) in a time bound manner, as mandated by 86th amendment to the
                         Constitution of India making free and compulsory Education to the Children of 6-14 years age group,
                         a Fundamental Right.
                         India has made long strides in the last 50 years in the field of education. The National Policy on
                         Education (1986) and Program of Action (1992) also accorded top priority for achieving the goals of
                         Universal Elementary Education. A number of programs / schemes were launched during the last
                         four decades for universalization of elementary education. Some of these efforts have been in the
                         field of primary education and a few also covering upper primary sector.
                         The Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) is a comprehensive and integrated flagship program of
                         Government of India to attain Universal Elementary Education (UEE), in a mission mode. The
                         program was launched in 2001-2002 in partnership with the State Governments and Local Self
                         Governments. The program aims to provide useful and relevant, elementary education to all children
                         in the 6 to 14 age group. It is an initiative to universalize and improve quality of education through


                                                                      Page 6 of 15
                         decentralized context specific planning and with a process based, time bound implementation
                         strategy. The program lays emphasis on bridging gender and social category gaps at elementary
                         education level. The gigantic dimensions of the program and the financial implications call for a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         meticulous planning and a rigorous appraisal.

                         Due to these interventions, initiated by Government of India and the respective state Governments,
                         there has been considerable progress in providing access, improving retention and the quality
                         improvement in primary education sector. However, much needs to be done for the special focus
                         groups, and the upper primary sector. Quality improvement still remains a major concern, especially
                         for upper primary sector. SSAIII is an attempt to fill this vacuum. The program covers the whole
                         gamut of elementary education sector and has flexibility to incorporate new interventions for girls, e.
                         g., NPEGEL, Kasturba Gandhi Program.

                         The program will strengthen existing school infrastructure through provision of additional class
                         rooms, toilets, drinking water, maintenance grant and school improvement grants. Existing schools
                         with inadequate teacher strength are provided with additional teachers, while the capacity of existing
                         teachers is being strengthened by extensive training, grants for developing teaching-learning
                         materials and strengthening of the academic support structure at a cluster, block and district level.

                         In 2012-13, the GOI has identified certain special focus districts for providing special attention to
                         SCs and STs, minority population, out-of-school children and high gender gap issues. Funds for
                         these districts are sanctioned on priority for different interventions to meet the quality deficit
                         including teacher recruitment and strengthening teaching learning processes especially for the
                         disadvantaged segments.

                         The SSA adopts “the bottom-up” process of planning, wherein the felt needs of the served
                         communities and educational needs of learners are to be taken care of. In view of the fact that the
                         desired improvement and sustenance of the improved efficiency level cannot be achieved without the
                         active involvement of the community in the schooling system, SSA has emphasized the involvement
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of local people & stakeholders in planning. This also ensures reflection of local specificity, which is
                         essential for achieving the goals of the program. SSA seeks to provide quality elementary education
                         including life skills. SSA has aspecial focus on girl's education and children with special needs. SSA
                         also seeks to provide computer education to bridge the digital divide.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (SASDI)
                         Susrutha Pradeep Goonesekera (SASDS)
                         Khabilongtshup Khumujam (SASDI)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes               It is envisaged that civil works under the project
                         BP 4.01                                               will largely consist of construction of additional
                                                                               classrooms, toilets and/or water facilities (to meet
                                                                               the original shortfall or to meet the norms set
                                                                               forth under RTE act). Such specific interventions
                                                                               envisaged under the project such as upgrading of
                                                                               the building infrastructure may have some



                                                                       Page 7 of 15
                                                                        potential adverse environment, health and safety
                                                                        impacts in the local context. Even though the new
                                                                        buildings/blocks are likely to be located within
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        existing campus (within available govt. land),
                                                                        planning, design, construction of buildings and
                                                                        associated facilities would require appropriate
                                                                        integration of environment, health and safety
                                                                        measures to ensure that adverse environmental
                                                                        impacts are minimized and properly managed.
                                                                        Impacts/issues related to sanitation/ hygiene,
                                                                        water supply, drainage, waste water management,
                                                                        solid waste arrangement, access for physically
                                                                        challenged and fire safety would continue to need
                                                                        attention. More importantly, the efficacy of
                                                                        environment, health and safety management
                                                                        measures as part of the school operation/
                                                                        maintenance has a direct implication on the
                                                                        program outcome and therefore important to
                                                                        consider from an environment safeguards
                                                                        perspective.
                                                                        OP 4.01 has been triggered to facilitate creation/
                                                                        strengthening of mechanisms whereby school
                                                                        buildings can be planned, designed and
                                                                        maintained in an environmentally sound manner
                                                                        through integration of appropriate approaches
                                                                        into the over-all decision making process of the
                                                                        program.
                                                                        All other planned/proposed interventions under
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        the project will not have any significant, long
                                                                        term or irreversible impacts on natural or physical
                                                                        environment.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No             OP 4.04 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                        no interventions are envisaged in natural habitats,
                                                                        including those defined as ‘critical’ under the
                                                                        policy.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No             OP 4.36 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                        no interventions are envisaged in forest areas and
                                                                        therefore no conversion/degradation of this
                                                                        natural resource is expected to occur.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No             OP 4.09 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                        biological/environmental control methods or
                                                                        reliance on synthetic chemical pesticides is not
                                                                        envisaged.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No             The implementation of the project/program is
                         BP 4.11                                        not likely to affect religious structures of local
                                                                        significance or other physical cultural resources.



                                                                Page 8 of 15
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      Yes               The project is designed not to have any negative
                                                                               social impacts. In fact, the project has the
                                                                               potential to generate substantial positive social
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               benefits.
                                                                               The two previous projects (SSA I and II) have
                                                                               had specific focus on disadvantaged and
                                                                               vulnerable communities, including Scheduled
                                                                               Castes and Scheduled Tribes. This project will
                                                                               further improve on the existing implementation
                                                                               framework to ensure equitable learning outcomes
                                                                               for this group and to effectively tap opportunities
                                                                               for enhancing social inclusion, recognition and
                                                                               participation of all stakeholders.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No                OP 4.12 is not triggered for this project as no
                            4.12                                               resettlement is envisaged due to the
                                                                               implementation of the proposed project
                                                                               interventions.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No                OP 4.37 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                               there is no construction of new dams or activities
                                                                               that are concerned with safe functioning of
                                                                               existing dams.
                            Projects on International          No                OP 7.50 will not be triggered for this project as
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               there are no interventions planned/ proposed over
                                                                               or around an international waterway that could
                                                                               cause a potential conflict. There are also no
                                                                               activities that may affect the use or pollute such a
                                                                               waterway.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  OP 7.60 is not being triggered as the project is
                            7.60                                               not proposed in any disputed area.

                                                                               Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address
                                                                               Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in
                                                                               Bank-Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental Issues. While the project interventions are likely to have an over-all positive
                              impact on the elementary school education sector, specific interventions envisaged under the
                              project such as creation of upgrading/expansion of building and related infrastructure may have
                              some potential adverse environmental impacts in the local context. However, the nature of
                              activities proposed under the current project does not pose significant environmental risks or
                              issues.
                              The environmental issues in the project are related mainly to the construction and operation of
                              schools. Impacts pertaining to: (a) location (environmental and social features of the site and


                                                                       Page 9 of 15
                           surrounding land-uses); (b) design (lay-out within the campus, sanitation, water supply, drainage,
                           solid waste arrangements, waste water management, ventilation, access, energy efficiency,
                           material usage, fire safety and natural disaster dimension) and; (c) construction management,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           including safety issues will have to be dealt with in cases where new school construction and/or
                           additional civil works to meet the RTE requirements, including toilets and water facilities are
                           envisaged. This will also include the situations where need based infrastructure is introduced for
                           children with special needs.
                           In a vast majority of the cases where the school infrastructure has already been created, the most
                           pertinent environment, health and safety issues revolve around the need for maintaining a clean,
                           hygienic and safe learning and teaching environment. Issues such as regular cleaning and proper
                           maintenance of toilets, kitchen, water supply facilities, regular quality checks for the potable water
                           supply and waste management would require attention. There are also some planning related
                           deficiencies in cases where the piece-meal approach to school construction and development has
                           been marred by gaps resulting from lack of an holistically planned school campus.
                           The school infrastructure Operation and Maintenance (O&M) is currently financed through annual
                           Repair and Maintenance Grants (RMG) and other State funds, which are not always adequate. The
                           nature, scale and level of interventions, however will continue to remain contextual and will vary
                           between and sometimes, even within the state.
                           In view of the project’s potential impacts on the environment, the Bank’s OP 4.01 on
                           Environmental Assessment has been triggered, and the project is designated as Category B. On the
                           whole, with proper management, including some corrective actions, the program/project
                           interventions are not likely to cause large scale, significant or irreversible damage to natural or
                           physical environment.
                           Social Issues/Impacts. As per design, the project will only support expansion / repair / renovation /
                           upgrading of existing schools. The project will contribute to ensuring equitable learning outcomes
                           for the indigenous and disadvantaged groups and will also effectively tap opportunities for
                           enhancing social inclusion, recognition and participation of all stakeholders.
                           The government seeks to specific attention to special focus districts (established in 2012-13) under
                           SSA III, which are identified on indicators of infrastructure deficit, a high concentration of the SCs
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and STs, minority population, out-of-school children and high gender gap. The tribal development
                           plan (TDP) that had been in operation under SSA II has since been replaced. As a result of the gap
                           created, social management measures have been proposed under the SSA implementation
                           framework.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Some specific minor but long-term environmental impacts are associated with the operation and
                           management of the schools itself. Appropriate water and sanitation facilities, disposal of wastes
                           and dealing with issues where schools are exposed to noise or other sources of pollution require
                           regular attention. However, such adverse impacts are not likely to be large-scale or irreversible in
                           nature. These can be avoided/minimized to a great extent and the positive outcomes from the
                           program can be enhanced substantially by putting appropriate institutional mechanisms,
                           procedures and capacity in place. Considerations of environment, health and safety dimensions in
                           operation and maintenance cycle of schools would help in ensuring the soundness and
                           sustainability of the program from an environmental perspective.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not applicable.



                                                                     Page 10 of 15
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Safeguard policy issues have been considered by carrying out environment and social assessments
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and by applying OP 4.01 and OP 4.10 - this has resulted in preparation of distinct safeguard
                           instruments for the proposed operation. The safeguard instruments, thus prepared for the project
                           include: (a) Environment Assessment (with recommendations to strengthen environment, health
                           and safety aspects based on the diagnostic review, including feedback from key stakeholders) and;
                           (b) the Social Assessment (with recommendations/suggestions to strengthen social dimensions of
                           the program). Specific details are given in the sections below:

                          Management of Environmental Issues and Risks
                          Environmental Assessment. The Environmental Assessment (EA) for SSA II was undertaken and
                          completed in September 2007, including findings from National Third Party Evaluation (TPE)
                          conducted in several major states. National level monitoring consisted of TPE, periodic reviews by
                          project implementing authorities and special monitoring visits by TSG and other members.
                          National level monitoring was supplemented through the joint review missions (JRMs). These
                          missions were effective in identifying shortcomings and highlighting good practices.
                          Building on this, a limited Environmental Assessment (EA)/diagnostic study for the proposed
                          World Bank support to SSA III was undertaken and completed in November 2013. It builds on the
                          assessments conducted earlier for SSA I and SSA II and has been informed by results from a
                          similar exercise conducted for the secondary school program (RMSA), which looked at several
                          upper primary schools across five states, namely Assam, Gujarat, Kerala, Uttar Pradesh and
                          Odisha.
                          Management Measures. The SSA as a program has evolved since its launch and several
                          guidelines and manuals have been developed. Most of these manuals continue to remain relevant
                          to the program and will therefore be used for SSA III as well. The EA describes the manuals,
                          directives and guidelines, which have been prepared and shared with all states to address the
                          environmental issues as part of the planning and implementation stages of the program. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                          recommendations/management measures proposed as part of the Environmental Assessment study
                          (diagnostic review) for SSA III would further help in attaining/supporting the intended project
                          objectives by creating a healthy and safe learning and teaching environment in schools.
                          Under the project, all States will develop/strengthen sustainable school infrastructure O&M
                          procedures. A feature of SSA has been the involvement of communities and school level
                          institutions such as VECs/SMCs in the identification, planning, design, implementation, operation
                          and maintenance of schools and other program activities, which will continue to form a part of
                          these procedures.
                          The project will provide support to the implementation of ‘Whole School Development
                          Guidelines’ that have been recently formulated in 2013. This will help in rectifying at least some
                          of the issues that resulted from the lack of an over-all plan for developing facilities within a school
                          Likewise, the innovations developed during DPEP, SSA I and II such as BaLA (Building as
                          Learning Aid) have been implemented in some states but there remains a significant opportunity to
                          scale-up good practices. This too will be taken-up to strengthen the environmental performance of
                          the program. Further, interventions related to promoting cleanliness and hygiene (with specific
                          attention to sanitation facilities, water supply, kitchen/mess and personal hygiene) will be
                          strengthened by dove-tailing existing available materials and schemes.
                          Monitoring Mechanisms. National level monitoring will consist of Third Party Evaluations (TPE),
                          periodic reviews by project implementing authorities and special monitoring visits by TSG and
                          other members. National level monitoring will be supplemented through the joint review missions


                                                                     Page 11 of 15
                         (JRMs). These missions have been effective in identifying shortcomings and highlighting good
                         practices on a variety of aspects, including environment, health and safety dimensions.
                         DISE coverage has expanded across all schools and it continues to provide critical information
Public Disclosure Copy




                         required for infrastructure planning for schools. The same mechanism will be used for monitoring
                         the environmental, health and safety requirements and performance under the project as well.
                         A further innovation under SSA II was the inclusion of environmental audits which were
                         conducted by special teams using engineers within the State implementing agencies. All States and
                         UTs will be covered in a cycle of three years. The audits are expected to provide the state technical
                         teams an opportunity to learn through self-evaluation. The same system will be used for SSA III as
                         well.
                         Management of Social Issues and Risks.
                         The tribal development plan (TDP) that had been in operation under SSA II was replaced with a
                         new mechanism, more powerful and responsive, to meet the special needs of deprived sections of
                         populations like indigenous tribal populations, scheduled castes, minorities and girls. The Special
                         Focus Districts (SFDs) are provided special attention in planning, appraisal and financial
                         allocations. The indigenous peoples plan for SSA III, therefore, will to a large extent build and
                         improve upon the well-functioning SSA implementation framework that is largely dependent on
                         the SFDs for meeting the special needs of deprived segments.
                         Borrower’s Capacity Assessment and Implementation Arrangements
                         The key implementing agency for the Program/project will be the Ministry of Human Resource
                         Development, Govt. of India. The management and implementation arrangements under SSA III
                         will follow those used in SSA I and SSA II. Management and implementation arrangements under
                         SSA III will provide for: (i) program management, oversight and review; (ii) undertaking
                         management and implementation through institutional arrangements like the PAB of the SSA; (iii)
                         providing and generating technical support and capacity building effected through national and
                         state level institutions, including those on environment and social dimensions of the program.
                         National Level. The SSA is governed at the Centre by a General Body chaired by the Prime
                         Minister, an Executive Committee and a Project Approval Board. At the national level, a PAB is
                         functional that assists the General Body in the management and oversight of the SSA project that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         is now the vehicle for the RTE Act. The RTE Act envisages a National Advisory Council at the
                         Centre and State Advisory Councils, to advice on the implementation of the Act. As for
                         monitoring the Act designates the NCPCR and its state counterparts to ensure that the rights of the
                         child are not violated.
                         State Level. At the State level, a State Mission Authority whose governing council is chaired by
                         the Chief Minister operates as an autonomous SIS which provides direction and oversight at the
                         State level. The SIS, through the State Project Office (SPO), coordinates with District and sub-
                         District level organizations; supports districts in preparing annual plans and budgets (AWPBs); is
                         responsible for monitoring and evaluation; and serves as a channel for the flow of funds to the
                         lower levels. The SPO reports on implementation progress, and submits and negotiates the
                         consolidated AWP&Bs, to the national level.
                         District Level. At the District level, the oversight function is carried out by District Elementary
                         Education Committees, chaired by the District Collector. The District Project Office (DPO),
                         which works in close collaboration with the SPO, prepares the district AWP&B, and monitors
                         physical and financial implementation progress. The district office is headed by the District
                         Education Officer (DEO) who also performs the duties of the District Project Coordinator (DPC).
                         Sub-district Level. Block Education Offices (BEOs) have administrative responsibility for the
                         schools, working in close collaboration with BRCs and CRCs on academic support. With the
                         passing of the RTE Act, the sub-district level authority or the “local authority” having
                         administrative control over the school or empowered by or under any law for the time being in

                                                                   Page 12 of 15
                           force to function as a local authority in any city, town or village; … will through close
                           coordination with the SMCs oversee educational management and implementation in the block.
                           Community and School Level. Under the RTE Act the SMCs have been provided greater powers
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and responsibilities. They can take the support of the PRIs, to effectively monitor and implement
                           SSA, through community mobilization, preparing school development plans, identifying out of
                           school children and monitoring students’ and teachers’ attendance. SMCs are often sub
                           committees of the Gram Panchayat (the village level elected government).
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Stakeholders: The primary stakeholders include the intended target population or beneficiaries of
                           the program being supported under the proposed operation – the students and teachers of the
                           Elementary Education system. The project will directly benefit about 200 million children enrolled
                           in elementary schools and 1.8 million teachers in the sector. Girls are expected to be about 48.4%
                           of the TOTAL targeted beneficiaries. The secondary stakeholders include officials from MHRD,
                           NCERT, NUEPA, the administrative officials in the states associated with the planning and
                           implementation of the SSA, the members of local governments and SMCs, NGOs and experts.
                           Consultations: Stakeholder participation is central to design and implementation of the project and
                           provides for information sharing, consultation and collaboration measures. In SSA, the planning
                           approach itself follows a bottom-up method, where communities and local institutions (including
                           the Village Education Committees or School Management Committees as they are now called) are
                           involved in identification, planning, design, implementation and operation of schools and other
                           program activities. The Environment and Social Assessments used secondary data review and
                           qualitative tools to get feedback from the primary and secondary stakeholders. The study used
                           assessment schedules to get information from the State/District/Block/Village/Teachers/Children
                           and the community. Focus Group Discussions and key informants interviews were conducted to
                           collect details from the stakeholders.
                           Disclosure. The Ministry of Human Resource Development, Govt. of India has a program-specific
                           website for SSA (www.ssa.nic.in), wherein all important aspects and documents of the program
Public Disclosure Copy




                           are disclosed for dissemination.
                           The environment and social assessments prepared for the project are being uploaded for disclosure
                           on this website. It is expected that these documents will be in public domain by December 15,
                           2013. The same will be disclosed in the Bank’s Infoshop by December 18, 2013. The executive
                           summary of the documents will be translated in vernacular language (Hindi) and will be made
                           public through MHRD’s website. Further, the documents, including the executive summaries, will
                           be available at the
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       09-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    18-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                             13-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework



                                                                    Page 13 of 15
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                      11-Dec-2013
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                   13-Dec-2013
                            "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                              India                                                            11-Dec-2013
                              Comments:
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Shabnam Sinha

                                                                      Page 14 of 15
                         Approved By
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Amit Dar (SM)           Date: 30-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                         Page 15 of 15
