                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA8841

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jun-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Jun-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Liberia                           Project ID:    P146966
                                                       Parent         P115664
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     Emergency Monrovia Urban Sanitation 2AF (P146966)
   Parent Project    Emergency Monrovia Urban Sanitation Project (EMUS) (P115664)
   Name:
   Task Team         Ventura Bengoechea
   Leader:
   Estimated                                           Estimated   26-Jun-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    AFTU2                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Solid waste management (100%)
   Theme(s):         Urban services and housing for the poor (50%), City-wide Infrastructure and
                     Service Delivery (50%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      16.67           Total Bank Financing:                 0.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                       Amount
     Borrower                                                                                  9.67
     Liberia Reconstruction Trust Fund                                                         7.00
     Total                                                                                    16.67
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                             Page 1 of 6
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent


   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


 3. Project Description
The project activities represent a continuation of the current ones on a further financial declining
basis over a period of two and a half years. This additional period will allow for an orderly phasing
out of the Project Implementation Unit, which has provided great support to MCC beyond project
implementation. The PIU responsibilities will be transferred to the Waste Management, Finance and
other Departments of MCC.

•       Component 1: Solid Waste Collection. The additional funds will be used to partially finance
solid waste collection and disposal costs in a declining basis over a period of two and a half
additional years. EMUS Project has financed these activities as follows: 100% in 2010 and 2011,
80% in 2012, and 60% in 2013. The proposed 2AF will continue this decreasing trend by financing
50% the first year of implementation, 40% the second year and 30% the last year. The balance will
be financed by a combination of GOL/MCC funds.

•       Component 2: Capacity Building at MCC. Taking into consideration the technical assistance
provided by EMUS to MCC to strengthen its capacity to plan, design, and deliver solid waste and
other services to its constituencies, MCC will be gradually taking over the responsibilities of the PIU,
which will be phased out over the next two years.

•       Component 3: Development of new sanitary landfill. Although there is an urgent need to
develop a new landfill over the next three years, no funds will be provided for this activity under the
proposed second AF, other than preliminary studies. The only activity that will be carried out with
regard to landfills is the environmental protection of ground water at the existing one by covering the
area where waste was originally dumped on the ground. High Density Poly-Ethylene (HDPE),
already imported, will be used to cover that waste.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Project activities will be located in Monrovia.

 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)
Felix Nii Tettey Oku (AFTN3)

 6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project triggers OP4.01 due to the planned
 BP 4.01                                              construction and waste management activities
                                                      associated with two waste transfer stations and
                                                      landfill site which could have an adverse impact


                                              Page 2 of 6
                                                        on health and the general environment. An ESIA
                                                        and three EMPs have been prepared, consulted
                                                        upon and disclosed to manage the potential
                                                        environmental/social impacts from the facilities.
   Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               The waste management activities at the two waste
                                                        transfer stations and landfill site is not causing
                                                        direct or indirect significant conversion (loss) or
                                                        degradation of natural habitats.
   Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               Project activities have no impact on health and
                                                        quality of forests.
   Pest Management OP 4.09             No               The project activities do not involve procurement
                                                        of pesticides or pesticide application equipment
                                                        and do not affect pest management in a way that
                                                        harm could be done.
   Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               The locations of the two waste transfer stations
   BP 4.11                                              and landfill site are not within the vicinity of,
                                                        recognized cultural heritage sites.
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No               N/A

   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               The construction of the two waste transfer
   4.12                                                 stations and the buffer around the Whein Town
                                                        Landfill site had required pieces of land. Two
                                                        RAPs and one ARAP have been prepared to
                                                        address resettlement policy concerns.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               Project activities do not involve construction of
                                                        new or renovation of existing dams.
   Projects on International        No                  Project activities have no impact on international
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 waterways.
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  Project activities are not within disputed areas.
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     Environmental: The proposed second AF will partially finance the continuation of secondary solid
     waste collection, which includes the operation of two existing transfer stations (Fiamah and
     Stockton Creek Transfer Stations) and operation and maintenance of an existing solid waste
     sanitary landfill site (Whein Town Landfill).

     Social: The activities financed under the 2AF do not require any acquisition of land, since they
     only involve provision of services and operation activities within existing facilities on lands which
     have been secured by under the parent project. The PIU has satisfactorily complied with the social
     safeguards obligations under Bank Policy.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities


                                                Page 3 of 6
  in the project area:
  Pollution of groundwater receptors from the Whein Town Landfill site has been identified a source
  of potential long-term impact.

  As a mitigation measure against this potential long term environmental impact, the landfill cells
  constructed under the first additional financing were equipped with liners to prevent groundwater
  contamination. The EMP and operations manual for the Landfill facility include intensive
  monitoring programs that are subject to periodic independent environmental audits. These
  monitoring programs include: groundwater quality above and below the landfill; quality of water
  supply wells in the vicinity, including two deep wells that MCC constructed for the community;
  and performance of the leachate treatment system. The first environmental auditing of the three
  MCC’s Solid Waste Management facilities at Whein Town Landfill, Fiamah and Stockton Creek
  Transfer Stations took place in June 2012 and have continued semiannually. The reports indicate
  that the landfill is not causing any groundwater contamination.

  When the useful life of the Landfill facility is over, it needs to be closed, capped and monitored as
  provided for in the closure plan provisioned in the ESIA.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  The 2AF will not source project alternative analysis on either location or design of operation as it
  will focus on the activities which have been initiated by the parent EMUS project.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Environmental:
  The parent project adopted the EMP for solid waste collection that was prepared by the borrower
  and disclosed under EIP and the ESIA for solid waste disposal at Whein Town that the borrower
  prepared and has been disclosed under EIPSC. The EMP was disclosed in-country on January 23,
  2009 and in the InfoShop on November 2, 2008. The ESIA was disclosed in-country on March 31,
  2009 and in the InfoShop on March 11, 2009.

  In compliance with the safeguard due diligence arrangements put in place for the Parent Project
  (P115664) secondary collection system component, three EMPs were prepared and approved by
  the Liberia EPA for the two new waste transfer stations at Fiamah and Stockton Creek and the
  landfill site at Whein Town on March 2010. All three EMPs were consulted on and publicly
  disclosed in-country between February 25 to March 24, 2010 and on Bank’s Infoshop on
  September 2010. Biannual Environmental and Social compliance audits have been conducted in
  all three (Fiamah, Stockton Creek and Whein Town) of the sites since June 2012 to ensure
  compliance with the requirement of the ESMPs. The December 2013 reports have identified
  areas for improvement but shown general compliance with the ESMP. The recommendations of
  the report and the environmental mitigation measures within the EMPs to reduce the
  environmental impacts at various stages of collection and disposal of waste together with the
  regular monitoring of the project’s activities have proven effective since inception of the parent
  project. This approach will be will be sustained under this 2 AF.

  Social.
  The activities to be financed by the 2AF do not require any acquisition of land, since the activities
  only involve provision of services and operational activities within the existing three facilities


                                             Page 4 of 6
  which have already been secured under the parent project.

  The PIU has satisfactorily complied with the social safeguards obligations under Bank Policy.
  Two Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) have been prepared for the Fiamah and Stockton Creek
  waste transfer stations. Seven people affected by the construction of the Fiamah and Stockton
  Creek Transfer Stations received compensations during the last quarter of 2010 and there are no
  pending issues related to these facilities. With regard to Whein Town, one abbreviated
  Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) was prepared for the necessary land acquisition in September
  2011. The ARAP was consulted on and publicly disclosed in country from August 6 to September
  5, 2012 and Bank’s Infoshop in August 2012. Compensation payments have been made to all but 2
  PAPs whose signed cheques are ready to be picked up. Payments to these 2 PAPs will conclude
  the settlement of all PAPs in the undisputed area as indicated in the ARAP. The other pending
  matter refers to a small section of buffer zone which is under investigation for multiple
  ownerships. The Ministry of Lands, Mines and Energy is collaborating with the courts in
  investigating the matter and, once there is a conclusion, the rightful owner(s) will be paid the
  required compensation. Fence construction has proceeded in such a way that the disputed area is
  being left temporarily outside of the fence until the dispute is resolved. A Grievance Committee
  with membership drawn from Ministries of Finance and Lands Mines & Energy, Environmental
  Protection Agency, Monrovia City Corporation, Liberia Refugee Resettlement & Repatriation
  Agency and the General Auditing Commission, has been constituted in accordance with Bank
  Policy. Since the PIU will be phased-out over the period of implementation of this project, special
  attention will be paid to training of the MCC staff who will take over the safeguards obligations, if
  different than the current staff at the PIU.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Residents around the facilities participated in the second audit exercises by observing the
  processes of samples collection and asking the auditor questions regarding environmental issues in
  the facilities. Through their participation, residents were informed about mitigation measures
  included in the project for the three facilities and hence were invited to participate in all
  subsequent audits. Copies of the reports are sent to the EPA, MCC and the Bank and to the
  operators of the facilities for their information and records. The reports indicate that the landfill is
  not causing any groundwater contamination.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                           07-Oct-2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                        02-Nov-2008
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure

  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                                              Page 5 of 6
  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
   OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    report?
    If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
    Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the credit/loan?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Ventura Bengoechea
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                     Date: 26-Jun-2014
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Alexander E. Bakalian (SM)                      Date: 27-Jun-2014




                                              Page 6 of 6
