                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC8119

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bangladesh                       Project ID:       P149493
                            Project Name:      Bangladesh Urban Resilience Project (P149493)
                            Task Team          Marc S. Forni
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          14-Sep-2014                      Estimated         16-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDC                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General public administration sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Natural disaster management (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       125.00                 Total Bank Financing:          125.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   125.00
                              Total                                                                         125.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objective is to increase the effectiveness of disaster preparedness
                           and response, while addressing existing and emergent risks in Dhaka and Sylhet.
                           C. Project Description
                           City-level actors are critical protagonists in the effort to develop resilient and livable cities in
                           Bangladesh. This project seeks to create an enabling environment for coordinated, locally managed
                           DRM. There are three core pillars of disaster resilience in urban settings, including: i) effective
                         emergency management; ii) improved structural resilience through reduction of existing physical
                         vulnerability; and iii) risk-sensitive land use planning and safe construction standards and practices
                         to ensure sustainable growth.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A comprehensive approach to increasing urban resilience requires coordinated, long-term investment
                         across all three pillars. This framework draws from the experience in urban earthquake resilience in
                         other countries, notably the World Bank’s Istanbul Seismic Risk Mitigation and Emergency
                         Preparedness Project. The proposed project covered in this document would serve as the first in a
                         series, which will initially focus on Pillar 1, to improve the critical capacity and infrastructure for
                         emergency planning and response. The proposed project will also lay the foundations for subsequent
                         projects in pillars 2 and 3 by identifying key risks in the built environment, and developing the
                         practice of risk-sensitive urban development in the country.

                         With the key elements of effective urban response in place as a result of this project, future attention
                         could then shift to reversing the trend of risk accumulation, and to increasing physical resilience
                         through broader investments in priority sectors. Under this strategy, a second project would seek to
                         further improve construction standards for future developments and reduce the existing physical
                         vulnerabilities in Dhaka and major cities across Bangladesh including Sylhet. A third project could
                         consider broader investment in priority sectors, for example water system, power system, transport,
                         and construction of protective infrastructure.

                         There is significant consensus and demand for this investment, consolidated through the ongoing US
                         $1.5 million World Bank / Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) TA
                         program that has been ongoing for the past two years. Through this assistance foundational outputs
                         have been delivered, including guidebooks on elements such as hazard, vulnerability and risk
                         assessment, legal and institutional approaches to DRM, risk-sensitive land-use planning, as well as
                         the development of knowledge and data sharing technology and protocols. The TA program
                         emphasizes collective problem-solving, shifting mindsets, and building consensus through multi-
                         stakeholder thematic ‘focus groups.’ The Project will benefit from continued support from GFDRR-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         supported technical assistance, providing just-in-time access to global expertise.

                         Component A: Emergency Response Systems Improvement – US$80 million

                         The objective of this component is to enhance the capacity of the targeted entities to effectively plan
                         and respond to urban disasters. They include Dhaka North City Corporation (DNCC), Dhaka South
                         City Corporation (DSCC), Sylhet City Corporation (SCC), and Fire Service and Civil Defence
                         (FSCD). The program includes the development and implementation of an integrated emergency
                         management system conformed to international standards including: i) establishing a uniform
                         emergency command/management system; ii) improving capacity and infrastructure for emergency
                         response including establishment of Emergency Operation Centers; iii) upgrading communication
                         networks and equipment; iv) undertaking related emergency management training, exercises and
                         drills; and v) establishing effective data sharing technology and protocols.

                         An integrated, inter-operable, coordinated system is essential to increase the effectiveness of
                         emergency response activities and to distribute roles and responsibilities effectively. To establish this
                         system, one Project Management Unit (PMU) will implement the two sub-components on behalf of
                         the various nodal agencies. The PMU will be housed in DNCC and will coordinate closely with
                         DSCC, SCC, FSCD, Department of Disaster Management (DDM) and Ministry of Disaster
                         Management and Relief (MoDMR). All Component requirements will be consolidated and
                         implemented by the DNCC PMU.

                         This Component will require action by the Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Committees (MoLGRD&C) and Ministry of Home Affairs (MoHA) prior to the start of the Project.
                         A Disaster Risk Reduction Management Cell (DRRMC) will be established within DNCC, DSCC,
                         SCC and FSCD HQ. Identified staff will be provided with an initial training on the integrated
                         emergency management system and the requirements of the DRRMC from the ongoing GFDRR TA.
                         The DRRMC will be responsible for all stages of DRM (preparedness, prevention, mitigation, and
                         response) within the respective agencies and will coordinate with the CCs & FSCD PMU formed
                         during project implementation.

                         A1. City-level emergency communications and management information system s – US$30 million

                         The objective of this sub-component is to support DNCC, DSCC, SCC, and FSCD to establish the
                         necessary hardware, software, personnel and training for basic communications infrastructure for
                         emergency response. Currently, key agencies in charge of response activities in Dhaka have
                         insufficient means to rapidly communicate in times of emergency at the municipal level.
                         Furthermore, there is no central Emergency Management Information System (EMIS), which is
                         needed to handle and disseminate information. Following a diagnostic of needs and capacities, the
                         EMIS will link first responders to city level and national authorities for purposes of early warning
                         and response. This sub-component will be implemented by DCCs.

                         A coordinated emergency communication and management system will be established in DSCC,
                         DNCC, Sylhet CC, FSCD HQ, DDM and MoDMR, and necessary resources and training will be
                         provided to the concerned agencies.

                         A2. Emergency operations centers, warehouse facilities and essential emergency management
                         equipment – US$40 million
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The objective of this sub-component is to support the establishment of emergency operations centers,
                         stockpiling of warehouse facilities, and procurement of essential emergency management equipment
                         for first-responder services in Dhaka. A needs assessment is currently underway through the World
                         Bank / GFDRR TA program. Working in close consultation with local and national officials, the TA
                         defines the physical layout requirements and identifies and prioritizes the specific equipment
                         standards to be used and ensures that the initiatives supported through this project are coordinated
                         with other initiatives by the government and international donors. This sub-component will be
                         implemented by DCCs.

                         The system put in place requires the interlinked systems of emergency operation centers (EOC)s,
                         warehouses and emergency equipment. EOCs serve as the nerves for planning, coordination and
                         decision making in time-sensitive situations, including on the deployment of resources and providing
                         situational updates and analysis. Warehouses are needed to pre-position emergency supplies, which
                         should be readily accessible in emergency situations. In addition, emergency management personnel
                         must have access to search and rescue equipment and facilities and training to support their efforts,
                         both of which are currently overlooked. The project will support the renovations of the physical
                         space assigned to the EOCs, the acquisition of equipment, such as response vehicles, upgrades of
                         emergency medical support teams, rescue equipment, command vehicles, and personal protective
                         gear.
                         Emergency operations centers will be established in the DSCC, DNCC, and Sylhet CC. Existing
                         centers in FSCD HQ, DDM and MoDMR will be upgraded to similar capacity and operability as the
                         ones in the CC’s. The necessary resources and training on operations and management of EOCs and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         emergencies will be provided to the relevant agencies.

                         A3. Training, exercises, and drills – US$5Million

                         The objective of this component is to train first responders and other officials and practitioners
                         involved in response planning and management on skills, standards and techniques of an effective
                         emergency management system. It includes also the preparation of targeted and city-wide drills and
                         exercises with the participation of all relevant stakeholders, including policy and decision makers,
                         community leaders, ward representatives, private sector companies, the media, and other segments of
                         the population. The outcomes and lesson learned from these drills and exercises will serve as inputs
                         to the emergency plans and protocols. This component will also include the organization of
                         volunteers in a sustainable and effective manner and their continued training. This subcomponent
                         will be implemented by DDM and FSCD.

                         A4. Assessment of the physical vulnerability of critical DCC Facilities – US$5 million

                         The objective of this component is to undertake the structural assessment of selected DCC facilities
                         and will establish a program for strengthening and retrofitting them for the purpose of emergency
                         response and relief. DNCC and DSCC own, maintain, and operate a number of critical public
                         facilities such as city halls, hospitals and health centers, social halls, recreation facilities, and
                         educational facilities. These buildings would be relied on as emergency shelters, emergency
                         response staging facilities, and first care facilities after a disaster. This subcomponent will be
                         implemented by DCCs.

                         Component B: Address Risks in the Built Environment – US$20 million
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This objective of this component is to develop the consensus-driven analytical foundation required
                         for longer term investments to reduce risks in the built environment of Dhaka and other cities in
                         Bangladesh. This component will be implemented by DCCs and DDM, as outlined below.

                         B1.     Understand the risks – US$15 million

                         The objective of this sub-component is to identify at-risk public infrastructure and facilitate physical
                         strengthening and retrofitting. It will focus on four types of critical infrastructure: i) public buildings
                         that must be resilient such that decision-makers are available during crisis situations, ii) water
                         systems that must be functional and must provide safe drinking water and capability for firefighting
                         during emergencies, especially since risk of contamination is high; and iii) transportation systems
                         that are critical for responding to emergencies in a timely and efficient manner. This will include
                         sector specific infrastructure vulnerability assessments, and the identification and prioritization of c.
                         US$3 billion of vulnerability reduction investments. This sub-component will be implemented by
                         RAJUK.

                         B2.     Communicate the risks – US$5 million

                         The objective of this sub-component is to assist the government in its policy formulation and
                         planning processes to incorporate disaster risks into development planning. It will include putting in
                         place the standards and programs for monitoring, evaluation, coordination and communicating risks
                         within government and between government and broader civil society in order to facilitate science-
                         informed decisions. A number of efforts have been moderately successful at assessing risks, but
Public Disclosure Copy




                         awareness remains low, and information is not shared in a way that facilitates decision making at the
                         local level. This sub-component will bring together different actors, including government agencies,
                         civil society, development partners, the digital volunteer community and citizens, and will be
                         implemented by DDM.

                         Data sets will be utilized by engineering and specialized firms to determine which approach (for
                         example between retrofitting and reconstruction) is most cost-effective. Furthermore, the data will
                         also inform emergency operations centers (e.g. by enhancing situational awareness and analysis), and
                         will provide a critical advocacy tool among the public for addressing risks. A large scale
                         communication campaign will be financed and supported under the subcomponent, including media
                         advertisements, on-demand notifications through text messaging and the internet, and other
                         communication tools as developed in the ongoing World Bank/GFDRR TA.

                         Component C: Support to improved construction, urban planning, and development – US$15million

                         The objective of this component is to put in place the institutional infrastructure and competency to
                         reduce long term earthquake vulnerability in Dhaka. It would address both the existing built
                         environment as well as future development. Various focus areas to reduce urban vulnerability will
                         be addressed, including; i) improved capacity to engage in risk-sensitive planning and development
                         of controls for building code enforcement; ii) improvement in construction standards through
                         engineer certification; and, iii) promotion of incentives for risk reduction. The subcomponent will
                         support pilot projects for resilient urban redevelopment, and will engage key professional
                         communities in training and planning exercises, including those involved in planning, engineering
                         and property development. This component will be implemented by RAJUK and will include
                         support to the three areas mentioned above.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C1.     Capacity support to RAJUK – US$5 million

                         This sub-component will improve the capacity of the Ministry of Housing and Public Works
                         (MoHPW) to enforce building construction standards, through the establishment of an Urban
                         Resilience Unit (URU) within RAJUK. This is necessary to support RAJUK and will address the
                         lack of human resources, both in number and capacity, within the agency. Staff will be identified and
                         provided with an initial introduction to the requirements of the URU through the ongoing GFDRR
                         TA. Thr ough the Project, the URU will be further strengthened to promote risk sensitive land use
                         planning processes, improve development control mechanisms, enforce zone ordinances, conduct
                         hazard and vulnerability analysis, train officials on building codes and standards, and provide
                         licensing and certification. The URU will coordinate closely with the RAJUK PMU formed during
                         project implementation and will remain when the Project period has ended.

                         C2.     Engineer certification program – US$3 million

                         This sub-component will support the establishment of an accredited professional certification for
                         structural engineers based on international best practices. It will build on documentation (e.g.,
                         certification bylaws, accreditation rules, and operating procedures) that spell out the various elements
                         of the Certification Program. Other activities include selecting members of the Accreditation Board,
                         identifying delivery institutions, promoting the program, and evaluating the demand through surveys
                         and other means. The certification program will established as a 2-year indicative program; however,
                         in the long term, the incentive-based program should become financially self-sustainable through
                         direct contributions by engineers and investments from the construction industry. While improving
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the implementation and certification of the building codes, RAJUK will be strengthened in their
                         capacity to enforce the codes.

                         C3.     Electronic monitoring system for building safety – US$7 million

                         This sub-component will institute an electronic monitoring system for building construction and
                         development. Electronic construction permits will speed up the process for builders, inspectors, and
                         plan reviewers, and provide for more timely information for all involved in both the public and
                         private sectors. The system will include a broad array of task-specific tools for plan reviews,
                         permitting, inspections, project tracking, fee collections, workflow management, and inter/intra-
                         departmental communication. The software will be tailored to each jurisdiction’s needs and can be
                         scaled nationally. This will enable additional transparency throughout the industry and further
                         promote safe construction.

                         Component D: Project Implementation, Monitoring, and Evaluation – US$10 million

                         The objective of this component is to ensure effective implementation of the Project activities. The
                         Project will have a complex implementation structure that engages several ministries focused on
                         disaster preparedness and emergency response. The implementing units will develop appropriate
                         methodologies and procedures for execution.

                         Due to the capacity building objectives of the project, it will be important to build M&E approaches
                         into the project management structure. An M&E Officer in the LGD PMU will be charged with the
                         responsibility of developing mechanisms to track and analyze the project’s effects, including the
                         resulting actions of key stakeholders – particularly the City Corporations. The project will also
                         undergo an independent mid-term review and end-of-project evaluation. In addition, activities under
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the Bank’s Governance and Anti-Corruption Action Plan will be implemented under this component.
                         These activities are meant to provide real time evaluation of the investment program in order to
                         highlight positive results and support the foundation of a longer term investment program.

                         Component E: Contingent Emergency Response – US$ 0 million

                         Following an adverse natural or man-made event or that causes a major disaster, the Government
                         may request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to this component (which presently carries a zero
                         allocation) to support response and reconstruction . This component would allow the Government to
                         request the Bank to reallocate project funds and designate them as Immediate Response Mechanism
                         funds to be engaged to partially cover emergency response and recovery costs. This component could
                         also be used to channel additional funds should they become available as a result of the emergency.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         All physical works under Component A will take place within urbanized areas in Dhaka and Sylhet.
                         The precise location is not yet known and confirmation is subject to further dialogue with the client.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The project is to be implemented by three implementing agencies, DNCC within the MoLGRD&C,
                           RAJUK within the MoHPW, and DDM within the MoDMR.

                           The three implementing Ministries will have the overall responsibility for the project implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           including, but not limited to, reporting, monitoring and evaluation, procurement control, financial
                           management, audit and disbursements, compliance with the environmental and social assessment, as
                           well as coordination with the line agencies and the Bank.

                           DCC has implemented World Bank supported projects, including a component of the ongoing Clean
                           Air and Sustainable Environment (CASE) Project and the closed Dhaka Urban Transport Project.
                           The DCCs were split into two in December 2011 and since then DNCC and DSCC have coordinated
                           in implementing CASE, with the CASE PMU located within DSCC. The DDM is currently
                           implementing one of the components of the Emergency Cyclone Recovery and Restoration Project
                           and a component of the Safety Net Systems for the Poorest Project. RAJUK has not implemented a
                           Bank supported project and does not have experience implementing other donor funded projects,.

                           It will be necessary to strengthen the implementing agencies with a PMU housing professional,
                           technical, procurement, financial management, social, and environment staff that would use
                           appropriate procurement and financial management systems, and procedures with adequate internal
                           control arrangements. These would be complemented by a specially designed GAAP.

                           The three implementing agencies have been assessed by the Bank fiduciary specialists as having the
                           capacity to manage projects similar to the proposed project. However, given the level of coordination
                           required in this project, the Bank will be conducting a thorough institutional assessment of the
                           concerned agencies during preparation to determine the appropriate implementation and fiduciary
                           arrangements.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Nadia Sharmin (SASDC)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Md. Akhtaruzzaman (SASDS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             This policy is triggered as the project will
                           BP 4.01                                             conduct upgrade or construction of emergency
                                                                               management infrastructure.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         TBD             This policy will be reconsidered once specific
                                                                               scope of project is decided as the project is
                                                                               proposing construction works in unknown
                                                                               locations at this stage.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  TBD             This policy will be reconsidered once specific
                                                                               scope of project is decided as the project is
                                                                               proposing construction works in unknown
                                                                               locations at this stage.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No              This policy is not triggered due to the project
                                                                               description.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   TBD                           This policy will be reconsidered once specific
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         scope of project is decided as the project is
                                                                                                                                 proposing construction works in unknown
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 locations at this stage. Also, please consider
                                                                                                                                 chance find possibility during construction
                                                                                                                                 phase.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            This policy is not triggered due to the project
                                                                                                                                 description.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    TBD                           This policy will be reconsidered once specific
                                 4.12                                                                                            scope of project is decided as the project is
                                                                                                                                 proposing construction works in unknown
                                                                                                                                 locations at this stage.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This policy is not triggered due to the project
                                                                                                                                 description.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             This policy is not triggered due to the project
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            description.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This policy is not triggered due to the project
                                 7.60                                                                                            description.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-May-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      All studies completed by October 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Marc S. Forni

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Zia Al Jalaly (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 14-Apr-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst (SM)                                                                                       Date: 15-Apr-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
