INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 172
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Jan-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Pakistan                   Project ID:  P130193
Project Name: Punjab Skills Development (P130193)
Task Team Scherezad Joya Monami Latif,Ayesha Khan
Leader(s):
Estimated       23-Jan-2015                Estimated    30-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Vocational training (80%), Tertiary education (10%), Secondary education
(10%)
Theme(s):       Education for the knowledge economy (75%), Education for all (25%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      60.00            Total Bank Financing:   50.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         10.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                50.00
Total                                                                      60.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to to improve the quality, labor market relevance of,
and access to skills training programs in priority sectors in the Punjab.
3. Project Description
The Project would be implemented over a five year period and has two components. The first uses
Page 1 of 5


﻿results-based financing to support the achievement of GoPunjab's Growth Strategy objectives
through five sub-components in three strategic areas: (a) strengthen the skills training system; (b)
improving the quality and relevance of skills training; and (c) increasing access to market-relevant
trades. For each sub-component, a disbursement-linked indicator (DLI) has been identified with
time-bound targets. Targets have been selected as key links in a results chain that incrementally
contribute to the achievement of the Project Development Objective. Funds would be disbursed upon
the achievement of targets.
The second component would finance all monitoring and evaluation, technical assistance and
capacity building required to achieve the DLIs and manage project implementation using a
traditional reimbursement mode based on statements of expenditures after the completion of
activities.
Component One: Improving and Expanding Market-Relevant Skills Training (US$46 million
equivalent, 92% of total Project cost)
This component uses results-based financing to support the achievement of GoPunjab's Growth
Strategy objectives through five sub-components along three strategic lines: (a) strengthening the
management and coordination of the skills training sector; (b) improving the quality and relevance of
skills training; and (c) increasing access to market-relevant trades. For each sub-component, a
disbursement-linked indicator (DLI) has been identified with time-bound targets. Targets have been
selected as key links in a results chain that incrementally contribute to the achievement of the Project
Development Objective. Funds would be disbursed upon the achievement of targets.
Strategic Area One: Strengthening the skills training system. The Project would work to strengthen
public institutions in the Punjab to accredit, regulate, certify and deliver skills training services. It
would achieve this by: (i) Sub-component 1.1 - Developing a single agency responsible for the
accreditation, regulation and certification of all training providers and graduates in the province; and,
(ii) Sub-component 1.2 - Addressing institutional constraints in the Punjab Technical Education and
Vocational Training Authority (P-TEVTA) to help it become an efficient and effective training
provider of quality and market-relevant courses.
Strategic Area Two: Improving the quality and relevance of training programs. The Project would
a        work to raise the quality of skilled graduates through: (i) Sub-component 1.3 - Introduction of
competency-based training and assessment; and, (ii) Sub-component 1.4 - Improved collaboration
between employers and training providers to increase the industrial relevance of training content.
Strategic Area Three: Increasing access to market-relevant trades. The Project would work through
one sub-component, Sub-component 1.5 - Increasing the supply of skilled workers in demand-driven
trades, to increase the levels of enrollment in technical and vocational training courses that produce
the skills needed in the priority economic sectors identified in the Punjab Growth Strategy and Skills
Strategy and Vision 2018.
Component Two: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Technical Assistance (US
$4 million equivalent, 8% of total Project cost)
The objective of this component is to support Project management, monitoring and evaluation, and
technical assistance to enable the achievement of the DLIs and ensure efficient and effective
management of the Project. M&E strengthening of the skills development system is ensconced
Page 2 of 5


﻿within Project design and financing for M&E activities would come out of this component. In
addition, this component would finance advisory, technical, monitoring and capacity building
support to achieve DLIs 1-5. It would also finance Project operating costs, including inter alia
personnel costs associated with seconding staff to and hiring technical assistance for the Project
O
U        Implementation Unit (PIU), equipment, supervision costs (transportation and per diems) and
incremental operating costs at the Department of Industries, Commerce, and Investment (DoICI) and
P-TEVTA associated with the work of staff or TA working on Project implementation. It would also
finance communications activities to engage and inform stakeholders about Project activities and the
sectoral reforms it suppo rts.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project will be implemented in the province of Punjab. Project activity will take place in mostly
urban or semi-urban areas with no expected activities in any pristine environments. The Project does
not involve any physical works, civil works or rehabilitation and thus have no interactions with
physical environment relevant to safeguards analysis.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Fouad Muhammad Khan (GENDR)
Saba Gul Khattak (GSURR)
Salma Omar (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment No          No physical works, construction, reconstruction or
OP/BP 4.01                           rehabilitation activity is envisioned as part of the
Project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No
Pest Management OP 4.09  No
a        Physical Cultural Resources No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP  No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement  No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas No
OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Page 3 of 5


﻿A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
O
There is no investment in infrastructure and no resettlement issues are expected to arise for the
Project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Mainly beneficial impacts are foreseen as the Project would improve skills and employability
prospects of trainees and students. Gender integration concerns are also met effectively.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The Project addresses additional issues of poverty, gender and employability lens. Thus all
foreseen adverse impacts have been addressed.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
None required as no OP is triggered.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Project has a comprehensive consultation and beneficiary feedback mechanism. Consultations
have and will continue to be held with P-TEVTA, PSDF and PVTC. Trainee and beneficiary
feedback will be sought throughout Project implementation through M&E activities. The results
framework will also include indicators disaggregated by gender where appropriate. No specific
consultation on safeguards is required.
B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
P         Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
in the project cost?
Page 4 of 5


﻿Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Scherezad Joya Monami Latif,Ayesha Khan
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Halil Dundar (PMGR)                  Date: 23-Jan-2015
Manager:
Page 5 of 5


