                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC8677

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Jul-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Brazil                           Project ID:      P147272
                            Project Name:      Bahia Road Transport for Regional Development Project (P147272)
                            Task Team          Gregoire Francois Gauthie
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          10-Oct-2014                      Estimated        30-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (80%), General transportation
                                               sector (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Export development and competitiveness (60%), Regional integration (20%),
                                               Rural services and infrastructure (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    300.00                     Total Bank Financing:        200.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     100.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        200.00
                              Total                                                                        300.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to contribute to enhance the condition and the safety of state
                           highways and feeder roads in selected regions. This objective seeks to underpin the broader goal of
                           spurring sustainable development in those regions.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed Project would consist of four components, totaling $300 million.

                         •       Performance-based State highway rehabilitation and maintenance ($210 million). Building
Public Disclosure Copy




                         on the success of the previous Bahia road project, this component aims at consolidating the
                         performance-based road management in Bahia. Approximately 2,000 km of State roads have been
                         pre-identified, based on the following criteria: (i) strategic importance of the road corridors for
                         Bahia’s logistics needs, (ii) overall road condition of the corridors, (iii) looking for synergies with the
                         new railway line under construction in Bahia (FIOL, Ferrovia de Integracao Oeste – Leste); and (iv)
                         inclusion of the previous Bahia road project’s corridor, aiming at sustainability of the maintenance.
                         These will be 5-year rehabilitation and maintenance contracts, part of the contractors’ payments
                         being based performance. Lessons learned from the previous project, as well as from latest best
                         practice, will be factored in the contract design. Pushing further the limits of the model, the State has
                         agreed to implement a pilot 10-year performance-based contract; Bahia will continue to be at the
                         forefront.

                         •        Feeder road improvement ($50 million). This component will finance the suppression of
                         critical points on rural local roads, either state or municipal. Works would primarily include
                         replacing wood bridges by standardized concrete bridges, as well as the construction of adequate
                         drainage. These investments would contribute to the infrastructure sustainability. This component is
                         considered as the necessary complement to the State road one, providing capillarity to the road
                         network, for producers to be able to send their products from farms to markets. While the areas of
                         focus of this component are not yet defined, the concept is, as much as possible, to find synergies
                         with the areas of focus of the Bahia Sustainable Rural Development Project (P147157). This latter
                         project, under preparation, will foster rural production and development, for eight product chains, in
                         the poorest areas of the State. The combination of both projects could have a multiplying effect on
                         beneficiaries.

                         •        Road safety ($15 million). This component would finance two kinds of activities. First,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         institutional strengthening activities, specific to road safety governance and knowledge. These
                         activities could include: building a momentum for road safety in Bahia, working towards the creation
                         of a Bahia road safety lead agency, working on road safety monitoring and reporting, drivers
                         licensing, etc. The second activity would establish a road safety pilot corridor; the concept is to
                         address road safety in an holistic manner and demonstrate a best practice replicable example.
                         Interventions would range from communication campaigns to infrastructure retrofit, in a road safety
                         perspective, including law enforcement (primarily, speed and drink-driving) and detailed monitoring/
                         evaluation.

                         •        Institutional strengthening ($25 million). Besides of the Project Coordination unit operating
                         costs, this component would finance selected institutional strengthening activities in line with
                         sustainability: (i) identify new options for sustainable road sector funding mechanisms, bridging the
                         sector funding gap; (ii) improve road asset management; (iii) “DERBA 100 years”: prepare Bahia’s
                         road agency for its upcoming challenges; (iv) improve logistics efficiency in Bahia; (v) monitor/
                         evaluate, better capturing the socio-economic impact of investments, transport in particular.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project activities will be located across all the state of Bahia territory, with some maintenance
                         activities being executed in road stretches covered by the previous Project, Bahia Integrated State
                         Highway Management Project (P095460).
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Borrower has satisfactory capacity for safeguard policies implementation. It has a thorough legal
                           framework and has demonstrated adequate institutional capacity (including staffing and budget) for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           identifying, avoiding and mitigating social and environmental impacts of its programs and projects.
                           The proposed Project will likely adopt similar institutional arrangements as those designed for the
                           Bahia Integrated State Highway Management Project (P095460). This means that the technical
                           responsibility for preparation, supervision, monitoring and evaluation of Project activities and results
                           – including safeguards – are expected to remain with the Borrower’s respective sector agencies (i.e.
                           Environmental Secretariat, Road Agency, etc.) under the coordination of the Project Coordination
                           Unit.

                           With a proposed allocation of US$ 25 million under its Institutional Strengthening component, the
                           proposed Project may continue strengthening social and environmental impact management in
                           Bahia. Under the proposed set of activities, improvement in the monitoring of safeguard application
                           outcomes will be sought through the strengthening of the State government’s capacity to monitor
                           environmental quality.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Jason Jacques Paiement (GURDR)
                           Marcio Cerqueira Batitucci (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Direct environmental impacts resulting from
                           BP 4.01                                               rehabilitation (on existing State paved roads)
                                                                                 and surfacing (on existing dirt roads) works are
                                                                                 expected to be minor, and mostly related to civil
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 works' execution. For improvements of the
                                                                                 municipal roads (the interventions consisting in
                                                                                 the construction of small bridges and culverts
                                                                                 allowing water crossing) and improvements of
                                                                                 traffic safety on State unpaved roads (consisting
                                                                                 in the replacement of existing narrow often
                                                                                 wooden structures by culverts and bridges),
                                                                                 direct environmental impacts are also expected
                                                                                 to be minor and related to the construction
                                                                                 phase.
                                                                                 For rehabilitation works: environmental
                                                                                 management frameworks establishing specific
                                                                                 environmental programs will be prepared by the
                                                                                 Borrower, and reviewed by the Bank. Their
                                                                                 implementation will be monitored by specific
                                                                                 environmental supervision and Bank's team
                                                                                 field visits.
                                                                                 An Environmental and Social Impact
                                                                                 Assessment (ESIA) will be prepared during
                                                             Project preparation to evaluate potential impacts
                                                             and propose mitigation measures. In accordance
                                                             with the potential impacts, adequate mitigation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             and monitoring measures will be established
                                                             based on specific EMPs and for the component
                                                             activities and sub-projects. For any road
                                                             segments already identified during Project
                                                             preparation as part of the set to be improved
                                                             during project implementation, the specific EA
                                                             and EMP will be prepared, consulted, and
                                                             disclosed before Project appraisal.
                                                             The elaboration of the ESIA will be contracted
                                                             to specialized consulting firms, through Terms
                                                             of Reference to be agreed upon by the Bank.
                                                             The ESIA will contain: (i) the criteria for road
                                                             and works selection, detailed mechanisms to
                                                             screen out high risk subprojects from an
                                                             environmental and social perspective; (ii) draft
                                                             terms of reference for the environmental and
                                                             social assessment of these investments; (iii)
                                                             mitigation measures, institutional capacity
                                                             building measures, and monitoring and
                                                             evaluation arrangements as necessary.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   While the works for improvement of road
                                                             transport conditions may affect riparian
                                                             vegetation in water crossings on a very marginal
                                                             fashion, the Project may result in indirect or
                                                             induced impacts which are presently unknown.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             The safeguard has been triggered given that the
                                                             specific road segments and their locations have
                                                             not been identified. The ESIA will include
                                                             screening criteria to identify the presence of
                                                             natural habitats, assess potential impacts, and
                                                             determine appropriate measures to avoid,
                                                             mitigate, or compensate for any possible direct
                                                             or indirect impacts.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            TBD   The Project will not directly involve forest
                                                             management or activities in forest areas.
                                                             However under its roadworks activities, it may
                                                             have activities that affect natural forests. Thus,
                                                             in accordance with OP/BP 4.01, Environmental
                                                             Assessment, the Project’s Environmental and
                                                             Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) will assess
                                                             the potential impact of the Project on forests
                                                             and/or the rights and welfare of local
                                                             communities and, if necessary, establish the
                                                             appropriate mitigation measures. Project
                                                                 screening criteria would review the possible
                                                                 impacts on forests and appropriate measures to
                                                                 mitigate any possible direct or indirect impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Decision on triggering this policy will be based
                                                                 on the ESIA findings.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   Although the Project will not finance the
                                                                 manufacture, use, or disposal of
                                                                 environmentally significant quantities of pest
                                                                 control products, this policy is triggered as there
                                                                 is a potential for future use of pesticides/
                                                                 herbicides outside of the project timeline.
                                                                  The Project Operational Manual and Catalogue
                                                                 for contractors will explicitly prohibit the use of
                                                                 pesticides/herbicides for works and services
                                                                 financed by the Project. The ESIA will evaluate
                                                                 the Project interventions in the context of this
                                                                 policy.
                                                                 The ESIA will also evaluate the possibility of
                                                                 future pesticide/herbicide application during
                                                                 subsequent road maintenance outside of the
                                                                 Project timeline, including the need for the
                                                                 future adoption of an economically and
                                                                 environmentally sustainable Integrated Pest
                                                                 Management (IPM) in relation to the roads
                                                                 associated with this Project. Project safeguard
                                                                 instruments would include guidance on good
                                                                 practice that should be adopted by the project in
                                                                 case the need arises for the use of such
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 substances.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Negative impacts on physical cultural resources
                         BP 4.11                                 are not expected during project implementation
                                                                 as the Project’s civil works will normally be
                                                                 located within the existing right-of-ways of road
                                                                 sections. However, "chance findings" during
                                                                 works are possible, and to handle such findings,
                                                                 Brazil has a well-developed legislative and
                                                                 normative framework, which is under the
                                                                 oversight of the National Institute for Protection
                                                                 of Historical and Archeological Sites (IPHAN).
                                                                 These procedures will be described in the ESIA
                                                                 mentioned above and provisions for proper
                                                                 handling of the issue by contractor will be part
                                                                 of bidding documents and works contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   Between 7,000 and 11,000 indigenous peoples
                                                                 live in or near one of the seven officially
                                                                 recognized indigenous territories in the State.
                                                                 The Bank project team shared a draft Terms of
                                                                Reference (TOR) with the Client for contracting
                                                                a specialized firm to conduct a project specific
                                                                Environment and Social Impact Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                (ESIA). These comprehensive TOR cover a
                                                                wide range of social issues including gender and
                                                                communications, and participation and
                                                                consultations, in addition to Bank safeguards
                                                                and applicable state and national legislation.
                                                                The ESIA will evaluate whether any project
                                                                funded activities may be implemented in areas
                                                                where indigenous peoples are present. As many
                                                                project locations will not be determined until
                                                                after implementation begins, the Client may
                                                                decide to prepare an Indigenous Peoples
                                                                Planning Framework (IPPF). Where relevant,
                                                                the IPPF will assist the Government of Bahia to
                                                                determine whether indigenous peoples are
                                                                present in any of the eventual project areas, and
                                                                if so, to ensure that the interested communities
                                                                support the proposed activities as well as any
                                                                additional measures required to maximize their
                                                                culturally appropriate benefits and/or avoid
                                                                potentially adverse impacts. Decision on
                                                                triggering this policy will be based on the ESIA
                                                                findings.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   The project is not expected to require any land
                         4.12                                   acquisition or involuntary resettlement.
                                                                However, because the exact location and design
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                specifications for the proposed investments—
                                                                for example, localized road realignments, the
                                                                elimination of accident-prone points, and the
                                                                widening of bridges—remain unknown at this
                                                                time, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                                                will be prepared and disclosed prior to
                                                                appraisal. The RPF will clarify resettlement
                                                                principles, organizational arrangements, and
                                                                design criteria to be applied to subprojects to be
                                                                prepared during project implementation. Also,
                                                                the ESIA will evaluate whether project activities
                                                                related to biodiversity conservation, land use
                                                                management, and water resources management
                                                                could result in restrictions of access to natural
                                                                resources in legally designated parks or
                                                                protected areas, with adverse impacts on local
                                                                livelihoods. Should this occur, a Process
                                                                Framework will also be prepared.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            Not applicable. The Project will not finance the
                                                                                                                                 construction of a new dam, rely on the
                                                                                                                                 performance of an existing dam or a dam under
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 construction, nor require increases in the
                                                                                                                                 capacity of an existing dam, nor changes in the
                                                                                                                                 characteristics of the impounded materials of
                                                                                                                                 the dam.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            Not applicable. None of the Project activities
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            are located in any international waterways and
                                                                                                                                 there are no other riparians impacted by the
                                                                                                                                 Project.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             Not applicable, because the activities financed
                                 7.60                                                                                            by the Project are not located in disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      - Draft ESIA ToR: April, 2014
                                      - Hiring ESIA consultancy: July, 2014
                                      - Draft ESIA: September, 2014
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Gregoire Francois Gauthie

                                 Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Dianna M. Pizarro (RSA)                                                                                              Date: 15-Jul-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Aurelio Menendez (SM)                                                                                                Date: 15-Jul-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
