                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC5696

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bosnia and Herzegovina           Project ID:       P143844
                            Project Name:      DRINA FLOOD PROTECTION PROJECT (P143844)
                            Task Team          Guy J. Alaerts
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          22-Jan-2014                      Estimated         14-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSAR                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Irrigation and drainage (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (67%), Rural services and infrastructure (33%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          30.00              Total Bank Financing:       25.00
                            Financing Gap:                0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             5.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         15.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   10.00
                              Total                                                                         30.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project’s objective is to provide increased protection from flood events to agricultural and
                           commercial interests and communities in the project areas. The PDO would be achieved through
                           construction, rehabilitation and modernization of flood protection and drainage infrastructure along
                           the Drina river and tributaries in select areas. The higher-level goal is to stimulate longer-term
                           investment in areas which heretofore were threatened by seasonal floods.
                         C. Project Description
                         This proposed Project has been identified as a key priority by BiH, which have been underlined by
                         the authorities after the December 2010 and February 2013 floods. The Project will address high-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         priority flood protection investments as defined by the 2012 analytic study conducted under the
                         Regional Drina River Basin Program. The Project would only include those investments that are
                         "no-regret," that is, they do not negatively impact neighboring or downstream countries; would not
                         require extensive additional analysis; nor require additional management agreements amongst the
                         riparians, thus averting potential preparation and/or implementation delays

                         The key results will be a significant reduction of the risk of flooding in the concerned municipalities.
                         This risk reduction can be directly linked with the implementation of the proposed works. Indicators
                         would include (i) functioning flood protection systems within project areas, (ii) number of meters of
                         dikes rehabilitated; (iii) flood forecasting equipment installed and regular flood warnings issued (iv)
                         high satisfaction rates amongst population and water users within the municipalities under the
                         project.

                         The project would have the following components:

                         a.       Component 1 (about US$25.00 million): This component will fund the civil engineering
                         works and related investments for the flood protection in the Bijeljina and Gorazde areas. It is
                         expected that this component will be mostly earth moving, dike construction and/or re-construction,
                         and river bank shaping works and building of protective structures for roads, bridges and other
                         infrastructure along the river.

                         b.      Component 2 (about US$1.5 million): This component will strengthen the flood forecasting
                         and early-warning facilities, as well as provide training and capacity building. Procurement will
                         include goods and installations as well as user training and data analysis to improve accuracy of
                         forecasted flows and timing of crests including warnings.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         c.      Component 3 (about US$ 3.5 million): This component will fund project management, and
                         supportive studies including additional detail designs and preparation of Bidding Documents, in the
                         case these have not been completed during project preparation.

                         More detailed information will be made available as project preparation progress. To date TORs are
                         being prepared from project preparation and detailed designs of the works.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will span municipalities of Bijeljina, Janja, Gorazde, Foca-Ustikolina and Pale-Praca,
                         located in the watershed of the Drina river, and in both Entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina -
                         Republika Srpska and Federation BiH.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The project will be executed through the state-level Ministry of Foreign Trade and External Relations
                         (MOFTER), and by agencies in the two entities - the Sava River Agency in FBiH and the Sava River
                         District Agency in RS. Both agencies are located under the respective ministries of Agriculture,
                         Waterworks and Forestry which have experience in implementing World Bank pojects. Additionally,
                         during project preparation the Bank’s safeguards specialists assigned to the project will assess the
                           adequacy of existing capacity for environmental and social performance and make recommendations
                           for improvement, if needed. Training will be provided to the PIU staff on EMP implementation and
                           adequate staffing arrangements will be made.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Vera Dugandzic (ECSSO)
                           Esma Kreso (ECSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes             The civil engineering works on flood protection
                           BP 4.01                                           that will be financed under Component 1 will
                                                                             most likely have some adverse environmental
                                                                             impacts during the construction phase. The
                                                                             works will need to be subject to an
                                                                             Environmental Assessment and Environmental
                                                                             Management Plan that will be prepared and
                                                                             disclosed with public consultations prior to start
                                                                             of works. If the scope of the actual works and
                                                                             precise locations are not known prior to Project
                                                                             Appraisal an Environmental Management
                                                                             Framework may be in place with EA and EMP
                                                                             prepared for the known sites. The works will
                                                                             most likely generate noise, dust, require
                                                                             adequate storage and management of wastes and
                                                                             protection of waterways during works.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD             The dikes on the lower stretches of the river
                                                                             near Bijelijna will follow the contours of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             flood plain created over the last century that is
                                                                             today mostly brush and wood covered and has
                                                                             little human activity. It is not a protected area
                                                                             and the EAs will include a light survey of the
                                                                             flood area to ensure that impacts from
                                                                             potentially higher water levels and longer flood
                                                                             periods would not effect critical rare species.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD             Excavation works and movement of earth may
                           BP 4.11                                           result in potential chance finds and the OP 4.11
                                                                             is triggered as a precaution. The site EAs will
                                                                             include a survey that assesses the areas as a
                                                                             precautionary measure. The decision to
                                                                             definitely trigger will be made by appraisal.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   It is very likely that the project implementation
                         4.12                                   will require land acquisition the scope of which
                                                                will be determined at a later stage of project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                preparation. More information on potential
                                                                social impact will be known after the field
                                                                verification visits by social safeguard specialist
                                                                are conducted to the locations of selected
                                                                municipalities of Bijeljina, and Gorazde,and
                                                                meetings with local officials and potential
                                                                project affected people (preparation mission will
                                                                be held in mid-September). However, based on
                                                                project information to date, planned civil works
                                                                in the municipality of Gorazde will entail
                                                                rehabilitation infrastructure works on public
                                                                land - on the river bank itself. In the
                                                                municipality of Bijeljina, new dike is planned to
                                                                be constructed on both private and public land.
                                                                Consultations with the affected farmers, owners
                                                                of the private land plots, have been held.
                                                                Farmers have expressed keen interest to sell
                                                                their land plots to the municipality as they are
                                                                tired of seeing their land flooded and crops/
                                                                yields ruined.

                                                                No physical relocation or displacement is
                                                                anticipated under the project. If the scale and
                                                                magnitude of land acquisition will not be known
                                                                before project appraisal, as a guiding
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                resettlement instrument Resettlement Policy
                                                                Framework (RPF) will be developed and
                                                                disclosed. In case of known locations,
                                                                Resettlement Plans (RP) will be developed and
                                                                disclosed. Public consultations with local
                                                                officials and affected farmers are ongoing. Joint
                                                                public consultations meeting covering both
                                                                environmental and social/resettlement could be
                                                                held in selected municipalities.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No    Dikes and works to retain water will not exceed
                                                                1.5 meters at their highest points. Dikes are of a
                                                                dry design only in contact with water during
                                                                periods of flooding. Upper reaches of river
                                                                involves rehabilitation of existing banks.
                         Projects on International        Yes   No alteration in the quality and quantity of
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   water are expected. Riparians will be notified
                                                                through Sava River commission.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 16-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The EA and EMF with subsequent EMPs as well as RPF/RPs will be prepared and disclosed with
                                      public consultations prior to Project Appraisal, which is planned for January 22, 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Guy J. Alaerts

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 18-Nov-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)                                                                                            Date: 26-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
