                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1298
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Russian Federation                Project ID:    P127405
                            Project Name:      Development of Innovative Pre-school Education in Sakha Republic (Yakutia)
                                               (P127405)
                            Task Team          Soren Nellemann
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       03-Feb-2014                          Estimated   01-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: ECSH2                                 Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Pre-primary education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       234.70               Total Bank Financing: 117.70
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  117.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     117.70
                              Total                                                                                     234.70
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve the access to kindergarten places and improve the
                           quality of early childhood care and education services in the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia), where the
                           conditions to do so are created.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         The Project would consist of two complementary components, in addition to an implementation
                         support component.The first component would aim to increase access to improved learning
                         environments for children of pre-school age, by building new ECD centers, and converting existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         buildings into ECD centers, using innovative designs.The second component would aim to improve
                         the quality and management of early childhood education and care servicesand to increase the use of
                         alternative forms of early education services.The third component would finance implementation
                         support.

                         Component 1: Increased access to improved learning environments (USD 226.3 million equivalent
                         (Rub 6912 million), 96.1% of total project cost)
                         The objective of this component is to increase the number of places available in improved pre-school
                         education and care centers.A total of 8,830 new places would be created, equivalent to covering 87%
                         of all children aged 3-7 years on the official waiting list for ECD services.This component would
                         finance: (i) construction of new ECD centers in urban areas; (ii) construction of new ECD centers
                         and rehabilitation of existing buildings as ECD centers, in rural areas; and (iii) development of
                         innovative designs for new and rehabilitated ECD centers.The component includes three sub-
                         components that reinforce one another:

                         Sub-component 1.1: New pre-school learning environments for urban areas and settlements

                         This sub-component would finance the construction of 36 new innovatively-designed ECD centers in
                         urban areas and settlements, with each center having an official capacity of at least 90 full-time
                         children.27ECD centers would be built in urban settlements and 9in Yakutsk city. This would create
                         at least an additional 6,400 pre-school places, roughly equivalent to the number of urban children
                         aged 3-7 years on the official waiting list.

                         Sub-component 1.2: New pre-school learning environments for rural and remote areas
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This sub-component would finance the construction of 42 new innovatively designed ECD centers in
                         villages, with each center having an official capacity of up to 75 full-time children; this would create
                         at least an additional 2,040 places.It would finance the rehabilitation of seven buildings as ECD
                         centers in remote areas; this would create new improved learning environments for at least 390
                         children.The new places created would be enough to enroll more than 60% of rural children aged 3-7
                         years on the official waiting list.

                         For all centers, the Project would finance the provision of furniture, teaching-learning materials and
                         equipment, and playgrounds.

                         Sub-component 1.3Innovative designs for ECD centers

                         In order to address shortcomings in existing designs and construction practices, the Project would
                         finance the development of innovative designs to be used for the civil works in sub-components 1.1
                         and 1.2.The designs would adhere to four guiding principles: the physical layout and furniture should
                         encourage play, active participation in learning, and the development of each child’s personal
                         characteristics; space should be used efficiently; materials and construction practices should
                         reconcile modernity with local usage, and accommodate risks associated with climate change; and
                         building and operating costs should be reduced (see details in the project description Annex 4).This
                         sub-component would also finance activities to enhance the consultative process during the


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         construction planning phase, with parents, the community, building users and other stakeholders.

                         Component 2: Innovations in ECD systems and service delivery(USD 7million equivalent (Rub
Public Disclosure Copy




                         218million), 3.0% of total project cost)

                         The objective of this component is to improve the quality and efficiency of ECD services as well as
                         to increase the provision of alternative forms of ECD services. This component is organized into
                         three sub-components that support reforms and innovations: to promote education services quality; to
                         manage the pre-school system more efficiently; and to expand access to ECD through alternative
                         forms of services delivery.

                         Sub-component 2.1.Strengthening of quality assurance and child development monitoring systems.
                         This sub-component would finance the improvement of the quality assurance (QA) and the child
                         development monitoring (CDM) systems, and build capacity in child-centered teaching-learning
                         practices.

                         The Project would support and finance the improvement of the QA system by incorporatingnew
                         federal standards of early education practice , including standards for a more child-centered approach
                         and for inclusive education, and producing instruments that check against the revised standards.
                         Further, the Project would support the revision of system procedures to incorporate more peer
                         review, an increased regularity in assessment, a comparative review of results across kindergartens,
                         and the linking of results to support from the MoE to address challenges and reward successes.The
                         child development monitoring (CDM) system would be technically improved to incorporate revised
                         child development standards, as well as instruments and procedures that would be used to monitor
                         child progress and improve education planning.

                         The Project would finance the design and delivery of an in-service training course, including
                         supplementary resource materials, for teachers and other ECD staff on the principles and use of the
                         strengthened QA and CDM systems.The course would also include modules on child-centered
Public Disclosure Copy




                         pedagogy and on inclusive education, and provide participants opportunities to observe and apply
                         child-centered teaching-learning practices. The training content and duration would be tailored for
                         two main categories of participants: teachers and other pedagogical staff (e.g. speech therapists); and
                         ECD Directors, methodologists and municipal/MoE staff, including inspectors.All pedagogical staff
                         (approx. 7,600 persons), ECD Directors (approx. 750), and municipal/MoE ECD staff (up to 60)
                         would be trained using project financing.Further, any staff hired to work in new ECD centers
                         established under the Project or hired to teach part-day education-only groups created in ECD centers
                         and primary schools under Sub-component 2.2would be trained.The course for ECD Directors and
                         methodologists would include a more extensive component on how to mentor teachers to apply
                         child-centered pedagogy, including instruments and methods for observation and coaching. The
                         component pertaining to the role of inspection would focus on supportive and formative inspection
                         approaches.

                         The Project would finance the development and delivery of a supplementary training module for all
                         pedagogical staff hired to work in the new or rehabilitated ECDs financed under Component One.
                         The Project would finance technical assistance to support the incorporation of materials developed
                         on QA, CDM, child-centered pedagogy, inclusive education, and working in innovative learning
                         environments into the pre-service training curriculum of the RS teacher training institutes. The
                         Project would also finance the participation of up to 15 ECD managers in tertiary education training
                         programs (MA level), to facilitate the introduction and dissemination of best practices in project-

                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                         related areas.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Improved system management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project would finance the piloting and introduction of innovations in system management.The
                         areas of reform would include inter alia the consolidation across urban ECD centers of certain
                         management functions; the outsourcing of non-education services to private or public sector
                         providers; and the introduction of per capita financing for pre-school education.The Project would
                         finance technical assistance and information exchange, as well as expenses associated with pilot
                         design, implementation and monitoring; the development of the legal-regulatory framework and
                         operational guidelines and procedures enabling innovative management practices; and the capacity
                         building of management and other staff to implement innovations and enable scaling up.The Project
                         would also finance study tours for decision-makers to learn more about successful practices in
                         priority reform areas.

                         Sub-component 2.3:Innovative approaches to ECD provision

                         This sub-component would finance activities that expand and improve the range of innovative and
                         alternative forms of ECD services provision, particularly for children aged three-four years and
                         under. This would create an additional 5,000 places for pre-school care and education. These places
                         would be more than sufficient to enroll all children aged 3-7 years on the official waiting list who did
                         not get a place in one of the spaces created under components 1.1 and 1.2.

                         The Project would support the expansion and improved quality of home-based education and care
                         groups managed by a mother or other caregiver who is formally affiliated with an ECD center and
                         who brings her group to the center on a limited basis. To achieve this, the Project would finance the
                         training of ECD teachers on how to work with the caregivers and build their care-giving and
                         pedagogical capacities; as well as the provision of pedagogical and other materials for use by the
                         children in the caregiver’s group. The Project would include training of ECD teachers who work in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         centers that cater to nomadic children during their fixed months, and where a caregiver in the
                         community can be found who will provide early childhood stimulation to a group in her care during
                         the months the community is mobile. Relatedly, the Project would also finance the development and
                         distribution of an adapted curriculum for group caregivers who live in areas that are difficult to
                         access, including among nomadic peoples and remote or underserved communities. The Project
                         would finance the development and distribution of materials for parents and caregivers on early
                         childhood stimulation; as well as the development and publication of a registry of formally-approved
                         group caregivers.
                         The Project would finance technical assistance and workshops to build the capacities of ECD and
                         primary school directors to expand the number of children attending their institutions on a part-time
                         basis for early education only. The Project would also finance the provision of pedagogical and other
                         materials for use by the children in these part-time groups.The Project would finance an analytical
                         review of private sector provision; revisions to the legal-regulatory framework that would promote
                         expansion of the private sector and public-private partnerships; and the training of public authorities
                         on the revised legal-regulatory framework and its implementation. Finally, the Project would finance
                         a competition highlighting best practices in the Republic in providing high quality innovative forms
                         of ECD services.

                         Sub-component 2.4: Communications and outreach activities
                         This sub-component would finance activities to inform and engage stakeholders - including the

                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                         media, government, parents and professionals - about the progress of the Project delivery, and
                         changes in the education sector supported by the Project. The sources and uses of project funds
                         would be made public. The Project would also finance a client satisfaction survey to be conducted a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         year after each new ECD center opens.A project dedicated internet Web-Site would be developed
                         and other communication means would be employed to inform the public about the project, and to
                         provide them with an opportunity to consult and give feedback, and file grievances.As well as the
                         consultative activities associated with safeguards, the Project would finance outreach activities to
                         beneficiary communities, with a special focus on indigenous peoples.

                         Component Three: Project Management and Supervision (USD 2.0 million equivalent (Rub 62
                         million); 0.9% of total project cost)

                         The objective of this component is to ensure that the project is managed efficiently and effectively.
                         This component would finance project operating and monitoring costs, including salaries of the
                         Project Implementation Unit (PIU) staff and operating expenses such as translation/interpretation,
                         utilities, equipment, audit, communications and supervision (transportation and per diem); as well as
                         project-related monitoring and evaluation activities.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project implementation involves construction of new and rehabilitation/reconstruction of existing
                         kindergartens. All project sites are located on municipal land. All sites have necessary infrastructure
                         (water supply and sanitation, heat and electricity supply) and good level accessibility. Impact of
                         connection to engineering networks will be minimal. Sites in rural areas are not part of (or located
                         nearby) nature protected areas, hence OP Natural Habitats is not triggered.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexei Slenzak (ECSEN)
                         Jennifer Shkabatur (ECSSO)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               Environmental Assessment is triggered. Project
                          BP 4.01                                              implementation involves standard environmental
                                                                               impacts associated with construction or
                                                                               reconstruction/rehabilitation works (dust, noise,
                                                                               operation of construction machinery/trucks etc).
                                                                               Draft Environmental ManagementFramework has
                                                                               been prepared and disclosed. Partial EA/OVOS
                                                                               will be undertaken as part of preparation of sub-
                                                                               project design documentation and EMPs or EMP
                                                                               Checklists prepared for each site.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No




                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             Indigenous Peoples Policy OP 4.10 is triggered
                                                                         and draft Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework
                                                                         and two site specific Indigenous Peoples Plans
                                                                         (for Batagay Alyta and Khatystyr) have been
                                                                         prepared and disclosed due to presence of Even,
                                                                         Evenks and Yukaghir groups in several project
                                                                         sites. The IPPF and two IPPs will be finalized by
                                                                         the end of Appraisal and redisclosed. IPPs for
                                                                         other project sites will be prepared, if needed,
                                                                         once these project sites are selected during the
                                                                         implementation of the project. No negative
                                                                         impacts are expected. The IPPF focuses on
                                                                         documenting positive social impacts and ensuring
                                                                         broad community support of affected IPs.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             Involuntary Resettlement OP.4.12 is triggered as
                         4.12                                            the project will finance the construction of new
                                                                         preschool education facilities or rehabilitation of
                                                                         existing ones, and some sub-project activities
                                                                         may cause negative impacts on formal or
                                                                         informal assets, livelihood or income generating
                                                                         activities. Thus, a draft Resettlement Policy
                                                                         Framework was prepared and disclosed (the final
                                                                         version will be completed as part of Appraisal
                                                                         and redisclosed).
                                                                         All works on the restoration, rehabilitation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         construction of preschool education institutions
                                                                         financed under the project will be carried out on
                                                                         municipal property. Similarly, all investments in
                                                                         the sub-projects (reconstruction of small roads,
                                                                         kindergarten playgrounds) will be implemented
                                                                         on public lands and do not require land
                                                                         withdrawal. This was confirmed by the initial
                                                                         screening of sites, where Project activities will be
                                                                         held during the first year of Project
                                                                         implementation. Further, as no formal or informal
                                                                         economic activities are conducted on Project sites
                                                                         that were identified for the first year of Project
                                                                         implementation, no loss of income is expected as
                                                                         a result of Project activities on these sites.
                                                                         Site-specific Resettlement Action will be
                                                                         prepared, if needed, once additional Project sites
                                                                         are identified as part of the Project
                                                                         implementation.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No



                                                                 Page 6 of 9
                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental impacts of construction and reconstruction of preschool educational institution
                              sites will be undertaken within the boundaries of existing cities or villages. These impacts are
                              standard for this type of projects and broadly include: (i) air pollution and noise from trucks, other
                              construction machinery, and (ii) soil disturbance (in case of new construction). These
                              environmental impacts can be mitigated by good construction and general housekeeping practices
                              and through implementation of the EMPs/EMP Checklists. The project is assigned environmental
                              Category B.
                              No protected areas will be affected by the project. Safeguard Policy on Natural Habitats will not
                              be triggered.
                              No physical cultural resources would be affected, however, “chance finds” provisions will be
                              included in the standard bidding contracts. Safeguard Policy on Physical Cultural Resources will
                              not be triggered.
                              Draft Indigenous Peoples Framework and two site-specific Indigenous Peoples Plans were
                              prepared and disclosed (the final versions will be completed as part of Appraisal and redisclosed).
                              The project is expected to directly benefit indigenous peoples and no negative impacts are
                              foreseen.
                              A draft Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared and disclosed (the final version will be
                              completed as part of Appraisal and redisclosed). All project sites that have been identified so far
Public Disclosure Copy




                              are located on empty municipal lands and there are no formal or informal economic activities on
                              these sites. Thus no land withdrawal or loss of income are expected as a result of Project activities
                              on these sites. Site-specific Resettlement Action will be prepared, if needed, once additional
                              Project sites are identified as part of the Project’s implementation.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              No potential indirect and/or long-term impacts are anticipated.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The borrower identified key PIU staff responsible for implementation of project and compliance
                              with safeguards policy issues, particularly implementation of EMPs, IPP and RPF provisions.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              The in-depth stakeholder consultations were conducted in March and June 2012 to solicit
                              stakeholder’s feedback on the project design, validate project assumptions and identify any


                                                                          Page 7 of 9
                           negative impacts, which the project could entail. Additional consultations on draft IPPF and RPF
                           were conducted on May 31, 2013 with particular focus on soliciting feedback from representatives
                           of indigenous communities. The draft safeguards documents are disclosed at the Ministry of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Education website.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01-May-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Russian Federation                                               05-Nov-2013
                           Comments: The EMF was disclosed in the InfoShop in Decemeber 2013.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Russian Federation                                               16-Dec-2013
                           Comments: The documents were disclosed in a draft form. They will be finalized as part of
                                         Appraisal and redisclosed.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Russian Federation                                               16-Dec-2013
                           Comments: The documents were disclosed in a draft form. They will be finalized as part of
                                         Appraisal and redisclosed.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector       Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples


                                                                    Page 8 of 9
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Soren Nellemann
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                               Date: 19-Dec-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Andrea C. Guedes (SM)                             Date: 19-Dec-2013




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
