                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA6457
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Albania                          Project ID:    P130492
                            Project Name:     ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES PROJECT (P130492)
                            Task Team         Drite Dade
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         05-Mar-2014                      Estimated   17-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    ECSEN                            Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Forestry (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Land administration and management (80%), Climate change (10%), Water
                                              resource management (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      22.88           Total Bank Financing:              10.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                              0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                10.00
                              Free-standing TFs for ECA SD Sector Unit                                             10.00
                              Global Environment Facility - Cofinancing Trust Funds                                 2.88
                              Total                                                                                22.88
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)


                                                                    Page 1 of 11
                            A. Project Development Objective(s)
                            The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support sustainable land management practices
                            and increase communities’ monetary and non-monetary benefits, in targeted Project areas which
Public Disclosure Copy




                            are mainly in erosion prone rural upland areas.

                            This PDO is to be achieved through the support of alternative livelihoods and provision of
                            environmental services and through sustainable utilization of wood and pasture products in the
                            long term. The Project will particularly focus on enhancing the financial, economic, and
                            institutional sustainability of land use and natural resources management, and will help build
                            capacities of Albania farmers, community organizations and government institutions to efficiently
                            use EU funding. The Project will also promote gender equity.
                            B. Global Environmental Objective(s)


                         3. Project Description
                         The environmental services (such as carbon sequestration, protection of watersheds, the supply of
                         water for power generation, irrigation, drinking and sanitation, and the contribution to scenic beauty)
                         derived from any landscape ultimately depends on how the landscape is managed. This project aims
                         to maximize the provision of these services whilst contributing to the economic development of the
                         communities dependent on their local environment for their livelihoods. In any situation where
                         different goods and services are provided, there is a trade-off between the different benefit streams.
                         The goal is to manage the landscape holistically to optimize the balance between the different benefit
                         streams and the different beneficiaries. The ESP will identify means to secure funding for the
                         provision of direct production and the environmental services in perpetuity through: formalizing land
                         use rights and tenure, sharing the benefits of sustainable land use, implementing payments for
                         environmental services (e.g. sequestered carbon and reduced damage from erosion), and precursors
                         to EU funding (i.e. Natura 2000, agro-environment measures of the rural development program and
                         the LEADER approach, and the Instrument of Pre-Accession and Rural Development (IPARD)).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project components

                         Component 1: Strengthening Institutional Capacity to improve environmental services from
                         integrated landscape management (€8.5 million).

                         This component aims to build a stable institutional environment that facilitates sustainable upland
                         use management to maximize the provision of the different environmental services. To manage
                         forest, pasture, and micro-catchments sustainably, it is necessary to know the extent and condition of
                         the resources as a whole, to define priorities and set the overall framework within which the various
                         resources can be optimized. At the same time it is necessary for the ownership and tenure to be
                         clarified and registered. Without defined ownership and clarity of responsibilities it is difficult to
                         ensure and effectively monitor proper management. The component will strengthen the institutional
                         capacity to undertake several aspects of national level management of the forest sector including
                         carbon over and above the direct management planning and monitoring support being provided for
                         communal forest and pasture management under component 2. It will also support institutional
                         reform and development within the Ministry of Environment (MOE) Directorate of Forest, the
                         National Environment Agency (NEA), Regional Forestry Directorates (RFD) and District Forest
                         Office (DFO) and provide assistance for further legal gap analysis of regulations and guidelines.
                         The project will finance the following subcomponents:

                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                         a)      Strengthening Forest and Pasture Management Capacity. This will include:

                         (i)     preparation of a change detection National Forest Inventory (NFI);
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (ii)    assistance in developing a ten year rolling NFI;
                         (iii)   support for forest management planning in the state's productive forests (i.e. excluding
                         protected areas);
                         (iv)    establishment of the Albanian Forest Information System (AlFIS);
                         (v)     support for newly established Regional Forest Directorates (RFDs); and,
                         (vi)    first registration of Communal Forest and Pastures.

                         The support provided for the change detection and rolling forest inventories and the support for
                         forest management planning in the state’s production forests, will enable an up to date and
                         increasingly accurate estimate of the scale and impact of illegal logging within these forests. The
                         implementation of the AlFIS, will allow for systematizing timber sales (through whichever method is
                         preferred), much better recording of official removals and significantly improved transparency and
                         for reporting of suspicious activities through the planned web interface. Support for institutional
                         development of the RFDs will have a particular focus on reducing opportunities for corruption
                         through improving transparency, independent monitoring of the forests (through the rolling forest
                         inventory and state forest management planning) and setting up a system of checking the sites post
                         harvest.

                         b) Empowering Beneficiaries. This will include training of LGUs, Forest and Pasture User
                         Associations (FPUAs) and farmers, implementation of a Gender Action Plan (GAP), and the
                         establishment of proto-type LEADER Local Action Groups (LAGs). Activities of this sub-
                         component will include:
                         (i)       implementation of a GAP including gender specific activities such as (but not limited to):
                         establishment of village focal points for young men, young women and middle-aged/elder women;
                         training on gender awareness, women rights and equal opportunities; establishment or using of
                         existing gender focal points at the communal level to act as information point and grievance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mechanism for the grant scheme; provision of support to strengthen local women organizations etc.
                         (ii) support to the establishment of proto-type LAGs in a maximum of 5 communes with varying
                         economic and environmental settings, aiming at future implementation of LEADER type measures.
                         Support is envisaged in a maximum of 5 LAGs with varying economic and environmental settings.
                         To this end the Project will support the creation of an enabling framework, provide training to help
                         establish the LAGs and possibly funds for the implementation of some actions as defined in the
                         economic development strategy.
                         (iii) strengthening of LGUs and FPUAs administration and management capacities of through
                         training and demonstration to increase the understanding of sustainable use of forest, pastures and
                         agricultural lands that can generate both environmental benefits and livelihood opportunities; and
                         (iv) promote rural income generation by analyzing values chains and preparing short-term and
                         medium-term forest products processing and marketing plans. In conjunction with the work on
                         LAGs, this analysis will seek to understand the problems that farmers face and will aim to inform
                         future financing opportunities.

                         Component 2: Planning and Provision of IPARD like Grants to improve land management (€6.9
                         million).

                         This component aims to increase income generation opportunities and support government efforts to
                         alleviate poverty in rural areas and improve land use management through integrated planning and a

                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                         competitive grant scheme. The aim is that by improving the forest, pasture and micro-catchment
                         management, the environmental services to downstream beneficiaries and society as a whole can be
                         maximized whilst increasing the return and livelihood opportunities to the owners/users/managers of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the land. The grant scheme will finance rural farmers, women, and the local communities organized
                         in the FPUAs. This component will pave the way to support future payments for environmental
                         services to the forest and pasture sector by the EU rural development and agro-environment
                         financing mechanisms, provided under the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA II), which
                         was expected to take effect in January, 2014 and in the longer term through Natura 2000 payments
                         for sites that will be selected under the EU’s habitats and birds directives. The component will test
                         sustainable financing arrangements linked to EU future funding and build in this way capacities of
                         Albanian farmers, community organizations and government institutions to efficiently use the EU
                         funding for improving land use management and related environmental services.

                         The project will finance the following sub-components:
                         (a)      Preparation of Communal Micro-Catchment Plans (CMCPs), including the upgrading Forest
                         and Pasture Management Plans (CFPMPs) into CMCPs. The Project will support: (i) the preparation
                         of new guidelines for the preparation improved methods for CMCPs that provide for an integrated
                         and sustainable management and use of all natural resources (forest, pastures, water, agriculture land,
                         etc.) within the micro-catchments; (ii) Preparing CMCPs for about 37 new communes; these plans
                         will be based on Terrain Analysis and GIS supported by a Digital Elevation Model (DEM) which
                         will be used to determine critical areas and in particular those most prone to erosion. The process
                         involves cooperation between relevant government extension agencies such as agriculture,
                         veterinary, animal husbandry and forestry at local and regional levels. The DEM model will guide
                         the selection of the most appropriate land use management activities that provide environmental
                         services eligible for payment under the PES scheme; and (iii) updating of CFPMPs that will expire
                         during the Project life and upgrading them into CMCPs. This will also involve participatory planning
                         according to the new guidelines with increased involvement of women and other vulnerable
                         constituents.
                         (b)      Provision of IPARD like grants. TThis sub-component will support a demand-driven
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mechanism, where beneficiaries pro-actively apply and then if successful implement the agreed
                         activities. The objective of the competitive grants scheme is to finance implementation of the
                         CMCPs and CFPMPs, improve landuse management practices and provide target communities with
                         alternative livelihood opportunities and income. The scheme will have two windows: An Individual
                         Window, targeting private beneficiaries. This window will be similar to IPARD: it will reimburse
                         certified expenditures only after grant completion (as a consequence, labor contributions which
                         cannot be certified will not be accepted). Grant financing can be up to a maximum of 50% of the
                         costs, with the balance provided by the beneficiary in cash; and A Group Window, targeting groups
                         and associations. Part of this grant can be disbursed in advance, and the certification of expenditure is
                         more flexible so as to allow including labor provided by beneficiaries. In this case, grant financing
                         can be higher than 50%, in the order of 60-80% (specific criteria will be detailed in the Grant
                         Operational Manual (GOM) and can be adjusted during Project implementation to influence
                         beneficiaries’ demand). Eligible applicants may include: individual applicants, FPUAs, LAGs, NGOs
                         etc. who work with women and youth groups, and other associations. The Project will work to
                         involve vulnerable groups, particularly women, in planning and decision-making with respect to
                         preparation and implementation of the CFPMPs and CMCPs. More details on the establishment and
                         implementation of the competitive grants scheme will be detailed in a GOM.
                         (c)      Strengthening the capacity of ARDA, technical bodies and applicants. The Project will
                         conduct approximately 3000 days of training for DFO forest and pasture extension service staff. The
                         Project will conduct additional technical training for ARDA regional/district staff. This sub-

                                                                      Page 4 of 11
                         component will finance training and coaching activities to increase awareness about Project activities
                         and help applicants prepare good applications and simplified business plans. These activities will
                         also help to generate quality demand for the Competitive Grant Scheme. The GIZ experience with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IPARD like grants shows that potential applicants need to fully understand the rules of the scheme
                         and prepare financeable proposals.

                         Component 3: Introducing Payment for Environmental Services (€1.2 million).

                         The aim of this component is to assist the development of mechanisms that allow sustainable
                         financing of natural resource management beyond the ESP horizon. The component will implement
                         activities that will enable the establishment of financing mechanisms to reduce land degradation and
                         support sustainable livelihoods through provision of and compensation for ecosystem services that
                         would otherwise be uncompensated. The component will support the development and piloting of at
                         least two payments for environmental service mechanisms: payments for carbon sequestration and
                         payments for watershed services.
                         (a)      Development of Carbon Projects. This sub-component will measure and monitor carbon
                         sequestration in all areas where the Project is increasing forest and biomass growth. The sub-
                         component will finance (1) baseline analyses, (2) review of methodologies, approaches and standards
                         for quantifying and verifying carbon sequestration, (3) buyer scoping study, (4) development of a
                         project design document, and (5) Monitoring, Reporting and Verification (MRV). The Project will
                         explore the feasibility - in terms of costs, benefits, and market risk - of adopting a landscape
                         approach to land-based carbon, including Afforestation/ Reforestation (A/R), Improved Forest
                         Management (IFM), as well as increased carbon stocks in soils due to Sustainable Agricultural Land
                         Management (SALM). It is envisaged to develop a grouped project approach under the VCS; i.e., to
                         combine multiple project activities into a single project to which new instances may be added over
                         time. This approach will reduce transaction costs by allowing the grouping of activities from several
                         carbon accounting methodologies that have been developed for the land sector.
                         Implementing a land-use and forestry project based on an international standard will provide
                         opportunities to scale up carbon sequestration activities in p arallel, or as a follow up, by assisting the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         GOA to develop a Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action (NAMA) focusing on forestry and land
                         use, which could also harness scaled up financing by 2020 under the United Nations Framework
                         Convention on Climate Change. Grouped projects and Programs of Activities are considered the
                         precursor of the NAMA approach.
                         (b)      Development of Payments Mechanism for Watershed Services. This sub-component will
                         support sustainable landscape management in rural areas by developing an innovative market-based
                         approach, based on the principle that those who benefit from environmental services should pay
                         those who generate them. Baseline studies will be undertaken to document existing land management
                         practices and environmental services flows. In order to justify, economically, why scarce government
                         resources should be allocated to issues pertaining to soil degradation and the consequent
                         sedimentation of water bodies, an analysis of the costs of land degradation will be carried out funded
                         under the existing Swedish Trust Fund. Further economic analyses will establish (i) links between
                         land use practices and the generation of environmental services such as sediment retention, water
                         purification, and water flows, (ii) what specific downstream actors (such as the Tirana Water
                         Authority, UKT) might reasonably be willing to pay for improved watershed management, and (ii)
                         the magnitude of the payments necessary to incentivize changes in upstream land management.
                         These environmental impact, ‘willingness to pay’, and ‘willingness to accept’ studies will inform the
                         viability of the Payment for Environmental Services (PES) approach, the necessary compensation
                         levels, and how the payments should be distributed over time. Mechanism designs for both public
                         and private payment schemes will be explored.

                                                                       Page 5 of 11
                         (c)     Piloting of Payments for Watershed Services. This sub-component will implement a pilot
                         PES scheme that may include areas surrounding Bovilla and Ulza Reservoirs. Bovilla Reservoir,
                         which provides 80% of the drinking water for the Tirana Metropolitan Area, was chosen for the pilot
Public Disclosure Copy




                         because watershed development and poor land use practices are contributing to documented
                         reductions in the lake volume and reductions in water quality. Ulza faces similar problems with
                         erosion. A payment scheme may be implemented in Bovilla and Ulza Reservoirs according to the
                         protocols designed during the preparatory studies. A technical assistance (TA) program will assist
                         farmers in switching to eligible Sustainable Land Management (SLM) practices. A communications
                         and awareness-raising strategy will serve to develop stakeholder capacity, facilitate negotiation,
                         inform stakeholders on the progress of the process, and encourage UKT or other potential buyers of
                         watershed services to take over the Project payments, thereby ensuring the PES scheme’s
                         sustainability.

                         Component 4: Supporting Project Implementation (€1.0 million). The objective of this component is
                         to support the MOE to carryout mainstreamed project implementation and overall coordination
                         according to the agreed arrangement.

                         (a)     Project Management. Project implementation will be mainstreamed into the regular functions
                         of the MOE and other implementing institutions, including NEA, RDF, DFO, IPRO and ARDA.
                         Support for Project implementation will include: (i) provision of technical assistance, training and
                         office equipment and incremental operating costs in support of Project management; and (ii) support
                         for implementation of Bank fiduciary and safeguards requirements.
                         (b)     Establishment and operation of a Management Information System (MIS). Overall Project
                         Monitoring and Evaluation will be the responsibility of MOE. In support of this task, the Project will
                         finance the establishment of a MIS to efficiently track Project activities, measure intermediate
                         outcomes, procurement and other inputs, financing, documents, schedules of implement ation, risks
                         and assumptions, and corrective actions. Description of the MIS system will be included in the
                         Project Operational Manual (POM). The MOE will prepare and submit to the Bank semi-annual
                         progress report covering progress in physical implementation, use of funds and Project impacts. In
Public Disclosure Copy




                         addition to establishing the MIS, the Project will establish a PWS monitoring and evaluation
                         framework to enable linking payments to performance. The monitoring of service delivery will
                         include both site monitoring to verify compliance with the participatory micro-catchment
                         management plan, and physical monitoring of service delivery resulting from the implementation of
                         the management plans. Drawing lessons from the PWS mechanism and developing a replication/
                         scaling-up strategy for other watersheds with similar problems will be an important part of Project
                         follow-up. Finally, the PMT will monitor the implementation of the Environmental Management
                         Framework (EMF), which is an integrated part of planning, and implementing activities as regards
                         land management. Several Environmental Performance Audits will be carried out by an independent
                         company or consultant. Finally, the MOE will also monitor the implementation of GAP.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented throughout Albania, while farmers, FPUAs, action groups and
                         individuals spanning 310 rural communes and 2980 villages in the country will benefit either directly
                         or indirectly from the grant funds and other project activities.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Bekim Imeri (ECSSO)
                         Esma Kreso (ECSEN)


                                                                     Page 6 of 11
                         6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes           The grants scheme under component 2 will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                      include targeted activities in the local communes
                                                                      including remedial forest operations, anti-erosion
                                                                      measures, reducing pressure on pasture lands,
                                                                      investments into processing and sale of forest
                                                                      products. The activities, especially the anti-
                                                                      erosion measures, including construction of check
                                                                      dams, gully rehabilitation, repair of culverts and
                                                                      drains will have some environmental impacts
                                                                      associated with them, including generation of dust
                                                                      and noise, waste management, aesthetic
                                                                      appearance of these interventions (fitting into the
                                                                      surroundings and use of naturally present
                                                                      materials). A screening mechanism will be in
                                                                      place through the Environmental Management
                                                                      Framework (EMF) document, with template
                                                                      Environmental Management Plans for select 4-5
                                                                      activities that have also been the most common
                                                                      during the previous, NRD project, in order to
                                                                      adequately identify potential environmental
                                                                      impacts and provide suitable mitigation measures.
                                                                      An EMF has already been in place for the
                                                                      previous (Natural Resources Development)
                                                                      project and the subsequent SIDA Trust Fund on
                                                                      Improved natural Resources management. The
                                                                      original EMF has been revised based on practical
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      experience from the field and for the duration of
                                                                      the project implementation, as defined in the
                                                                      annual environmental performance audit reports
                                                                      that have been conducted, and applied to this
                                                                      Project as well.The Project team will also work
                                                                      with the Client to help establish a mechanism for
                                                                      identifying and mitigating environmental and
                                                                      social impacts that could arise from the future
                                                                      environmental services to ensure sound
                                                                      environmental and social practices are adhered to
                                                                      beyond the scope of the actual project.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes           Project activities, especially under Component 2
                                                                      are envisaged to be carried out in areas which
                                                                      may include locations that are under some form
                                                                      of protection regime. Special provisions are
                                                                      included in the EMF document to ensure
                                                                      environmentally sound interventions are
                                                                      implemented and that the impacts on habitats are
                                                                      minimized.



                                                              Page 7 of 11
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes            Project activities include afforestation as well as
                                                                             remedial forest operations (coppicing, cleaning,
                                                                             re-spacing, enrichment planting, selective
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             silvicultural thinning, etc.) as well as processing
                                                                             and sale of the sustainable production of wood
                                                                             products, such as poles, firewood and non-
                                                                             wooden forest products.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes            Some of the erosion control measures may
                                                                             include planting of fruit trees, or other
                                                                             agricultural activities which may require use of
                                                                             pest-control mechanisms. An Integrated Pest
                                                                             Management Plan has been developed as part of
                                                                             the EMF document to help promote use of
                                                                             biological/environmental pest control
                                                                             mechanisms and to help control the use of
                                                                             chemical substances.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No             There are no anticipated works near protected
                            BP 4.11                                          heritage or monument sites, nor will there be
                                                                             substantial excavation and earth-moving works.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No             The Involuntary Resettlement policy is not
                            4.12                                             triggered because the project will continue to
                                                                             support the decentralization of the forests and
                                                                             pastures from the central government to local
                                                                             government, development of management plans
                                                                             and their implementing them. The management
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             plans will be done in a participatory way through
                                                                             involvement of the communities as the traditional
                                                                             users of the pastures and forests. The project will
                                                                             not finance activities in private owned forests and
                                                                             pastures and nor there will be need for any seizure
                                                                             of private land.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No             There are no project sites that involves a dam or
                                                                             that are located downstream of a dam.
                            Projects on International         No             The project will not involve activities directly on
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                             international waterways or the tributaries. In
                                                                             particular, irrigation schemes are not eligible for
                                                                             financing under the grants of Component 2.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

                                                                     Page 8 of 11
                           It is generally expected that the ESP will not have major negative environmental impacts, but
                           rather that it will help reverse land and watershed degradation through both physical interventions
                           for forest and pasture regeneration and the empowerment of rural population and of local and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           central institutions. The project would support sustainable land use practices that help reduce
                           degradation in upland areas, reduce risks to downstream lands and infrastructure, improve
                           sustainability of dams and reservoirs, while improving water quality and improve agricultural
                           lands. As the project activities impact directly the livelihoods of the local rural communities, there
                           remains the potential for possible localized indirect and cumulative impacts of interventions
                           through the grants and any other potential impacts on local economies and society. The relatively
                           small and easily mitigated negative environmental impacts are anticipated during the works phase
                           of the small grants and local activities, for which a screening procedure along with template
                           Environmental Management Plans has been developed within the Environmental Management
                           Framework document.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The overall project will help establish better local management of natural resources and will
                           promote sustainable use of these resources. Carbon sequestration activities and payments for
                           environmental services will help promote positive environmental impacts in the project area and
                           the country overall.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           There are no project alternatives considered in order to minimize adverse impacts. The screening
                           procedure within the EMF, that shall be applied for the grants program will allow for
                           environmental and social review . This will lead to a final decision whether an activity is to be
                           financed or not, on an application by application basis.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The overall project management will be carried out by the Ministry of Environment. ARDA that
                           will administer the grants scheme will hire a safeguard specialist. The further implementation
                           arrangements would include a number of agencies that would liaise via Memoranda of
                           Understanding. The project will also build on the experiences of the now closed project Natural
                           Resource Development Project, that had a similar environmental screening procedure in place. In
                           addition, the grant program will be strictly guided by the Grant Operational Manual, where the
                           detailed environmental screening procedure will be laid out, in accordance with the one developed
                           within the EMF.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project will involve a number of institutions and will work with a number of levels in country,
                           in particular with the local communities. The consultant that has developed the EA and EMF has
                           identified a large group of potential stakeholders that included representatives of the institutions,
                           academia, local communities and non-governmental organizations that have been included in the
                           two sets of public consultations workshops (on July 31, 2013 and September 26, 2013).
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          13-Sep-2013


                                                                      Page 9 of 11
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Jan-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Albania                                                          26-Sep-2013
                           Comments: The documents including the EA, EMF and IPMP have been disclosed prior to the
                                         Final Public Consultations Workshop that was held on September 26, 2013.
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      13-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Jan-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Albania                                                          26-Sep-2013
                           Comments: IPMP is part of the EA and EMF and has been disclosed on September 26, 2013.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests



                                                                   Page 10 of 11
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Drite Dade
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Kulsum Ahmed (SM)                            Date: 10-Apr-2014




                                                                       Page 11 of 11
