                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                         APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSA1027
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            India                               Project ID:    P148531
                            Project Name:       Uttarakhand Health Systems Development Project (P148531)
                            Task Team           Somil Nagpal
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           02-Sep-2014                         Estimated   15-Jan-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                         Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GHNDR                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                    Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (75%), Non-compulsory health finance (15%), Public administration-
                                              Health (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Health system performance (50%), Child health (20%), Injuries and non-
                                              communicable diseases (20%), Other Financial Sector Developmen t (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     125.00           Total Bank Financing:                     100.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                              25.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                    100.00
                              Total                                                                                          125.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The PDO is to improve access to quality health services, particularly in the hilly districts of the state,
                           and to expand health financial risk protection for the residents of Uttarakhand.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                          Page 1 of 8
                         The proposed project will be implemented over six years, wherein the first year will be a ‘startup
                         year’ with a focus on commencing the revised design of Public-Private Partnership (PPP) service
                         delivery, setting up its performance measurement system and undertaking evidence-based design of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the integrated networked model, the health helpline system and RSBY primary care packages. This
                         will go concurrently with strengthening the state’s capacity to implement the project. The initial
                         rollout of the innovations in years 1 and 2 will be undertaken in a limited geographical area, with a
                         scale-up planned by year 4.

                         The proposed project will have two components: a) Innovations in engaging the private sector (for
                         integrated service delivery and for health financing), and b) Stewardship and system improvement to
                         enable innovations in engaging the private sector. A description of the activities under the two
                         proposed project components is provided below.

                         Component 1. Innovations in engaging the private sector (total amount: US$100 million, including
                         IDA US$ 80 million and GoUK US$ 20 million): Innovations in engaging the private sector is the
                         main project component that aims to create a conducive policy and institutional environment to
                         stimulate and finance innovative engagement with the private sector in the delivery of healthcare
                         services as well as in healthcare financing. This component will expand access to services by
                         creating integrated, technology-enabled health system architecture with enhanced focus and
                         availability of primary care, emergency care and necessary referral services. It will also expand
                         financial protection by defining a benefit package of primary care services for child and adolescent
                         care and for the management of non-communicable diseases. Component 1 comprises of two sub-
                         components:

                         •        Innovations in integrated delivery of healthcare services (primary, referral and emergency
                         care) (total amount: US$65 million, including IDA US$ 52 million and GoUK US$ 13 million): The
                         objective of this sub-component is to improve access to an integrated network of primary care,
                         referral services and emergency care in the state through engaging the private sector. The Bank’s
Public Disclosure Copy




                         support will focus on: (i) supporting the development of a conducive regulatory, policy and
                         institutional environment to support ongoing and new PPPs as well as new investments in the state ,
                         especially in the remote areas; (ii) reviewing and restructuring ongoing PPPs for community health
                         centers (CHCs) and mobile health vans; (iii) supporting the development of new PPPs as integrated
                         networks of mobile health vans, outsourced CHCs as well as government-run CHCs, and specialist
                         services and defined clinical and diagnostic services at the district hospitals. This will initially be
                         taken up in 2-4 selected districts and backed up by the development of an information network
                         promoting a patient centric health system, which would help patients navigate across different levels
                         of care across public and private providers, as well as create linkages to financing entities such as
                         RSBY/MSBY. The component will also finance a toll-free health helpline providing health
                         information and advice, and enabling a technology-enabled integration and coordination of services
                         offered by the health system.

                         •       Innovations in Healthcare Financing (total amount: US$35 million, including IDA US$ 28
                         million and GoUK US$ 7 million): This sub-component supports the expansion of primary care
                         coverage into the state’s health insurance programs (RSBY and MSBY) by designing, implementing
                         and evaluating benefit packages around childhood and adolescent health as well as case management
                         of NCDs in primary care settings, purchasing care from public as well as private providers.

                         The project will support the state with evidence and global knowledge to make key decisions on the


                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         specifics of expanded benefit packages, provider payment mechanisms, payment rates, provider
                         empanelment criteria (including the balance between access, quality and other provider
                         characteristics), and interface with the existing hospital coverage. It will finance the costs of an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation support agency, as well as reimburse the claims paid for primary care services and,
                         subsequently, finance the competitively determined premium paid for the primary care coverage
                         provided under the state’s health insurance programs.

                         Achieving this expansion will need to begin addressing bottlenecks facing the current
                         implementation of RSBY, addressing enrolment challenges as well as shortcomings from the supply
                         side. The state’s expansion of RSBY into primary care will also be necessarily phased. Expanded
                         packages will be piloted in a small number of districts. The first-phase coverage expansion is
                         proposed to start with child health services, with a plan to expand in the next phase to non-
                         communicable diseases.

                         Component 2. Stewardship and system improvement (total amount: US$25 million, including IDA
                         US$ 20 million and GoUK US$ 5 million): This component aims to strengthen the government’s
                         ability to engage effectively with the private sector and therefore to enable the government to provide
                         effective stewardship to the entire health system and particularly in its capacity to effectively pursue
                         the innovations being proposed under this project.
                         The component will focus on strengthening the institutional structures for stewardship and service
                         delivery and augmenting the state’s human resource capacity, so that the necessary skillsets required
                         for effective implementation of the project and the state’s health programs are available. The
                         strengthened capacity financed by this component will serve beyond the activities of this project, as it
                         will contribute to the government’s stewardship role for the health system as a whole. It will also
                         promote the establishment of a governance structure and regulatory system for improving quality of
                         care at all levels to ensure that services provided by public and private providers are of good,
                         comparable quality. It will support research and evidence generation, use of evidence for strategic
                         planning, and improved information systems for data generation and management, including timely
                         feedback to providers. Finally, the component will promote a multidisciplinary approach that will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strengthen the ability of the health system to respond to seasonal and context-specific needs. For
                         instance, specific activities under the project would include detailed planning for the potential
                         redeployment of mobile health vans as trauma centers in case of natural disasters, in close
                         coordination with the disaster response mechanisms being strengthened under an existing Bank-
                         financed project.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will benefit the residents of the entire state of Uttarakhand, and in particular those
                         residing in the remote, hilly and rural areas with poor availability of health services. Successful
                         implementation of the project will have a particularly positive impact on the underserved population
                         (women, elderly and communities living in remote areas). The strengthened availability of primary
                         care services and improved disaster response capabilities will also support the very large floating
                         population that visits the state for business, pilgrimage and tourism. Discussions with stakeholders on
                         innovative approaches for hilly/remote areas will also be undertaken
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Ruma Tavorath (GENDR)
                         Susrutha Pradeep Goonesekera (GURDR)



                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes           The nature of this project provides opportunities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                         to enhance the sanitation, hygiene and infection
                                                                         control and waste management systems and
                                                                         processes in the state so as to further promote
                                                                         sound public health outcomes, while also
                                                                         ensuring that there are no adverse impacts to the
                                                                         environment. Provision of good health services
                                                                         requires maintenance of clean and hygienic
                                                                         healthcare facilities, with adequate supply of
                                                                         clean, potable water and proper systems for
                                                                         sanitation, infection control and healthcare waste
                                                                         management. The OP is triggered to ensure that
                                                                         appropriate mitigatory measures are put in place
                                                                         to address potential negative impacts from the
                                                                         above.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           The indigenous people are categorized as tribal in
                                                                         the Indian context and the tribal population in UK
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         (many of whom reside in the hilly and remote
                                                                         areas) constitutes a little over 3 percent of the
                                                                         State’s total population. The project aims to
                                                                         enhance access and equity of health services to all
                                                                         underserved populations of the state. Thus, taking
                                                                         into account the findings of the Social
                                                                         Assessment, a draft IPP is currently being
                                                                         developed and will be disclosed as appropriate.
                                                                         The core actions coming out of the IPP will also
                                                                         be incorporated into the project ESMP.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No
                         4.12
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International        No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                         7.60




                                                                 Page 4 of 8
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environment:
                              Sound hazardous solid and liquid waste management is necessary to prevent spread of infections
                              such as HIV, Hepatitis and other viral or bacterial infections, which pose huge risk to public
                              health. Improper occupational practices and unsafe handling of infectious waste potentially expose
                              health care workers, waste handlers, patients and the community to infection and injuries. Open
                              and uncontrolled slow burning of mixed waste which includes plastic waste produces emissions,
                              such as dioxins and furans, which can be potentially carcinogenic. An integrated approach
                              towards better sanitation, hygiene and infection management will support the project objective in
                              providing cleaner health facilities and providing high-quality health services. The project has
                              prepared an Environment and Social Management Plan which focuses on instituting systems to
                              ensure that public and private sector and mobile services are in compliance with national GOI
                              regulations related to infection control and infectious waste management. The ESMP details
                              capacity building in good practices and emphasizes multisectoral coordination. The ESMP was
                              consulted with key stakeholder agencies and disclosed prior to appraisal.

                              Social: As per the design, the project will support interventions to strengthen State health systems
                              to expand universal health coverage, ensuring affordable and high quality health care for all.
                              Successful implementation of the project will have a positive impact, particularly on the
                              underserved, indigenous population (including women, elderly and communities living in remote,
                              hilly and rural areas with poor availability of health services). In terms of demographic and health
                              status, Uttarakhand (UK) performs better than the national average of many key indicators.
                              However, there remains room for substantial improvement in several areas. The overarching issue
                              that determines utilization of services and health outcomes appears to be the difficult geographical
Public Disclosure Copy




                              terrain. A second important issue is the inter-district variation in disease prevalence. Low
                              awareness of health issues amongst communities is a third issue that needs to be addressed. The
                              declining sex ratio, particularly in certain districts of the State, is also a cause for concern. Last but
                              not least, the difficult terrain (among other things) has had a negative impact on availability of
                              human resources in the health sector in UK.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              NA
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              NA
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The consultations with communities, representatives from health departments, women and child
                              development department, NGOs working in tribal areas and field visits to some of the health
                              facilities revealed the key issues faced by the tribal communities in UK. Widespread poverty, low
                              levels of literacy, malnutrition, lack of personal hygiene, limited access to safe drinking water,
                              lack of sanitary living conditions and health education, poor access to maternal and child health
                              services and ineffective coverage by national health and nutritional services were identified as the


                                                                           Page 5 of 8
                           main concerns. Due to poverty, poor accessibility of health services and various socio-cultural
                           beliefs, when these populations fall ill, home remedies are the first resort. Only when symptoms
                           don’t subside, help is sought from traditional healers. Illnesses are generally viewed as a curse for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           which Gods have to be appeased by making offerings.

                           Based on discussions with various stakeholders that have a direct link to health care delivery
                           mechanisms, an indigenous people’s plan (IPP) is being developed to address the specific issues
                           faced by the indigenous population. The IPP will be developed keeping in mind the status of the
                           tribal population and, as a result, will ensure positive impacts.

                           The IPP would be tied to the project implementation plan and will be implemented by the
                           Uttarakhand health and Family Welfare Society (UKHFWS) constituted under the Department
                           Health and Family Welfare. The mission director for the National Health Mission (NHM) will also
                           be the project administrator for UKHSDP and will lead the project implementation under the
                           overall guidance of the Principal Secretary, Department of Medical Health and Family Welfare,
                           who is also the Chairman of the society (UKHFWS), The project team consists of focal points for
                           each of the key implementation areas supported by a core group of experts and support staff.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders consulted during the Social Assessment (SA) included representatives from
                           the Health Department, Department of Women and Child Development, NGOs working in tribal
                           areas, health care providers and the members of the various tribal communities. The SA used
                           Secondary data review and qualitative tools to get feedback of the primary and secondary
                           stakeholders. The study used SA Schedules to get information from the State / District and the
                           community. Focus Group Discussions and Key informants interviews were conducted to collect
                           details from the stakeholders.
                           The ESMP and the IPP were publicly disclosed on the Department of Health and Family Welfare
                           website by 19 August, 2014 and submitted for disclosure at Infoshop by 29 August, 2014.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                  18-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                               28-Aug-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                        28-Aug-2014
                           Comments: The ESMP has been disclosed on the UKHSDP project website August 28, 2014.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                  18-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                               28-Aug-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                        19-Aug-2014
                           Comments: The PPP has been disclosed on the UKHSDP project website August 28, 2014.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the


                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Somil Nagpal
                            Approved By


                                                                        Page 7 of 8
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Julie McLaughlin (PMGR)   Date: 02-Sep-2014
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Page 8 of 8
