                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC5892

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Lesotho                         Project ID:      P143197
                            Project Name:      LS-PFM Reform Support Project (P143197)
                            Task Team          Gert Johannes Alwyn Van D
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          03-Dec-2013                     Estimated        06-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTME                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Central government administration (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          6.09                Total Bank Financing:       5.50
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.59
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  5.50
                              Total                                                                        6.09
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           35.     The project development objective is to improve the quality and timeliness of public
                           financial management information, to support better budget execution and financial accountability.
                           C. Project Description
                           Concept

                           A. Description
                         1. The Government of Lesotho (GoL) introduced IFMIS during 2009 at the level of Central
                         Government to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of financial management, control,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         accounting and reporting. It provides, despite implementation and operational constraints, the
                         framework within which most of the public financial management functions are exercised, or
                         supposed to be exercised. The full benefits from the system have however not been realized as all the
                         functionalities of the current IFMIS (based on Epicor version 7.3.5) are not fully operational, or
                         utilized. As a result the GoL has not been able to produce annual financial statements in the time
                         frames prescribed by the regulatory framework – the annual financial statements for FY2010 have
                         only been finalized in March 2013 and FY2011 and FY2012 are currently in process. A lack of
                         verified and accepted opening balances in the IMFIS as at 2009 also affect the reliability of the
                         IFMIS data.

                         2. An evaluation of the IFMIS finalized by Pohl Consulting & Associates in May 2013 (funded by
                         the European Union) confirms that several problems with the configuration and operation of the
                         IFMIS need to be addressed. These include:

                         •        The IFMIS has been configured with separate databases for each Ministry. Transactions
                         created and authorized by the Maseru-based Ministries are however processed through the four main
                         Treasury bank accounts at the Central Bank, which are connected to the Consolidated Fund database
                         – this creates a need for “inter-departmental” reconciliation of the separate databases. Reconciliation
                         of the four main Treasury bank accounts is the responsibility of the Office of the Accountant-general.
                         The present implementation does not yet cater for a seamless consolidation with automated inter-
                         departmental transaction clearance and reconciliation of all these databases. Furthermore the
                         accounting discipline and skills to handle all the reconciliation requirements have not yet been
                         established.
                         •        For service units of Ministries outside of Maseru, commercial bank accounts have been
                         opened - transactions on these accounts are manually initiated and authorized by the decentralized
                         service units of Ministries, but recorded on the IFMIS by Sub-Accountancies belonging to the Office
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of the Accountant-general. This requires budget, warrant and cash transfer processing by the HQ
                         Ministries to support transacting on these commercial bank accounts, and subsequent reconciliation
                         by them. However, reconciliation of revenue and expenditure bank accounts has also not been
                         completed in nearly all sites - in some sites no reconciliation has been conducted since April 2009.
                         The payment process is further complicated in that no electronic funds transfers are currently
                         possible.
                         •        There is lack of consistency of figures in some reports - there are cases where the same
                         report for the same period using the same parameters provides different results. This may also be as a
                         result of no month-end procedures being applied, and the ongoing process of recording transactions
                         actually created outside of the IFMIS and traced through the bank reconciliation process.
                         •        Commitment controls in the IFMIS are not fully utilized, and also results in payment
                         processing being extremely cumbersome and slow (in some instances it takes up to six months to
                         process supplier payments).
                         •        Maintenance of the supplier database is not centralized.
                         •        Budget department is not using the Active Planner for the budget preparation process.
                         Budgets submitted to Cabinet are prepared outside of the IFMIS on excel worksheets, which requires
                         additional work and controls to ensure reliable transfer to and maintenance in the IMFIS.
                         •        The operations at the ministries and sub-accountancies are often disrupted by the network
                         instability.
                         •        The IFMIS has become in essence just an (unreliable) accounting data repository and is not
                         effectively supporting public financial management.

                         3. The root causes for the unsuccessful implementation and operation of the IFMIS are mainly to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         found i n:

                         •        Business process and IFMIS configuration issues
                           - No consolidated database operating against the bank account configuration of the GoL
                           - No rigorous month & year-end accounting procedures, including bank and inter-departmental
                         reconciliations required in the current configuration
                           - Receipting – Lesotho Revenue Authority interface not yet fully implemented; line ministry
                         receipting notyet fully on-line; data continue to be created outside of the system; lack of regular bank
                         reconciliations to assure completeness and accuracy of data
                           - Payments – cumbersome payment processes and data capture; no electronic fund transfer system
                         in place; payments created outside of the system; lack of regular bank reconciliations to assure
                         completeness and accuracy of data.
                           - Lack of electronic bank statement files to facilitate automated bank reconciliation
                           - Non-compliance to transaction processing, control & approval procedures – e.g. commitments
                         created outside of the IFMIS
                         •        Inadequate involvement from the GoL Treasury in the initial design, configuration and
                         implementation phases, and inadequate skills transfer to the core IFMIS team
                         •        Management in the Office of Accountant-general is not yet relying routinely on the IFMIS to
                         support their core functions, and unclear IFMIS roles & responsibilities exist
                         •        A lack of adequate user training
                         •        No effective help desk function in operation
                         •        Inadequate change management
                         •        Inadequate network and server capacity and no service level agreement with the Ministry of
                         Communication, Science and Technology (MCST) to support effective IFMIS network operations

                         4. The Epicor software itself is sound and relevant to the perceived needs of Lesotho. However, an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         upgrade to version 9 is required as the previous version is no longer to be maintained, which in itself
                         will assist to resolve some of the configuration problems related to the separate databases. However,
                         an upgrade alone will not be sufficient to address all of the problems. It will be equally important to
                         address the overly complex architecture and process designs, coupled with a lack of capacity in the
                         management of the Treasury function, control weaknesses and a general lack of capacity in the way
                         in which financial management is actually carried out within GoL. The essence of the Bank’s
                         discussions thus far with Government and the software supplier (Soft-Tech) is therefore a proposal
                         that any further development of IFMIS should be carried out within the context of a major overhaul
                         of the whole financial management system (not just those aspects of it which are computerized). This
                         will require a complete business process re-engineering (BPR) of the way financial control and
                         reporting are carried out, coupled with the requisite capacity building to also address behavioral and
                         cultural issues in addition to the more mechanistic matters. Such an approach will have to cover not
                         just the operations of IFMIS itself, but the entire basis of compliance with the rules and regulations,
                         and the comprehensiveness, transparency, and timeliness of data collection and fiscal reporting.

                         5. The components of the planned assistance therefore are:

                         •       Component 1: Reconfiguration and upgrading of the Epicor system in order to establish one
                         integrated general ledger system for the GoL, operated against a Treasury Single Account.
                         •       Component 2: Correction of data problems in the current IFMIS system and transfer of
                         opening balances to Epicor 9.
                         •       Component 3: Focused change management activities and skills development of key IFMIS
                         champions in the MoF and line ministries to operate, maintain and oversee the IFMIS on a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sustainable basis.


                         6. The provisional cost estimates of the components are reflected as follows:

                         (a) Component 1: Reconfiguration and upgrading of the Epicor system - US$ 3,551,265
                            (i) Technical assistance with re-engineering and aligning financial management processes and
                         controls to the IFMIS software - US$750,000
                            (ii) Additional application software - US$ 243,096
                            (iii) Technical assistance with IFMIS reconfiguration - US$429,683
                            (iv) WAN upgrade TBA
                            (v) Primary & Backup Data Centers (server upgrades) - US$548,278
                           (vi) Upgrading of generators at Primary & Backup Data Centers - US$60,000
                           (vii) Improvement of cooling system at Primary & Backup Data Centers - US$50,000
                           (viii) Ministry LAN's - Switches - US$70,208
                            (ix) End-user equipment and peripherals - US$1,400,000

                         (b) Component 2: Correction of data problems - US$501,625
                            (i) Technical assistance - US$501,625

                         (c) Component 3: Focused change management activities and skills development of key IFMIS
                         champions - US$500,000
                             (i) Provision for change management activities - US$200,000
                             (ii) Provision for skills development and training - US$300,000

                         Project management - US$447,110
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (i) Contribution to cost of the PFM Reform Coordination Unit       - US$447,110

                         TOTAL - US$5, 000,000


                         7.       The GoL intends to request retroactive finance amounting to $978,582 to initiate activities
                         related to the following components –

                         (a) Component 1: Reconfiguration and upgrading of the Epicor system
                              (i) Technical assistance with re-engineering and aligning financial management processes and
                         controls to the IFMIS software - US$250,000
                              (ii) Additional application software - US$243,096
                          (iii) Primary & Backup Data Centers – IFMS Server Hardware - US$308,278
                              (iv) Upgrading of generators at Primary & Backup Data Centers - US$60,000
                              (v) Improvement of cooling system at Primary & Backup Data Centers - US$50,000
                             (vi) Ministry LAN's – Switches - US$70,208

                         8.      It will be important for GoL to ensure that there are sufficient, adequately trained and
                         qualified staff (not just provided with ad hoc IFMIS training) in the key posts in Treasury and
                         MDAs. The Bank will therefore be encouraging Government to push forward with their programs for
                               the professionalization of public financial management and management development for senior staff
                               within Treasury and other PFM functions through support to the Lesotho Institute of Accountants,
                               the Centre for Accounting Studies and other institutions involved in raising professional and
Public Disclosure Copy




                               managerial standards in accountancy, audit, procurement and public financial management generally.
                               This challenge will be even greater in the context of districts. GoL policy is to devolve more
                               responsibility for service delivery to this level but most districts are weak, under-capacitated and
                               disorganized, in many cases are in remote rural locations and have no history of taking responsibility
                               for the large-scale service delivery, or financial accountability.

                               9. The project activities do not have any impacts that require the preparation of safeguards
                               instruments. Therefore, this is a Category C project.
                               D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                               analysis (if known)


                               E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Melissa C. Landesz (AFTSG)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 14-Oct-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             Not required.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:     Name: Gert Johannes Alwyn Van D

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 24-Dec-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Patricia Mc Kenzie (SM)                      Date: 24-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
