                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA8594
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-May-2013, 02-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mongolia                           Project ID:    P125232
                            Project Name:      Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)
                            Task Team          Andrew D. Goodland
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          19-Feb-2013                        Estimated   06-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Sub-national government administration (50%), General agriculture, fishing and
                                              forestry sector (30%), Other social services (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Other environment and natural resources management (20%), Decentralization
                                              (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%), Other soc ial protection and risk
                                              management (20%), Participation and civic engagement (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      36.20           Total Bank Financing:                  24.80
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                24.80
                              SWITZERLAND Swiss Agency for Dev. & Coop. (SDC)                                            11.40
                              Total                                                                                      36.20
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The PDO is to improve governance and community participation for the planning and delivery of


                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         priority investments in rural areas of Mongolia.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Capacity Building for Local Governance and Livelihoods (US$10.2 million)
                         The objective of this component would be to build the capacity at local and national levels for the
                         implementation and further development of the Government’s programs and mechanisms for
                         supporting rural development.

                         At the local level, Soum governments will be challenged to effectively manage the significant
                         increases in governance responsibilities and investment planning and execution delegated through
                         the IBL and Soum Initiative. The project would include a four-year program of capacity building
                         coaching and establishment of effective monitoring and evaluation systems to support all of
                         Mongolia’s soums. The objective of capacity building at soum level is twofold, touching political
                         and administrative decentralization. Politically, the objective is to make participative processes in
                         soums strong and functional in order to elicit citizen’s preferences and make sure that soums respond
                         to these preferences. Administratively, the objective is that soums have an effective, efficient,
                         transparent and robust governance that is strategy-oriented, lawful and accountable at the same time.

                         To support this, training would be delivered in relevant topics, including:

                         (a)     Community participation in local development;
                         (b)     Local development planning, including for pastureland management;
                         (c)     Budget preparation and adoption;
                         (d)     Budget execution, including procurement; and,
                         (e)     Reporting, monitoring and evaluation and management information systems.

                         This training and technical assistance would primarily be delivered through Soum Support Teams,
                         based in each aimag. These teams would be provided with technical backstopping from national
                         Technical Assistance providers, which would support the development of training curricula and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         materials and training of trainers. This system should enable close and frequent contact between the
                         aimag level teams and the soum authorities and citizens.

                         At the national level, the project would provide technical support to Government to develop and
                         strengthen the Soum Initiative and LDF, including the possible integration of the two. For the Soum
                         Initiative, which is still a piloting stage, technical assistance would be provided to MoED to elaborate
                         and scale-up the program. This could include the review and assessment of the piloting phase of the
                         Soum Initiative, the development of guidelines, manuals, rules and regulations governing the
                         program as it scales up, and the strengthening of national level systems for the administration and
                         monitoring of the program.

                         Component 2: Good Governance Performance-Based Grants (PBGs) (US$21.7 million)

                         Component 2.1: Performance-based Grants (US$20.6 million)
                         To provide incentives for soums to achieve good governance objectives, a performance-based grant
                         (PBG) mechanism would be implemented under SLP3, explicitly tied to the LDF. The objective of
                         the PBGs would be to enhance good governance in the entire budgeting process starting with
                         financial and policy planning, including budget preparation and adoption, budget execution,
                         accounting, reporting, internal and external control and public scrutiny. Financing and execution of
                         public capital investments at soum level and below is an important part of the budgeting process.


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         Particular importance would be given to citizen participation, alignment of soum budgets with bagh
                         citizen priorities and citizen satisfaction with the LDF process and outcomes. Based on a soum
                         performance monitoring system, all soums will be rated annually by independent experts against a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         set of agreed performance indicators. Those soums meeting or exceeding agreed targets would
                         receive a percentage of the prior year’s LDF allocation as budget support in the following financial
                         year. Currently it is proposed that this top-up would represent approximately twenty five percent of
                         the previous year’s allocation, though this would be reviewed during the project and revised if
                         necessary. PBGs will be disbursed to qualifying soums through MOF Treasury systems along with
                         LDF allocations.

                         Component 2.2: Annual Performance Assessments (US$0.9 million)
                         The monitoring and assessment system for PBGs would be implemented by the PIU. The assessment
                         and ranking of soum performance would be outsourced to a politically neutral third party (Good
                         Governance Performance Assessment Teams). SLP3 would finance the training of these teams. The
                         PIU would oversee the capacity building to ensure comparability between the yardsticks used to
                         measure performance from one to another part of the country and to ensure political neutrality.

                         Component 3: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$3.6 million)
                         A Project Implementation Unit (PIU) would be established for SLP3 within MoED. The third
                         component would support this implementation structure, financing the costs of staff, related
                         expenditures and the M&E, procurement and FM functions. M&E support would be supported by
                         SDC and include developing a Management Information System for the LDF, and conducting a
                         baseline, mid-term and end of project impact assessment.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will operate across the country in every soum and therefore across all ecological regions
                         (desert-steppe, steppe, mountain-steppe). The investment support would be at soum level and below.
                         The majority of soums are rural and the predominant resource base is grassland supporting semi-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         nomadic herding. Small urban centers (provincial capitals) would also be eligible for investment
                         support under the PBGs. The participation of Ulaanbaatar in the project would be limited to
                         technical assistance for capacity building but no investment under the project (ie Ulaanbaatar
                         districts would be excluded from the PBGs).
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Songling Yao (EASCS)
                         Feng Ji (EASCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             Under the Local Development Funds, local
                          BP 4.01                                            governments will be able to finance investment
                                                                             priorities identified in consultation with local
                                                                             communities. These investments are likely to be
                                                                             similar in nature to those supported under the first
                                                                             and second phases on the Program under project
                                                                             funds (under SLP2 the project supported the
                                                                             Community Initiatives Fund which was used to
                                                                             finance small scale works and goods to increase



                                                                     Page 3 of 10
                                                                     local access to social services, and the Pastoral
                                                                     Risk Management Fund, which supported
                                                                     investments identified in soum level pastoral
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     management plans). Typical investments
                                                                     therefore included school and school dormitory
                                                                     renovation and refurbishment, health care center
                                                                     renovation and equipment, improved cultural
                                                                     centers and recreational facilities, and for PRM,
                                                                     improved storage facilities for animal feed and
                                                                     fodder, renovation of wells for livestock and the
                                                                     protection of crop land and fencing of natural
                                                                     springs also for protection. The estimated size of
                                                                     support under the LDF will be in the order of
                                                                     USD250k per year, so the size of individual sub-
                                                                     project will remain to be small.

                                                                     Based on the experience from SLP and SLP2, the
                                                                     SLP3 project would have a broadly positive
                                                                     environmental impact. But it may also bring
                                                                     adverse impacts, including (i) there is a risk that
                                                                     herders will seek to increase their numbers of
                                                                     livestock which would have implications for land
                                                                     degradation; (ii) the project will finance the
                                                                     rehabilitation of existing wells. Though probably
                                                                     negligible, there may be adverse impacts of wells
                                                                     on groundwater recharge due to the extraction of
                                                                     groundwater from the wells.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     All investments under the project would be
                                                                     subject to the environmental guidelines under the
                                                                     Ministry of Environment and Green
                                                                     Development. As part of the annual assessment of
                                                                     soum performance, performance in applying
                                                                     environmental guidelines and ESMP will be
                                                                     closely monitored, and if they are not reached,
                                                                     soums would not qualify for the performance
                                                                     based grants under the project.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           Mongolia’s pasture lands are natural habitats in
                                                                     the sense that they conform to the definition in
                                                                     OP4.04 on Natural Habitats. The SLP3 could
                                                                     have adverse impacts on these natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No

                                                       No



                                                             Page 4 of 10
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/
                            BP 4.11 Peoples OP/BP 4.10
                            Indigenous                         Yes             There are more than 30 ethnic groups in
                                                                               Mongolia. All groups are either the descendants
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               of Mongolian nomadic tribes, or are groups of
                                                                               Turkic origin who have become Mongolised over
                                                                               time. The Khalkh make up the majority and
                                                                               comprise over 90% of the population. Except for
                                                                               the Kazakh minority group residing in western
                                                                               Mongolia, all ethnic groups speak Mongolian
                                                                               dialects which are comprehensible to speakers of
                                                                               Khalkha and to each other. The Kazakhs also are
                                                                               the only ethnic group that relies primarily upon a
                                                                               distinct spoken language.

                                                                               The majority of Mongolia’s ethnic minority
                                                                               groups share similar customs, traditions and
                                                                               systems of production as the Khalkh. With the
                                                                               exception of the predominantly Muslim and
                                                                               linguistically differentiated Kazakhs in western
                                                                               Mongolia, and traditionally nomadic reindeer-
                                                                               herding Tsaatan peoples in the north, Mongolia’s
                                                                               ethnic groups are not considered to be
                                                                               economically, socially or legally marginalized or
                                                                               otherwise disadvantaged in a manner which
                                                                               would restrict their ability to participate in the
                                                                               project.

                                                                               The project will be nationwide in scope and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               therefore cover those areas populated by all ethnic
                                                                               groups including Kazakh and Tsaatan.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              General: The project would finance similar types of investments as were financed under SLP2
                              (the previous phase of the Program), typically small scale works and goods. In this regard, the
                              same safeguards issues apply with similar associated impacts. No large scale, significant or


                                                                       Page 5 of 10
                           irreversible impacts are anticipated.

                           Social: One of the objectives of the project is to increase and institutionalize community
Public Disclosure Copy




                           engagement in local development processes, therefore, SLP3 would further reduce the
                           vulnerability of rural communities and enhance the security and sustainability of herder
                           households’ livelihoods throughout the country. The project will be nationwide in geographical
                           coverage. There are more than 30 ethnic groups in Mongolia, of whom the Khalkh make up the
                           majority and comprise over 90% of the population. The majority of Mongolia’s ethnic minority
                           groups share similar customs, traditions and systems of production as the Khalkh, with the
                           exception of the predominantly Muslim and linguistically differentiated Kazakhs in western
                           Mongolia, and traditionally nomadic reindeer-herding Tsaatan peoples in the north. These two
                           exceptional ethnic minority groups have been identified as Indigenous Peoples as defined by
                           OP4.10 Indigenous Peoples. As identified from the Tsaatans consultation, the principal issue is
                           that those who maintain traditional lifestyles in remote areas would be excluded from participating
                           in project decision-making processes, and hence would not be afforded equitable opportunities to
                           benefit. Furthermore, for the remote Tsaatans, traditional tribal decision-making processes differ
                           from other citizens’ khurals.
                           The project does not envisage any land acquisition or population resettlement.

                           Environment: Overall, the project is expected to generate significant environmental benefits. It
                           would not have any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible environmental impacts.
                           However, the project carries risks/impacts on environmentally sensitive areas, land degradation,
                           and water resources due to the broader geographical scope of the project and its relation to policies
                           and institutional development. Similar to the SLP2, the project could have a positive
                           environmental impact on reduced land degradation. But the project, if not managed well, has the
                           potential to degrade land, biodiversity as well as surface water and groundwater resources through
                           the effects of livestock, over-extraction from rehabilitated or newly-created wells, surface water
                           capture facilities and localized pollution from sheep/goat dips. Although the impact of increased
                           extraction of groundwater from the relatively shallow wells is probably negligible, there may be a
Public Disclosure Copy




                           cumulative effect of wells on groundwater recharge. Despite the focus of the project on a
                           sustainable distribution of livestock, there is a risk that herders will seek to increase their numbers
                           of stock. More livestock in combination with an adverse distribution of livestock would have
                           implications for land degradation, biodiversity and water resources.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           There are no potential and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The project will support small scale works at the local level. There were two main options
                           considered for this: i) to co-mingle funds with the Government Treasury system through its Local
                           Development Fund (LDF) and therefore subject to country systems; or ii) to operate a separate
                           IDA financed “window” for the LDF top up, as was done with SLP2. From a safeguards
                           perspective, operating a project top-up funds to the LDF would provide greater oversight.
                           However, the first option was preferred as this is working directly with the government systems
                           and therefore contributes more to the project's objective of institutionalizing approaches. It should
                           be noted that for the types of investment under the LDF, government environmental policies, if
                           applied correctly and rigorously, meet the Bank safeguard requirements. The ESMP would serve



                                                                      Page 6 of 10
                           as the guideline to local authorities to implement environmental controls. For social safeguard
                           issues, which are focussed on IPs, the approach taken under SLP2 would be used.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The project will implement those mitigation measures which have been proved effective under
                           previous projects. The ESMP has been updated to reflect the experience and lessons learned, and
                           include carefully designed mitigation measures. A series of mitigation measures include, among
                           others:
                           a)       Each soum has prepared its Pastoral Management Plan in accordance with the Guidelines
                           approved by the Agency for Land Administration, Geodesy and Cartography, including maps of
                           the location of environmentally-sensitive areas (such as degraded areas, areas of importance for
                           threatened wildlife, and watersheds of critical importance for downstream drinking water
                           supplies). The project will support capacity for preparation of PRM plans and maps to avoid
                           impacts on sensitive areas.
                           b) The current Environment Guidelines and screening system will be incorporated into the LDF
                           project screening process, updated to reflect the experiences learned from the previous projects.
                           c)       Simple Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOP) for small scale of construction would be
                           applied to the LDF, consistent with current environmental regulation, e.g. the revitalization of
                           existing wells, renovation works on different facilities (schools, health care center), improvement
                           of cultural centers, recreational facilities and storage facilities for animal feed and fodder.
                           d) The project will continue to conduct an annual Environmental Audit to review the performance
                           of the ESMP implementation as part of Annual Performance Assessments. Performance with
                           respect to environmental regulation application will be included in the criteria to qualify for PBGs.
                           e)       The project will develop local level capacity to implement the ESMP, through the Soum
                           Support Teams.

                           The updated ESMP specifies the monitoring plans, such as monitoring on land degradation and
                           water resource, institutional arrangement, capacity building activities, and the budget for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ESMP implementation for the project.

                           Regarding IPs: As its scope is the same with the second phase of the project, the SLP3 will be
                           carried out nationwide including the areas populated with the Kazakh groups and Tssatan groups
                           who have been identified as Indigenous Peoples as per the definition of OP4.10. Therefore,
                           OP4.10 thus applies to the SLP3 as it did in the second phase from which the Project Indigenous
                           Peoples Plan (IPP) was developed. The SLP3 will continue to follow the existing IPP, which has
                           been updated on behalf of the Kazakh and Tssatan communities based on their demand-led
                           consultation and participation in the project context of the third phase. As a result, special planning
                           measures have been incorporated for project activities in Bayan Olgii and Khovd aimags where
                           the Kazakh live, to ensure equitable Kazakh representation in decision-making as well as their
                           access to documentation in Kazakh language. Meanwhile, for the Tsaatan communities in
                           Khuvsgul aimag, some more specific measures have been updated and incorporated into project
                           design to ensure that traditional Tsaatan communities have an equitable opportunity to participate
                           in project processes and to benefit from project activities.

                           Borrower capacity: This is the third phase of the Sustainable Livelihoods Program. In the
                           previous phases the implementing agency demonstrated its adequate capacity to deal with
                           safeguard policies and issues during implementation. Under the third phase the implementation
                           agency will be changed from the Ministry of Finance to the Ministry of Economic Development


                                                                      Page 7 of 10
                           and a new Project Implementation Unit will be established. The major difference in design under
                           the proposed third phase is that the World Bank funds would be co-mingled with Government
                           public budget in the Local Development Funds and therefore the safeguards policies should apply
Public Disclosure Copy




                           to whole LDF, which is the responsibility of the local government to implement. It is therefore of
                           importance that there is capacity at the local level to address safeguard issues. The project would
                           provide support for this and capacity at the PIU level, and would only release Bank funds via the
                           Local Development FUnd to those soums which have been assessed and found to be compliance
                           with environmental policy, as per the annual environmental audit conducted as part of Annual
                           Performance Assessments.

                           Capacity demonstrated under SLP2: The main challenge for SLP2 has been to adapt the
                           environmental screening process to new legal requirements. The environmental law of 2009 gave
                           responsibility for environmental screening and impact assessment to licensed officers of the
                           Ministry of Nature, Environment and Tourism, posted at aimag level and limited the roles of soum
                           environmental inspectors to environmental audit of completed investments. Because the licensed
                           EIA officer is only 1 per aimag and far from the soums, it created a bottleneck, especially for
                           screening of large numbers of small PRM subprojects involving fencing of hay fields and
                           improvement of livestock water sources. The bottleneck was addressed by preparing a checklist
                           for screening of CIF and PRM subprojects for use by soum environmental inspectors, who would
                           compile environmental screening forms and send them to the aimag EIA officer for signature or
                           further investigation. Another process introduced by a recent amendment to the environmental law
                           makes it legal to conduct a “ strategic environmental assessment” for a category of similar
                           investments under a program approach, instead of requiring each single subproject to go through
                           the screening and sign-off process. This could greatly facilitate the approval of large numbers of
                           small PRM subprojects in support of implementing pastureland management plans. It would be
                           important for the PIU to seek official government consent that the abovementioned streamlined
                           environmental screening process developed for SLP2 would be carried over into IBL
                           implementation under SLP3 and included in the Government LDF Guidelines.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Under SLP2, nearly all social investments under the Community Initiative Fund involved small
                           improvements of existing facilities and only the public baths and other subprojects those involving
                           the construction of new facilities or adding new buildings to existing facilities were required to go
                           through environmental screening as well to comply with social safeguards on land acquisition.
                           Under SLP3, the ten-fold increase in funds available for soum budgets is likely to increase the
                           number of new facilities built. In addition, under SLP2, the PIU was required to implement social
                           safeguards for Tsaatan reindeer herders in the far north of Khovsgul aimag and to track
                           beneficiaries of investments in Bayan Olgii aimag to ensure that the Kazakh minority received an
                           equitable share of benefits. The main difference from SLP2 is that SLP3 supports the
                           government’s program and adopts government standards and procedures. Government has the
                           necessary environmental standards and procedures but it does not have social safeguards.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project would be nationwide, and potentially impact on all citizens, though the focus is on
                           rural dwellers. The key stakeholders are therefore rural citizens, including the IPs identified
                           (Tsaatan and Kazakh) and the local authorities serving them. Consultations and disclosure of key
                           documents was done at provincial (aimag) and district (Soum) levels, and online. The social
                           assessment in the IPP confirmed that the project received a broad support from the Tsaatan and
                           Kazakh minority groups and continuous consultation and participation will be done in the project


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                           implementation stage. The IPP was locally disclosed on March 28, 2013 and sent to InfoShop on
                           April 9, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Apr-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mongolia                                                         28-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Apr-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mongolia                                                         28-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?




                                                                    Page 9 of 10
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Andrew D. Goodland
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Iain G. Shuker (SM)                           Date: 02-May-2014




                                                                       Page 10 of 10
