                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA9002
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Russian Federation                 Project ID:    P144167
                            Project Name:      Enhancing Workforce Skills for Regional Development (P144167)
                            Task Team          Mario Cristian Aedo Inost
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Sep-2014                        Estimated   12-Feb-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSH2                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Vocational training (47%), Secondary education (30%), Adult literacy/non-
                                               formal education (13%), Public administration- Education (1 0%)
                            Theme(s):          Education for the knowledge economy (75%), Education for all (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       410.00           Total Bank Financing:  330.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    80.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      330.00
                              Total                                                                                      410.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objectives (PDO) are to increase the relevance of the skills of technical and
                           vocational education and training graduates to the needs of the labor market in selected pilot regions
                           and to expand best practices to other selected dissemination regions in the Russian Federation.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                         The proposed project aims to support the Russian Federation and its regions in two main endeavors:
                         (i) introducing up-to-date models of training in selected regional TVET systems and (ii) enhancing
                         the capacity of the federal government to support regional TVET systems.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Introducing modern workforce training models for regional economies (US$325
                         million; 79.3 percent of total project cost).

                         The purpose of this component is to develop different models of a regional TVET system that can be
                         replicated in other regions in Russia. Ten regions were selected to pilot the modernization of their
                         TVET systems: Chelyabinsk oblast, Kaluga oblast, Krasnoyarsk krai, Leningrad oblast, Perm krai,
                         Rostov oblast, Stavropol krai, the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia), the Republic of Tatarstan, and
                         Tambov oblast. The regions were selected in accordance to the criteria agreed between the Ministry
                         of Education and Science of the Russian Federation and the Bank. The project team assumes that, by
                         supporting key selected regions and building institutions to implement reforms in their TVET
                         system, this will influence similar efforts in other regions even if they are not supported directly by
                         the project. This component is divided into four thematic subcomponents.

                         Subcomponent 1.1: Bringing the content, technologies, and infrastructure used in vocational
                         education in line with the current and future requirements of the labor market. This subcomponent
                         will ensure that the substance and outcomes of vocational education are aligned with labor market
                         demand. It will support regional ministries of education in: (i) assessing regional labor market
                         demand (including the development of assessment tools); (ii) designing and implementing activities
                         to establish links between enterprises and vocational education; (iii) developing competence-based
                         modular TVET programs; (iv) improving the physical infrastructure of vocational educational
                         institutions; (v) supplying specialized hi-tech training equipment; and (vi) training teachers and
                         occupational instructors to deliver the new training programs. This component will be implemented
                         in parallel with the federal component (Component 2) to ensure a unified approach to and
                         dissemination of the outputs produced. Each region will develop a unique set of TVET programs to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         avoid any duplication of efforts. Each program developed in the pilot regions will be shared
                         nationally (after passing through the quality assurance procedures).

                         Subcomponent 1.2: This subcomponent will ensure that the network of TVET services providers is
                         aligned with the demands of the regional economy. It will support activities to: (i) design regional
                         roadmaps for restructuring and developing vocational educational institutions and for implementing
                         priority training programs; (ii) introduce innovative institutional models to enhance the network
                         optimization; and (iii) establish a system for the certification of skills and qualifications.

                         Subcomponent 1.3: Developing and introducing relevant management and financial instruments and
                         building the human capacity to apply them.
                         The subcomponent will ensure that the management and financing models used in the TVET sector
                         and institutions are efficient and aligned with the requirements of the regional economy. It will
                         support activities to: (i) develop financial regulations to create incentives for employers participation
                         and introduce targeted funding mechanisms; (ii) introduce governance and management systems
                         based on labor market information that include employers’ representatives; (iii) train regional
                         administration and college staff in the new financing and management policies; (iv) organize career
                         guidance and counseling services; and (v) prepare and publicly disseminate regional reports
                         analyzing TVET sector development and skills development.




                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         Subcomponent 1.4: Disseminating information to additional selected regions about the models used
                         in and the experiences of the pilot regions. This subcomponent will support the dissemination of
                         information on the piloted models and on the experiences in the pilot regions to additional regions to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         extend the benefits of the project system-wide. Up to 7 regions will be competitively selected for the
                         dissemination exercise, and each of these regions will then choose a model or project output (or a
                         combination of outputs) that it is willing to introduce. This component will support the following
                         activities, among others, on request from the dissemination regions: (i) staff training; (ii) the
                         development of regulations; (iii) organization of study visits and other experience exchange
                         activities; and (iv) TVET infrastructure improvements.

                         Component 2: Building national-level capacity for workforce development (US$75 million; 18.3
                         percent of total project cost)

                         This component will support system-wide changes in the TVET sector in line with national policy
                         priorities including the development of enabling regulatory frameworks and guidelines, assessment
                         tools, and TVET programs, the creation of institutional capacity for developing competency-based
                         curricula, the enhancement of human capacity, and information sharing activities. This component is
                         divided into four subcomponents.

                         Subcomponent 2.1: Developing regulatory frameworks and guidelines to make regional vocational
                         education systems responsive to changes in the labor market. This subcomponent will provide tools
                         and guidance to help the pilot regions to align their skills training with the demands of the regional
                         economy and society. It will support activities to: (i) assess the labor market's needs, develop
                         assessment tools and enable the exchange of information between employers and TVET institutions;
                         (ii) develop management and financing mechanisms to align the TVET sector and institutions with
                         the development needs of the economy and society; and (iii) introduce TVET quality assessment
                         systems and establish a system to provide methodological support to the TVET sector and
                         educational institutions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 2.2: Supporting the updating of TVET programs and pedagogical technologies. This
                         subcomponent will support updating the design and contents of vocational education programs, the
                         adoption of modern educational technologies and teaching methods, and the alignment of secondary
                         vocational education in the Russian Federation with labor market demand. It will also support the
                         development of toolkits for assessing training skills and of digital educational resources and
                         information systems to support the new TVET programs and teaching/learning aids. The component
                         will focus on cross-cutting occupational competencies and widely used occupational competencies.
                         The subcomponent will also support the development of a digital management system for TVET
                         institutions and for regional ministries of education and the establishment of a depository of
                         guidelines for teachers’ professional development and training.

                         Subcomponent 2.3: Disseminating information about best practices and innovations related to the
                         modernization of regional TVET systems. This subcomponent will inform the public, authorities,
                         employers, educational institutions, and consumers of educational services about new developments
                         in the Russian TVET system and make the outputs produced under the project widely available. The
                         subcomponent will support: (i) development and implementation of information sharing programs;
                         (ii) development of web-based information resources; and (iii) technical assistance to review best
                         national and international to provide advice to selected dissemination regions on the implementation
                         of their TVET strategies.



                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                         Sub-component 2.4: Building the staff capacity of the TVET system. The subcomponent will support
                         the building of capacity and the development of institutional frameworks for the professional
                         development of all staff in all of the educational institutions and regional TVET administrations that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be participating in the project. The federal government will provide retraining and professional
                         development for the following target groups in pilot regions: (i) the managers of regional TVET
                         systems and educational institutions; (ii) economists and finance specialists from the regional TVET
                         systems; and (iii) the managers and faculty of TVET institutions and the foremen of on-the-job
                         training in associated businesses. The subcomponent will support the following activities: (i)
                         conducting assessments of human resource capacity in regional TVET systems; (ii) developing
                         training programs for TVET staff including Master's degree programs; and (iii) designing toolkits for
                         assessing the competencies and skills of teachers, foremen of on-the-job training, and managers of
                         TVET institutions.

                         Component 3: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$10 million; 2.4 percent of
                         total project cost)

                         The objective of this component is to provide resources for the day-to-day implementation of the
                         proposed project by a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) as well as for monitoring and evaluating
                         the project's implementation and outcomes. This component will finance the project's operating and
                         monitoring costs, including the salaries of the staff of the PIU and other operating expenses such as
                         translation and interpretation services, utilities, equipment, audits, communications, and supervision
                         (transportation costs and a per diem), as well as the arranging of project-related monitoring and
                         evaluation activities.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project location is nation-wide and in ten selected pilot regions of the Russian Federation. The
                         selected regions are: Chelyabinskaya oblast, Kalugzhskaya oblast, Krasnoyarskiy krai,
                         Leningrzdskaya oblast, Permskiy krai, Rostovskaya oblast, Saha Yakutiya - Republic, Stavropolskiy
Public Disclosure Copy




                         krai, Tambovskaya oblast, and Tatarstan - Republic.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Nicolas Perrin (ECSSO)
                         Arcadii Capcelea (ECSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             In accordance with the Bank's OP/BP/GP 4.01
                          BP 4.01                                             Environmental Assessment, the project is placed
                                                                              into the Bank's Category B. The proposed project
                                                                              activities are not expected to cause significant
                                                                              adverse environmental and social impacts. An
                                                                              Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
                                                                              was prepared, which outlines environmental
                                                                              assessment procedures and mitigation
                                                                              requirements for the sub-projects to be supported
                                                                              by the project.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No




                                                                      Page 4 of 9
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/      Yes              In the case the selected building for renovation is
                            BP 4.11                                               included in the list of cultural heritage, its
                                                                                  renovation designs would have to be cleared with
                                                                                  the national authorities responsible for the
                                                                                  preservation of cultural heritage to ensure that
                                                                                  historic/cultural value of such buildings are not
                                                                                  compromised as a result of the improvement
                                                                                  works. These provisions are included in the EMF.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        Yes              The Social Assessment confirmed the presence of
                                                                                  indigenous peoples (IP) in one of the 10 project
                                                                                  pilot regions, the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia). A
                                                                                  draft Indigenous Peoples Framework (IPF) was
                                                                                  prepared, disclosed and consulted in the Republic
                                                                                  of Skaha (Yakutia) prior to Appraisal. The project
                                                                                  is expected to directly benefit indigenous peoples
                                                                                  and no negative impacts are foreseen. The IPF
                                                                                  will be integrated into the Project's Operational
                                                                                  Manual.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              In accordance with the Bank's OP/BP/GP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, the project is placed
                              into the Bank's Category B. The proposed project activities are not expected to cause significant
                              adverse environmental and social impacts and may be summarized as follows: (a) Dust and noise
                              due to the rehabilitation activities; (b) Dumping of construction wastes, accidental spillage of
                              machine oil, lubricants, paints, and solvents, etc.; and (c) Asbestos (although at this stage it is not
                              known if asbestos has been used in premises to be proposed for rehabilitation, but taking into
                              account it large usage in the former USSR it is possible to find such material used as an insulation
                              material and/or roofing material). In the case of inappropriate handling of asbestos this material
                              might be a real health concern for the construction workers, and the general public in the vicinity
                              of the rehabilitated premises in particular when it is inhaled. All these potential environmental


                                                                          Page 5 of 9
                           impacts are minor and could be easily managed during the project implementation.

                           The TVET school buildings that may be suggested for rehabilitation by the pilot regions with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           support of the project may be predominantly old, and some of these buildings may have some
                           historic value, which triggers OP/BP 4.11 Cultural Heritage.

                           The project will also bring positive social impacts as the proposed activities would increase the
                           youth employability and capabilities for continuous skills upgrading. There will be no expansion
                           of buildings beyond existing site boundaries, and no land acquisition will be required. Thus
                           OP4.12 is not triggered and no resettlement documents have to be prepared.

                           The Social Assessment confirmed the presence of indigenous peoples (IP) in one of the 10 project
                           pilot regions, the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia).
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The minor rehabilitation and provision of equipment are not expected to have any negative long
                           term impact, if the mitigation measures listed in the EMF are correctly followed. No negative
                           impacts are expected from the proposed project on the indigenous peoples. No construction is
                           likely to affect indigenous people communities but access to vocational training opportunities may
                           be of particular significance for some IPs population.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           As part of project preparation an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was prepared,
                           which outlines environmental assessment procedures and mitigation requirements for the sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                           projects to be supported by the project. It provides details on procedures, criteria and
                           responsibilities for subproject screening, preparing Environmental Management Plans and their
                           implementing and monitoring. The document also includes Environmental Guidelines for
                           proposed sub-projects, containing an assessment of potential impacts and generic mitigation
                           measures to be undertaken for identified sub-projects in all stages - from selection, and the
                           implementation phase, to the monitoring and evaluation of results. The EMF will be integrated
                           into the Project's Operational Manual, as well as an Environmental Management Plan "Checklist"
                           will be used as part of all contracts involving equipment and works. In the case the selected
                           building for renovation is included in the list of cultural heritage, its renovation designs would
                           have to be cleared with the national authorities responsible for the preservation of cultural heritage
                           to ensure that historic/cultural value of such buildings are not compromised as a result of the
                           improvement works. These provisions are included in the EMF. The Bank is expected to provide a
                           special EA training to the PIU team, so they can promote compliance with the EMF and EMP. The
                           Bank will also supervise this aspect of implementation. The subproject EMPs will be also
                           integrated into the construction contracts for individual sites, both into specifications and bills of
                           quantities and the Contractors will be required to include the cost in their financial bids. The
                           project beneficiary institutions will also receive a copy of the EMF and EMP so, when appropriate,
                           they can oversee their compliance on the part of contractors.

                           A draft Indigenous Peoples Framework (IPF) was prepared, disclosed and consulted in the


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                           Republic of Skaha (Yakutia) prior to Appraisal. The project is expected to directly benefit
                           indigenous peoples and no negative impacts are foreseen. The IPF will be integrated into the
                           Project's Operational Manual. The Bank is expected to provide a special training on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation of OP 4.10 to the PIU team, so they can promote compliance with the IPF. The
                           Bank will also supervise this aspect of implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The draft EMF was disclosed in the country and consulted with key stakeholders. The Ministry of
                           Education and Science (MoES) has disseminated the draft summary EMF to Moscow State
                           University of Civil Engineering for review and comments, also posting it on May 30, 2014 for the
                           wide public on the website of the Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation
                           (http://xn--80abucjiibhv9a.xn--p1ai/static/ministry_eng.html, http://www.fer.ru) in Russian
                           language. On June 6, 2014, the MES conducted a public briefing and consultation meeting on the
                           EMF documents. The meeting concluded that the draft EMF document covers practically all
                           potential impacts and possible mitigation measures. The draft document was revised after the
                           meeting, taking into account outputs from the consultation. The final version of the EMF (Russian
                           translation) and its English version were posted on the MES website and submitted to the World
                           Bank. The EMF will be used by the client during the project implementation.

                           As part of the IPPF preparation and Social Assessment, in-depth stakeholder consultations were
                           conducted in April-May 2014 to solicit stakeholders' feedback on the project design, validate
                           project assumptions and identify any negative impacts which the project could entail. Additional
                           consultations on draft IPPF were conducted on June 9, 2014 with a particular focus on soliciting
                           feedback from representatives of indigenous communities. The draft safeguards document was
                           revised after the meeting taking into account outputs from the consultation. The final version of
                           the IPPF (Russian translation) and its English version were posted on the web page of the
                           Republic of Sakha (Yakutia) and submitted to the World Bank. Indigenous Peoples Plans would
                           be prepared at the outset of project implementation in accordance with IPPF and the Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Operational Manual, which stipulates involvement of Indigenous Peoples in project
                           implementation activities, consultations, grievance mechanisms and participatory monitoring.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     12-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  12-Jun-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Russian Federation                                              30-May-2014
                           Comments: Disclosed in Russian language in http://xn--80abucjiibhv9a.xn--p1ai/static/
                                         ministry_eng.html, http://www.fer.ru. Document consulted on 06/06/2014.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     12-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  12-Jun-2014




                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Russian Federation                                               30-May-2014
                           Comments: Disclosed in Russian language in the web page of the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia):
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         http://sakha.gov.ru/node/175289. Document consulted on 06/05/2014.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?


                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Mario Cristian Aedo Inost
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Andrea C. Guedes (SM)                     Date: 25-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
