                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC7835

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Turkey                         Project ID:      P147183
                            Project Name:      Frontier Finance (P147183)
                            Task Team          Ilias Skamnelos
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          23-Apr-2014                    Estimated        15-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSPF                          Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        SME Finance (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       250.00             Total Bank Financing:           250.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     250.00
                              Total                                                                     250.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           13. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve access to longer term finance for small
                           and medium enterprises through Islamic finance and international factoring.
                           C. Project Description
                           Two project components will provide US$250 million to be intermediated by TSKB through
                           participation banks and factoring companies targeting SMEs. Component 1 will focus on Islamic
                           finance and Component 2 will focus on factoring. The credit line, guaranteed by the Turkish
                           government, will be intermediated by TSKB, which will be the Borrower and implementing agency
                           for this project. TSKB will in turn on-lend funds through PFIs, which can be participation banks and
                           factoring companies. TSKB will select PFIs pursuant to criteria agreed between TSKB and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           World Bank, and subject to no objection by the World Bank. The selected PFIs will in turn make
                           sub-finance to private SMEs, the final beneficiaries of the credit line. The PFIs will assume the credit
                           risk of the sub-borrowers who will be selected based on agreed upon selection criteria. TSKB will
                           have exposure only to the selected PFIs and will assume the credit risk for lending funds to PFIs.
                           There will be no sectoral restrictions and credit will be extended on market terms to avoid any
                           distortion. In the case of Islamic finance (see Annex 3 for details), preliminary talks point to a
                           Wakala structure –an agency contract under which the participation bank finances the SME on behalf
                           of TSKB. The participation bank acts as an agent for TSKB, investing on its behalf and offering a
                           guarantee (a Kafalah agreement) to pay back TSKB in case the SME fails to repay its obligations.
                           Nevertheless, the option of a Murabaha structure is also a possibility – the transfer of funds from
                           TSKB to the PFI is achieved through commodity based buy and sell transactions. Any accepted
                           structure will have to be in accordance to the PFI’s Sharia board approval.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will be implemented by TSKB as Borrower/ Implementing Agency through the PFIs.
                           The sub-project (SME beneficiary) locations are not defined at this stage and are expected to be all
                           over Turkey.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The FI, TSKB, during the course of the implementation of the EFIL and other credit line projects,
                           has developed institutional capacity to determine and monitor environmental risks of sub-projects.
                           The staff in TSKB are aware of the safeguard issues as they have been associated with the World
                           Bank in the past. TSKB, has a well established environmental and social risk rating tool, which will
                           be useful during the course of the project screening. The project will be implemented via
                           participation banks and factoring company PFIs, which are not determined at this stage. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Operations Manual (OM) will be a part of the subsidiary agreements between TSKB and the PFIs.
                           PFIs will be informed that implementing the OM will be their responsibility, and their capacity of
                           implementing will be assessed by TSKB, and improvement measures will be given by TSKB (with
                           the assistance of the World Bank if requested) as necessary. TSKB will also assess the capacities of
                           the PFIs and offer them trainings if necessary. The capacity assessment tools, assessment results and
                           the improvement measures identified for the PFIs will also be shared with the Bank on a periodical
                           basis and these actions will be done prior to the respective PFI's beginning to on-lend WB funds for
                           any sub-projects with potential Safeguards impacts.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (ECSSO)
                           Esra Arikan (ECSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The Environmental Category of the project is
                           BP 4.01                                               FI, as all the investments under the project will
                                                                                 not be identified until project implementation.
                                                                                 Environmental issues of sub-beneficiaries and
                                                            their sub-projects will be addressed through the
                                                            sub-finance environmental eligibility
                                                            assessments. Environmental assessments will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            carried out in accordance with both Government
                                                            of Turkey Environmental Assessment
                                                            (Regulation on Environmental Impact
                                                            Assessment, from the Ministry of Environment
                                                            and Urbanization-MoEU) and World Bank EA
                                                            (OP 4.01) requirements. Due to the nature of the
                                                            project, working capital or investment finance
                                                            applications are expected that will include
                                                            machinery purchase/replacement or small scale
                                                            construction works. Therefore, it is expected
                                                            that there will be no large scale significant and/
                                                            or irreversible impacts. Sub-projects in
                                                            environmental Category A will not be eligible
                                                            for funding. The environmental assessment
                                                            (including environmental due diligence)
                                                            procedures will be conducted according to the
                                                            environmental review framework which will be
                                                            prepared by TSKB and approved by WB. The
                                                            environmental review framework will also
                                                            include evaluation forms for assessing the
                                                            environmental due-diligence of the existing
                                                            facilities (SMEs) which will be applying for
                                                            working capital or investment loans. The
                                                            framework will provide guidance for additional
                                                            requirements if the investment finance includes
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            activities which will then lead to a classification
                                                            of 'Category B' of the sub-projects. It is
                                                            expected to have a prior review for an initial set
                                                            of projects whereby WB will review all
                                                            safeguard documentation, and then it is planned
                                                            to have a sampling system where WB's
                                                            environmental and social safeguard specialists
                                                            will conduct site visits and safeguard
                                                            documentation assessment for randomly
                                                            selected sub-projects.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No   It is not expected that the project will involve
                                                            any investment which has a footprint on green
                                                            lands. In any case, the project will not finance
                                                            sub-projects which may have impacts on natural
                                                            habitats. The environmental review framework
                                                            as a part of the Operational Manual will include
                                                            the ineligibility criteria for sub-projects if they
                                                            are expected to have any impacts on natural
                                                            habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Because the specific civil works of the existing
                         BP 4.11                                 factory buildings could potentially be within a
                                                                 historic district, the Bank safeguard policy on
                                                                 Physical Cultural Resources (OPO/BP 4.11) is
                                                                 applicable to these investments. For cultural
                                                                 property issues, local municipality is
                                                                 responsible for application of Turkish laws and
                                                                 regulations, including those relating to cultural
                                                                 heritage.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No    Land acquisition is not eligible under the
                         4.12                                    proposed project. This will be reflected in the
                                                                 Operational Manual stating that land acquisition
                                                                 is not eligible for project funding. Due to this,
                                                                 OP 4.12 is not triggered. In addition to not
                                                                 supporting any land acquisition, the project
                                                                 should utilize land that is free of squatters and
                                                                 other users that would be subsequently
                                                                 displaced by the project (economically or
                                                                 physically) or otherwise involuntarily block
                                                                 access to important assets and resources of
                                                                 community members. The FI should not fund
                                                                 projects that have also recently acquired land
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 involuntarily (through expropriation) in
                                                                 anticipation of use for the project to be funded
                                                                 by the FI. The social safeguard specialist will be
                                                                 included in the project team and will provide
                                                                 guidance to TSKB (and to PFIs if necessary)
                                                                 regarding the Bank's Involuntary Resettlement
                                                                 Policy, in order to eliminate any incompliance
                                                                 with this requirement. The specialist will also
                                                                 attend the implementation support missions to
                                                                 assess the sampled sub-project's scope and
                                                                 documentation, and ensure that land acquisition
                                                                 will not be financed by the project.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No    The project will not finance any investments
                                                                 related to construction or rehabilitation of a
                                                                 dam, or dam related infrastructure.
                         Projects on International         No    There will be a positive list of river basins
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                    which will be the eligible locations for sub-
                                                                 projects. The positive lists were identified by
                                                                 LEGEN and accepted as national waterways of
                                                                                                                                 Turkey. The positive list of watersheds in
                                                                                                                                 Turkey will be described in the environmental
                                                                                                                                 review framework which will guide the FI and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 the PFIs for the eligible locations of the actions.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Apr-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      TSKB will prepare an Operations Manual that will include the environmental review procedures
                                      and implementation arrangements under this project. The Environmental Review section will be
                                      shared with the World Bank and, after consent, the plan will be translated toTurkish and will be
                                      disclosed in TSKB's web site and. Environmental review will also be included in the subsidiary
                                      agreements with TSKB with selected PFIs and PFIs will be asked to disclose these procedures in
                                      their websites. The Operations Manual will state that land acquisition is not eligible for project
                                      funding and provide guidance on screening projects on this basis to ensure that sub-projects do not
                                      include any components that will trigger the World Bank's Involuntary Resettlement Policy.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Ilias Skamnelos

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Esma Kreso (RSA)                                                                                                     Date: 07-Apr-2014
                                 Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Aurora Ferrari (SM)                                                                                                  Date: 09-Apr-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
