                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                        Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSR8587
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Moldova                                      Project ID:           P118518
                            Project Name:     Moldova Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P118518)
                            Task Team         Anatol Gobjila
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         29-Feb-2012                                  Estimated   01-May-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                                Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    ECSAR                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                           Instrument:
                            Sector:           Agricultural extension and research (42%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade
                                              (35%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing an d forestry (23%)
                            Theme:            Rural policies and institutions (40%), Land administration and management
                                              (28%), Rural markets (16%), Rural services and infrastruct ure (16%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                         No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        37.44           Total Bank Financing:                                      18.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                 Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                   2.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                         18.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                    4.44
                              SWEDEN Swedish Intl. Dev. Cooperation Agency (SIDA)                                                  3.00
                              LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                                                 10.00
                              Total                                                                                               37.44
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?



                                                                                Page 1 of 9
                         2. Current Project Development Objectives
                         The Project Development Objective is to enhance the competitiveness of the agro-food sector by
                         supporting the modernization of the food safety management system; facilitating market access for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         farmers; and mainstreaming agro-environmental and sustainable land management practices.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The Project Development Objective is to enhance the competitiveness of the agro-food sector by
                         supporting the modernization of the food safety management system; facilitating market access for
                         farmers; and mainstreaming agro-environmental and sustainable land management practices.
                         3. Project Description
                         The Project will focus on three priority enabling areas and their elements:
                         -        Firstly, it will focus on the modernization of the public system of food safety management
                         which is critically necessary to maintain domestic market share and increase access of food exports
                         to traditional markets in the FSU countries and the EU market.
                         -        Secondly, it will focus on organization of farmers and facilitation of investments for modern
                         post-harvest technologies and equipment.
                         -        Thirdly, it will focus on providing information and incentives to farmers aimed at
                         mainstreaming sustainable land management practices. The three areas above are modeled according
                         to the EU CAP pillars.

                         The design of the proposed project, which will fully blend an IDA allocation of $18 million and GEF
                         resources of $4.4 million, will take into account investments and activities that the Government of
                         Moldova and the international donor community have already conducted, launched, or programmed
                         under any of these areas (EU, MCC, USAID and IFAD). As such, the Project would aim to: (a)
                         complement these investments; and (b) enhance the integration of investment efforts and technical
                         assistance in these areas; while (c) remaining sufficiently focused to address issues in key value
                         chains with comparative advantages and thus potential competitive advantages on domestic and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         foreign markets. The Project will have the following components:

                         Component 1 (US$ 9.25 million): Enhancing Food Safety Management. This component would
                         support the Government ambitious agenda in engendering critically necessary adjustments in the
                         food safety and quality management systems. The country has embarked on a process of deep and
                         comprehensive reforms in the sphere of Sanitary and Phyto-Sanitary actions (SPS) in order to ensure
                         high levels of consumer protection on the internal market, as well as create a platform for expansion
                         of Moldova produce into the EU market. As the Moldovan Government has explicitly set a strategic
                         course for EU integration, the implementation of EU legislation in the field of SPS is inevitable, and
                         is in fact a primary factor in the impending negotiations on the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade
                         Agreement, as part of a future Association Agreement with the EU. Adoption of EU acquis on SPS
                         carries significant implications for state institutions in charge of food safety and quality, producers
                         and consumers. EU regulations in these fields demand some of the highest standards in the world and
                         consequently compliance by Moldova to these rigors would entail a lengthy and complex process
                         that requires substantial financial efforts for necessary human and technical capacity enhancements.
                         The component would be structured in two sub-components that would aim to address key priorities
                         identified in the framework of Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement negotiations,
                         focused on regulatory, institutional and technical strengthening of the food safety management
                         system.



                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                         Component 2 (US$15.00 million): Enhancing market access potential. Acknowledging that the need
                         for investments promoting marketability and market integration of hey agricultural products –
                         specifically in the horticultural sector– is positively correlated to progress in improving post-harvest
Public Disclosure Copy




                         infrastructure and in promoting increased levels of farmer organization, this component would
                         support the establishment and further organization of productive partnerships, and the application of
                         modern post-harvest technologies by these emerging entities. This support would be expected to
                         translate into an increasing share of quality products that meet international quality standards, and
                         therewith strengthen the sectors relative competitiveness and consequently its income generation
                         potential. Support under this component recognizes that the ability of the horticultural sector to serve
                         increasingly demanding national and regional markets will ultimately also remain a function of
                         producers’ ability to organize and cooperate both (a) through cooperation in production logistics,
                         adaptation of voluntary international standards, and implementation of quality management and
                         promotion schemes, and (b) cooperation in the establishment and use of post-harvest technologies
                         and in the joint marketing of horticultural products. The design and configuration of this component
                         would fill a critical gap in the incentive system for producers to actually enter into productive
                         partnerships by providing an initial incentive in the form of conditional investment support.

                         Component 3 (US$11.00 million): Enhancing land productivity through sustainable land
                         management. As part of a broader push of the project to increase competitiveness of the agriculture
                         sector, this component would support activities aimed at enhancing land productivity through
                         mainstreaming of sustainable land management and good agro-environmental practices. The
                         activities of the component will be aligned along three lines of support: (i) strengthening of human,
                         institutional and technical capacity (both locally and nationally) for the implementation of SLM
                         activities; (ii) financial incentives to farmers for the adoption of sustainable land management; and
                         (iii) investment support for the rehabilitation of anti-erosion protection strips (hedges) with the
                         purpose of maintaining and enhancing the productivity of agricultural land.

                         Component 4: Project Management (US$1.59 million). This component will provide technical and
                         financial support for project management. The implementation agencies for the proposed Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry (MAFI) and the Ministry of Environment
                         (ME). The Consolidated Agricultural Project Management Unit (CAPMU), which has nearly 10
                         years of experience in implementing World Bank and GEF Projects will serve as a fiduciary agent
                         for both implementation agencies. This component will finance activities such as (i) the PMU staff
                         and operations, (ii) Monitoring and Evaluation activities, (iii) training programs and (iv) audits.

                         Contingencies: US$0.6 million.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented countrywide.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Arcadii Capcelea (ECSEN)
                         Klavdiya Maksymenko (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              Same rationale as in the original ISDS
                          BP 4.01


                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09            Yes              Same rationale as in the original ISDS

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    Yes              Rehabilitation of the building of the Food Safety
                            BP 4.11                                             Agency which is on the National Registry of
                                                                                State-protected Monuments.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No               N/A

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No               N/A

                            Projects on International        No                 N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                While generally the project will provide many environmental and social benefits (such as
                              increased food safety and farmer income due to higher agricultural productivity, enhanced
Public Disclosure Copy




                              agricultural competitiveness, improved farmer skills in land conservation or increased opportunity
                              for engagement in small scale agri-businesses by farmers), it may also cause some negative
                              impacts. These impacts might be associated with the project supported competitive and matching
                              grant schemes which are expected to finance: (a) producer-mobilization interventions on a pilot
                              basis and supporting post-harvesting investments aimed at improving quality, consistency and
                              quantity of primary supply (washing, grading, packing, ripening room equipment, cold-storage,
                              minor-processing); and (b) investments in technologies and equipment for soil conservation-
                              friendly agriculture as well as for soil management activities.

                             The proposed activities under these schemes, if not adequately implemented, may cause some
                             environmental impacts related to: (a) increased pollution of ground and surface waters due to soil
                             erosion, use of fertilizers and pesticide, as well as the processing of agricultural products; (b)
                             threats to human health and wildlife due to poor handling of fertilizers and pesticides; (c)
                             increased siltation of water bodies due to soil erosion; (d) solid waste resulting from pre-
                             processing of agricultural products. Additionally, the project will support the rehabilitation of
                             buildings, border control points and laboratory facilities which may include minor civil works
                             which also might generate solid wastes, air pollution and health hazards.

                             The project will also have positive impacts on the environment and natural resource base of the
                             project area: prevention of soil degradation; increase of soil moisture; increase in biomass and

                                                                        Page 4 of 9
                         organic matter of soils; reduction of sediment loads to the rivers; and a decrease of run-off and soil
                         losses. This would result in a series of economic benefits: (a) increased soil productivity due to the
                         adoption of SLM practices; (b) the value of nutrient recovery in the soil; and, (c) increased
Public Disclosure Copy




                         agricultural crops yields.

                         The project triggers two WB OPs and specifically OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment and OP
                         4.09 on Pest Management. The OP 4.01 is triggered as the project will support a series of activities
                         which will generate some environmental and social impacts. To address these impacts the
                         borrower prepared an EMF (see point above). While the project will not finance the purchasing
                         and/or application of pesticides, it is possible that pesticide use will increase due to the increased
                         intensity of cropping supported by the Project's grant schemes of the project and/or due to
                         promoting conservation agriculture. To address the issues related to this OP the EMF includes
                         measures to raise awareness and educate potential beneficiaries regarding safe pesticide handling
                         and use of Integrated Pest Management to enhance sustainability and reduce human and
                         environmental exposure to dangerous products. Such measures are described in the section VI of
                         the EMF.

                         The borrower confirmed the project will not support activities and sub-projects that might result in
                         resettlement. The EMF clearly indicates that any infrastructure constructed/rehabilitated under the
                         project will be: (a) located on land already owned by participants, or will be bought or leased on a
                         willing buyer-willing seller basis, and, (b) will be screened to ensure that it is free of legal
                         encumbrance, or informal use or occupation by others who lack formal title. Furthermore, these
                         documents will also specify pasture improvement will not entail any form of involuntary pasture
                         closure or diminished access.

                         As stated in the EMF prepared by the borrower, OP/BP4.04 on Natural Habitats also would not be
                         triggered as the project will not support any activities which might involve conversion of natural
                         areas. The OP/BP 4.36 on Forests policy also will be not triggered as all project activities will be
                         implemented on existing agricultural land and on the currently functioning border control points
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and laboratory facilities.

                         Originally the project has not triggered the OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources. During
                         the project implementation (in 2013) the Government of Moldova has decided to house the newly
                         established Food Safety Agency in a building which is on the National Registry of State-Protected
                         Monuments. This building requires essential rehabilitation and the works are to be supported by
                         the project. This has led to the triggering of OP/B P4.11 and the ensuing restructuring of the
                         project. The proposed building is in severely decrepit state and it will be radically improved with
                         support from the project. The designs for the rehabilitation works have been carried out in full
                         compliance with the national requirements for such types of civil works, with all necessary
                         approvals from the Moldovan Ministry of Culture and necessary construction checks and permits
                         (construction expertise). Per national regulations, the renovation activities will be implemented
                         under strict supervision of the Agency for inspection and rehabilitation of cultural monuments of
                         the Ministry of Culture of Moldova, as well as of the State Construction Inspection. A site-specific
                         Environmental Management Plan was prepared for the building of the Food Safety agency, which
                         was disclosed and consulted with all interested stakeholders (disclosure on May 23, 2014 and
                         completion of consultations on June 13, 2014), including the Ministry of Culture of Moldova, the
                         Chisinau city Council, environmental and cultural NGOs and local population. The project's
                         safeguards category will remain B.



                                                                    Page 5 of 9
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The potential long term impacts are positive and relate to increased agricultural competitiveness
Public Disclosure Copy




                           as well as increased soil productivity and crop yields. The project will also bring long term
                           positive impacts in terms of soil conservation by improving land management practices.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             To address project-related potential negative impacts the borrower prepared an EMF which
                           specifies the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) requirements for the project activities and
                           sub-projects to be financed. This document covers the following: rules and procedures for
                           environmental screening; guidance for preparing sub-projects EIA and/or simple EMPs as well as
                           of EMP Checklist for identified small scale construction and reconstruction activities; possible
                           mitigation measures for different types of sub-projects; requirements for monitoring and
                           supervision of implementing of EIA/EMPs. The EMF contains also a series of measures to raise
                           awareness and educate potential beneficiaries regarding safe pesticide handling and use of
                           Integrated Pest Management. These measures are targeted at providing a framework for educating
                           farmers on issues related to pesticide handling and promoting integrated pest management (IPM)
                           and thus, understanding and managing pest problems in the horticultural sector, reducing human
                           and environmental health risks associated with pesticide use, and protecting ecosystem by
                           conserving beneficial agents such as natural enemies of pests and pollinators to increase
                           productivity. The project will hire a national research institution and/or an NGO with necessary
                           expertise in horticultural crop and IPM capabilities as well as with capacity to deliver training for
                           farmers. Based on the research and technical support needs of the project beneficiaries, the
                           selected consultant will develop IPM packages for horticultural systems, develop and deliver a
Public Disclosure Copy




                           training program with the aid of demonstrations, adaptive research trials and experiential learning
                           in the farmer fields. This institution will train the trainers and project specialists, as well as sub-
                           project beneficiaries and assist the Project Management Unit in designing a monitoring and
                           evaluation program. The proposed activities would also cover field demonstrations with improved
                           pesticide usage as well as IPM technologies. The Consolidated Agricultural Project Management
                           Unit (CAPMU) will coordinate the implementation of these activities.

                           The EMF will be integrated into the Project's Operational Manual and will be used as part of all
                           contracts involving proposed activities and selected sub-projects. The Bank is expected to provide
                           a special training to the CAPMU team, so they can promote compliance with the EMF and EMP.
                           The subproject EMPs will be also integrated into the contracts for approved activities, both into
                           specifications and bills of quantities and the Contractors will be required to include the cost in
                           their financial bids and grant proposals.

                           The EMF specifies its implementing responsibilities and arrangements. The proposed Project will
                           be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry (MAFI) and the Ministry of
                           Environment (ME). MAFI has extensive experience in successfully implementing World Bank
                           projects (ex. on-going RISP-II and RISP-IIAF, Avian Influenza projects), while the ME has
                           extensive experience in implementing GEF funded projects (ex. Moldova Agricultural Pollution
                           Control and POPs projects). CAPMU, which has nearly 10 years of experience in implementing


                                                                       Page 6 of 9
                           World Bank and GEF projects will serve as a fiduciary agent for both implementation agencies.
                           CAPMU has a highly qualified Environmental Specialist, being responsible for project safeguards
                           issues. Up to now the CAPMU environmental and social performances have been qualified as
Public Disclosure Copy




                           adequate. The WB team will continue to monitor closely EMF implementation, providing, if
                           needed, relevant assistance. The EMF and sub-projects EMPs implementation will remain under
                           the direct responsibility of the CAPMU, including responsibilities for supervision and monitoring
                           of construction activities. Compliance with the EMF and EMPs and monitoring of the impact
                           during the construction phase will be undertaken by the CAPMU Environmental Specialist as part
                           of his contract supervisory duties.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The EMF was disclosed and consulted in the country. On January 18, 2011, CAPMU has
                           disseminated the draft summary EMF to key project stakeholders (Ministry of Environment;
                           Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry; State Ecological Inspectorate) for review and
                           comments, also posting it in the same day its full English version along with the EMF Summary in
                           Romanian for wide public on CAPMU web site (www.capmu.md). On January 26, 2012, CAPMU
                           conducted a public briefing and consultation meeting on the EMF document. The meeting
                           concluded that the draft EMF document covers practically all potential impacts and possible
                           mitigation measures. The draft document was revised after the meeting, taking into account
                           outputs from the consultation. The final version of the EMF (Romanian) and its English version
                           were posted on the CAPMU website and submitted to the World Bank for its disclosure in the
                           Infoshop. EMF will be used by the client during the project implementation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        02-Feb-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     22-Feb-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Moldova                                                            18-Jan-2012
                           Comments: There were no ammendments to the original EA/EMF. A site-specific Environmental
                                         Management Plan was prepared for the building of the Food Safety Agency, which
                                         was disclosed and consulted with all interested stakeholders - disclosure for
                                         consulations on May 23, 2014 and publication on June 13, 2014.
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     NA
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Moldova                                                            //
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.


                                                                    Page 7 of 9
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                             Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Anatol Gobjila


                                                                       Page 8 of 9
                         Approved By
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)   Date: 20-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           Page 9 of 9
