INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC9818
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Dec-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         China                      Project ID:   P148599
Project Name:    Hebei Clean Heating Project (P 148599)
Task Team        Gailius J. Draugelis
Leader(s):
Estimated        21-Sep-2015                Estimated     25-Feb-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (100%)
Theme(s):        Pollution management and environmental health (40%), Climate change (10%),
Other urban development (50%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     188.70             Total Bank Financing:    91.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                         97.70
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development            91.00
Total                                                           188.70
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
9.     The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to improve the efficiency and
environmental performance of heating services in project areas of selected municipalities of Hebei
Province.
C. Project Description
The proposed project consists of two components: (A) District Heating Subprojects and (B) Project


﻿Management Support and Technical Assistance. Currently, Component A includes physical
investments in four subcomponents. The total estimated project costs are RMB 1.160 billion (US
$188.7 million equivalent). The proposed indicative financing plan includes an IBRD loan of US$91
million, about 48% of total currently estimated project costs, and counterpart funds comprising
corporate loans and connection fees from new construction. As standard practice, the proposed
IBRD loan will be onlent by the Ministry of Finance to Hebei Province, which will sign a Project
Agreement with the Bank, taking primary responsibility for overall project implementation. The
IBRD loan will be onlent by the Provincial Finance Bureau to the final administrative unit (i.e.
county town) responsible for the project areas. The final administrative unit will onlend the proceeds
to the final sub-borrowers, the heating companies, who will be responsible for implementing their
subproj ects.
Component A: District Heating Subprojects
Subproject Al: Chengde District Heating Subproject (estimated cost RMB 282 million; indicative
Bank financing $20 million, RMB 123 million equivalent)
Chengde, a prefecture level city located northwest of Beijing and home of Qing dynasty's summer
palace - a UNESCO world heritage site - plans to improve district heating services in the old
downtown area. The DH system is supplied by a coal fired 2x330MW Combined Heat and Power
(CHP) plant for base load heating and a 2x58MW coal fired peak load boiler. The project proposes to
finance (a) DH network extension of about 6.7 km (channel length) new pipeline; (b) 23 group
substations, and 153 building level substations; and (c) DH primary network and secondary network
rehabilitation, replacement of 4.4 km primary and 57 km secondary pipelines, installation of 64 high
quality valves in primary network and 753 balancing valves in secondary network. The investments
will extend the district heating network by 2.9 million m2, including replacing small boilers that
supply about 87,000 m2 of heating area. The total project heating area is 15.25 million m2. The
proposed sub-borrower is the Chengde Heating Group Company, Ltd., a state-owned enterprise and
the only major district heating company in Chengde.
o
Subproject A2. Zhangjiakou Qiaodong District Heating Subproject (estimated cost RMB 342
million; indicative IBRD financing US$ 28 million, RMB 172 million equivalent)
o      Zhangjiakou, a prefecture level city that is located northwest of Beijing plans to improve the
environmental performance and energy efficiency of heating services in the Qiaodong District in the
city center. The project heating area is supplied by one large 4x64MWth heat-only boiler (HOB)
plant (3.5 million m2 heating area) and 99 small dispersed heating boilers (2.6 million m2). The
project will replace use of these heating sources located in the city center with a district heating
network supplied by the Datang Zhangjiakou coal fired Combined Heat and Power Plant located 15
km away from the project area. It was previously a thermal power plant and has completed
converting 2x300MW units into CHP (capable of supplying 24 million m2) and plans to convert its
remaining 6x300MW units in future to supply other urban areas. The Dongyuan Heating Company
plans to lease capacity from an existing transmission pipeline (about 12 km in channel length from
the CHP) owned by another heating company. The subproject is proposed to include: (a) a pressure
isolation station; (b) about 18 km additional primary network construction; (c) installation of about
59 heat exchange substations (HEX), of which about 41 are to be installed in the existing boiler
house areas; and (e) installation of a SCADA system in the pressure isolation station. The proposed
sub-borrower is the Zhangjiakou Dongyuan Heating Company, a state owned enterprise.


﻿In addition, conversion of the 4x64MW coal fired peak load boiler to gas might also be feasible as
the gas pipeline from Ordos to Beijing will run through Hebei near Zhangjiakou and will be
completed by 2016. Zhangjiakou has not yet decided on whether to pursue the gas boiler conversion
as it is awaiting for assured gas supply
0
Subproject A3. Xingtai Xian (County) Heating Subproject (estimated cost RMB 390 million;
indicative IBRD financing US$ 31 million, RMB 190 million equivalent)
Xingtai, one of the most polluted counties in China, is a heavy industrial center (with significant iron,
steel, and chemical industries). The purpose of the subproject is to meet significantly expanding
heating demand by optimizing the energy mix for heating through expanded use of industrial waste
heat for district heating. The heat sources will be supplied by China RISUN Coal Chemicals Group
(RISUN). Based on its website, RISUN is the world's largest independent coke and coking chemicals
producer (in terms of coke production volume). The optimization will reduce primary energy
consumption, avoid or reduce related emissions and reduce the cost of delivered heating in the
subproject area. The subproject would use industrial waste heat recovery from cooling water
systems in RISUN and construct (a) about 8.5 km channel length of pipelines connecting four
cooling water systems (1 main source and 3 backup) to the primary station in RISUN; (b) a primary
station including a steam-driven absorption heat pump for heat recovery from industrial cooling
water; (c) about 44 km channel length of primary district heating network; (d) 72 heat exchanger
substations; (e) central automation and control system. The network is expected to be completed by
2017.
The proposed sub-borrower is the RISUN Anneng Heating Company, Ltd, a new joint venture (JV)
company, established for this project. The JV is privately owned. 50% is owned by Shijiazhuang
Anneng Co., Ltd., which is owned by three individuals (40%, 40%, 20%) and 50% is owned by
China (Zhongmei) RISUN Xuyang Coking Company, Ltd., which itself is a private company. China
Xuyang Coking Company, Ltd. shareholding comprises: 45% shares owned by China National Coal
Group (Zhongmei) Corporation (a Central SOE, www.chinacoal.com), 45% owned by privately-held
Xuyang Group (in English - China RISUN Coal Chemicals Group, Ltd., www.risuntj.com, www.
risun.com), and 10% owned by Delong Holdings Ltd. (delong.listedcompany.com) a private
(partially publicly listed) company.
o      Subproject A4. Pingshan Xian (County) (estimated cost RMB 146 million; indicative IBRD
financing US$ 12 million, RMB 74 million equivalent)
Pingshan County, located some 30 km west of Shijiazhuang, the capital of Hebei Province, is also
expanding its existing urban area to create opportunities for higher living standards and services for
the surrounding rural population. The project heating area is 6.95 million m2, including 3 million m2
of new buildings. The heating supply is provided by the Xibaipo Thermal Power Plant (4x330 MWp
and 2x600MWp) which has converted 2x330MW units to CHP with supply capacity of about 7.2
million m2. The subproject proposes to finance: (a) extension of primary network by 4 km channel
length; (b) renovation of existing primary network of 3.2 km channel length (to improve reliability to
allow the pipes to handle the increased pressure and temperature, eliminate corroded pipes); (c)
installation of about 32 new consumer substations, including five BLS, (d) renovation and expansion
of five existing substations, (e) heat metering for 1.92 million m2, (f) automatic control systems for
existing substations (controls, frequency converters, meters, and data communication); and (g)
installation of a SCADA and central monitoring and control system for the whole DH system. The
proposed sub-borrower is Pingshan Heating Company, an existing state owned district heating


﻿company.
Component B: Project Management Support and Technical Assistance (indicative IBRD financing to
be determined)
0
The details and cost of the Project Management Support and Technical Assistance Component would
be discussed during preparation as the Hebei Province is cautious in borrowing for technical
assistance. Some initial ideas for the component discussed at identification include:
a.     Project Management Consultant: Project management support to the Provincial PMO with
the implementation and monitoring of the project by hiring a Project Management Consultant. Hiring
a Project Management Consultant to support procurement, contract management and other related
operational functions is a common practice, especially for similar projects with many subprojects and
entities with weak capacity or lack of experience with foreign capital utilization projects. The
Provincial PMO confirmed interest in a Project Management Consultant to strengthen its capacity to
supervise the proposed Project.
b.     Provincial Long-Term Support Mechanism for Clean Heating: The ban on the construction
of new coal fired boilers creates a need for well-planned and prepared alternative heating supply.
This may be beyond the abilities of many municipalities and towns (such as some in the proposed
Project)which have little or no experience with such work. During the pre-identification visitand at
the id entification mission, the task team discussed with the Provincial DRC, Provincial Finance
Department and Provincial Housing/Urban-Rural Construction Department how this project could
help to develop a platform at the provincial level to help other municipalities, especially counties,
plan and develop clean heating solutions. The Province could consider establishing a technical unit to
advise cities, especially smaller ones, on developing appropriate clean heating solutions. The
provincial-level technical team could review proposals from counties and guide preparation of
feasibility studies to ensure good quality results. The unit could be established during project
preparation to gain experience and test the viability of such a service, so that other cities outside the
project can benefit.
c.     Local Project Management and Operations Assistance: The project would involve one new
company with nearly no experien ce in managing heating systems or other companies with limited
a      knowledge of modern management approaches. These companies could consider using the loan for
TA support to build capacity in operating and maintaining the subproject heating systems. One idea
to consider might be to hire an experienced heating company from another city to provide
management services of the heating network. Training in O&M of networks and possible workshops
and study tours for the four project heating companies may also be considered. This could include
visiting, for instance, Northern European systems that include multi-heat source dispatching, use of
building level substations, integrated accounting and billing systems, etc.
d.     Accounting and Billing System Improvement: Feasibility study consultants are expected to
evaluate the accounting and billing systems of each subproject for readiness to implement
consumption based billing. The outcomes of this assessment could include provision of technical
assistance, equipment and software to integrate accounting and billing systems to help further
automate billing, track payments and make accounting entries smoothly.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)


﻿The proposed Project includes four subprojects, and they will be located in four different
municipalities of Hebei Province. They include Shuangqiao District in Chengde Municipality,
Qiaodong District in Zhangjiakou Municipality, Xingtai Municipality, and Pingshan County in
Shijiazhuang Municipality. The four project counties amount to a total of 5,000 square kilometers of
area and a population of 2.2 million. About one quarter of total population in these counties is urban.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Even though the provincial PMO has some experience with World Bank financed projects, for the
project cities and counties, it is their first engagement with Bank financed projects. Therefore, the
clients lack experience with Bank funded projects and are unfamiliar with Bank's safeguards
policies. However, they have exhibited strong commitment during project identification. The
provincial PMO will guide and supervise the project preparation and implementation. For each
project city or county, a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be set up to prepare and implement
the project in the project city, which will be expanded to meet the Bank's requirements for technical
works, environmental and social safeguards, financial management, procurement, as well as project
management. With representatives from relevant government agencies and professionals, they will
be responsible for preparing and implementing all the subcomponents. Their duties include the
management of the feasibility study and engineering designs, social and environment safeguard
preparation, monitoring and evaluation, as well as financial management and procurement in
accordance with Bank guidelines.
Safeguards documents such as the Environmental Assessment (EA) and the Resettlement Action
Plan (RAP) will be prepared by professional institutions with required qualification and adequate
experience with Bank projects in China. Further, the PMO will undertake a Social Assessment to
assist with the design of relevant resettlement activities. To assist with the lack of capacity for Bank
safeguards policies, substantial training will be provided to the provincial PMO and project city PIUs
on all relevant safeguards in the early stage of project preparation. The timely interaction between the
Bank's task team and the clients will help improve the clients' capacity to the acceptable level during
project preparation and throughout implementation.
0
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Shunong Hu (GWADR)
Yiren Feng (GENDR)
Yongli Wang (GSURR)
Youxuan Zhu (GEDDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project will have significant benefits in terms of
OP/BP 4.01                              providing efficient district heating services.
Investments under Component A include civil works
for sub-stations, transmission pipelines, and
household metering, depending on the scale and
actual needs of each county.
It is expected that environmental impacts during
construction are mainly related to small-scale


﻿construction of transmission pipelines and
substations, e.g. disturbance to traffic and local
communities along the sites for pipeline construction
and near the sites for sub-stations, disposal of spoil,
nuisance of dust and noise.The Proposed project is
expected to replace the existing small coal-fired
boilers by providing more energy efficient district
heating, dismantle of the small boilers may generate
the hazardous wastes (i.e. asbestos), a small boilers
dismantle
management plan will be developed as a part of the
EMP to cope with the identification, dismantle
operation, storage, transportation and disposal of the
hazardous waste. Environmental impacts during
operation mainly include (1)
noise from the substations, building-level substations
(2) air pollutants emission and noise of the peak
boilers. The main adverse social impacts besides the
OP 4.10 and OP 4.11 include the loss of employment
of temporary workers due to the shutdown of small
coal-fired boilers, however the overall social impact
is positive as the project will improve the heating
service quality and provide heating service to the
communities not connected.
It is expected that the project will overall increase the
heating efficiency and reduce the air pollution loads
in Hebei Province. The adverse impacts are
localized, limited and can be readily managed with
accepted measures of good environmental codes of
practice (ECOP). And most mitigation measures will
be included in engineering designs and construction
specifications.
The project was assigned as Category A project
given the scale of works, the potential linked
activities, the displacement of workers and social
issues, and potential operating safety risks during the
operation phase.
An single EIA/EMP will be prepared for all the four
subprojects. The EIA will include the due diligence
review of the associated facilities that will (1) supply
the heating source for the project; (2) provide the
backup peak heating to the project. The EMP will
include (i) Generic mitigation measures for
contractors for inclusion in the bidding documents


﻿and contracts. (ii) Site specific mitigations measures
for potential adverse impacts during construction and
operation; (iii)Institutional arrangement of
Environmental supervision, monitoring plan and
Reporting
requirements and (iv) EMP implementation budget.
For a Category A project, an EA Summary will be
prepared based on the information from the EIA and
EMP. In the EIA, cumulative impact assessment will
be conducted focusing on the reduction of air
pollutants of primary concern in project areas based
on the provincial air quality clean up action plan.
During preparation of the proposed instruments, the
WBG's Environmental, Health and Safety Guideline
will be referenced in the EIA. On asbestos from
dismantling of coal-fired boilers, the project will
refer to the WBG Asbestos Guidance Note. the EIA
will also include the main results of the Social
assessment conducted by the social team.
Public consultation and information disclosure will
follow OP4.01 requirements during EA preparation.
At least two rounds of public consultation will be
carried out with potentially affected persons and
other relevant stakeholders through various methods,
e.g., questionnaire surveys, interviews, and public
meetings as needed. The full draft EA will be
disclosed locally.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD          The project is mainly in the urban and periurban area
of Hebei and the areas already disturbed by intensive
human activities. The initial screening of the project
indicated that it will not convert, degrade or restore
any natural habitats or critical natural habitats, this
will be further screened and confirmed once all the
civil works determined during the project
preparation.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No           The project will not finance activities that would
involve significant conversion or degradation of
critical forest areas or related critical natural habitats
as defined under the policy. Hence this policy is not
triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09       No           The Project will not lead to purchase nor use of any
pesticides. This policy is not triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources   TBD          Based on the available information and preliminary
OP/BP 4.11                                 screening carried out by the Bank team, there are no
physical cultural resources identified to be affected


﻿by the project. It will be confirmed by a detail survey
to be carried out during project preparation, The
policy is marked as "TBD" at this stage.
Chance-find procedures will be included in the EMP.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     TBD         Among four project cities or counties, most project
4.10                                     components are located in urban areas and it is
unlikely ethnic minority communities defined by the
Bank will be affected by the Project. A screening
will be conducted during social assessment for all
project cities to confirm whether there are any ethnic
minority communities in the project areas and
whether Bank IP policy will be applied for the
Project.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        Under Component A, each city or county will
BP 4.12                                  develop heating system to meet heating requirement.
On Heating Source, two types will be involved.
Chengde, Zhangjjiakou and Pingshan will use heat
from existing CHPs; and Xingtai will use industrial
waste heat from Coking Plant. In connecting with the
heat sources, primary heating station, pressure
isolation station or pumping station will be built in
Xingtai and Zhangjiakou Cities. Among them,
Xingtai primary heat station and pump station will be
built on land areas (60 mu) obtained by the project
sponsor last year. For Zhangjiakou Subproject,
pressure isolation station will be built on the site
used to be a chemical factory, which was closed
down a few years ago and was allocated to project
sponsor by local government. For the required sites
for Zhangjiakou and Xingtai subprojects, due
diligence review will be conducted to ensure no
legacy issues involved. For existing CHPs and
choking plant, all of them were constructed many
years ago with no new land acquisition involved.
On Heat Transmission and Distribution, they include
2.4km of trunk heating pipeline in Zhangjiakou City,
68.6 km of primary heating pipelines and 186 heat
exchange stations will be constructed among all four
cities. Most of heat transmission lines will be
constructed along the urban roads with limited
impacts. However, in some newly developed urban
areas where urban roads have not yet been
constructed, temporary occupation of farmland might
be required. For heating transmission impacts, a brief
resettlement plan will be prepared for each
subproject. For those cities where heating pipeline


﻿alignment could not be determined during project
preparation, a resettlement policy framework should
be prepared. In terms of heat exchange stations, they
will be constructed either within the existing boiler
houses or on the site provided by housing
development companies with no land acquisition and
resettlement.
On Heat Service Area, they vary widely among four
subprojects. For Zhangjiakou and Chengde
subprojects, proposed heating area include large
portion of existing housing stock which will be
realized by replacing many small boilers. For Xingtai
and Pingshan Subprojects, the heating area mainly
covers part of new urban area, where all new housing
are either completed or under construction. For those
subprojects requiring closing down of small boilers,
a reemployment plan is required as part of the
resettlement action plan.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    Yes          The proposed project will not finance the
construction and rehabilitation of any dam. However,
for the Xingtai Subproject, the sub-project will use
industrial waste heat from Xingtai Risun Group. It is
found that the cooling water of the Xingtai Risun
Group comes from the existing reservoir upstream of
the Risun Group. OP4.37 is therefore triggered for
the subproject. A Dam Safety Report needs to be
prepared in compliance with the policy.
Projects on International    No           Not applicable.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         Not applicable.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Mar-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
For social safeguard document preparation, a TOR had been prepared in the middle of July 2014
for both social assessment and resettlement preparation for all four subprojects. Following TOR,
four project cities or counties have engage two qualified consulting teams in September 2014 for
SA and RAP preparation. It was agreed that a draft resettlement plan or a resettlement policy
framework as well as due diligence review will be prepared for each subproject, which will be
completed and submitted to the Bank for review by end of November 2014.
IV. APPROVALS
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿Task Team Leader(s): Name: Gailius J. Draugelis
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards   Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                    Date: 15-Jan-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/     Name: Julia M. Fraser (PMGR)                 Date: 16-Jan-2015
Manager:


