                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSC1038

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Cote d'Ivoire                      Project ID:       P149801
                            Project Name:       REDD+ Readiness Preparation in RCI (P149801)
                            Task Team           Laurent Valiergue
                            Leader:
                            Estimated
                            Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GENDR

                            Sector(s):        Forestry (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          3.80                    Total Bank Financing:            0.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                                Amount
                              Borrower                                                                          0.00
                              Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                          3.80
                              Total                                                                             3.80
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective is to reinforce the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire’s capacity to design a
                           socially and environmentally sound national strategy to reduce emissions from deforestation and
                           forest degradation.

                           Key results are:
                           - Institutions strengthened at national, regional, and departmental levels; these institutions will be
                           coordinating and implementing REDD+ readiness effectively and put in place an operational
                         grievance and redress mechanism;
                         - A National REDD+ Strategy (including analysis of options for the development of a benefit sharing
                         plan) incorporating SESA outcomes and recommendations is prepared in a consultative manner and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         validated by national stakeholders. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                         for managing potential social and environmental risks of agreed REDD+ strategy options is prepared
                         and validated.
                         C. Project Description
                         This REDD+ Readiness Preparation grant will provide funding to support Côte d’Ivoire in the
                         amount of US$3.8 million in carrying out a subset of activities outlined in its R-PP. The full R-PP
                         includes all activities necessary for Côte d’Ivoire to become ready for REDD+ as well as additional
                         complementary activities estimated to cost up to US$19 million. For a list of all activities to be
                         financed under the R-PP by all partners please refer to the R-PP submitted by the Republic of Côte
                         d’Ivoire. ).
                         Project Components

                         FCPF will finance six major components of the R-PP that have been prioritized by the REDD+
                         Permanent Executive Secretariat (PES):
                         •        National Readiness Management Arrangements (Component 1a):
                         Activities will support the appointment of the staff of the Permanent Executive Secretariat (PES);
                         PES travel expenses as well as the purchase of a vehicle, a computer and office supplies as well as
                         their maintenance.
                         •        Consultation and Participation Process (Component 1c):
                         Activities will include recruiting staff to support the training/capacity building for the REDD+/
                         FLEGT civil society platform and its regional branches in the agro-ecological zones as well as
                         substantial fieldwork in awareness raising.
                         •        Assessment of Land Use, Land Use Change Drivers, Forest Law, Policy and Governance
                         (Component 2a):
                         Activities will include a study on the history of land use and future strategic options; a national study
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of wood use for energy; and an analytical study on the potential of reforestation at the national level;
                         along with accompanying validation workshops.
                         •        REDD+ Strategy Options (Component 2b):
                         Activities will include support for interministerial workshops to feed into the development of REDD
                         + strategy options.
                         •        REDD+ Implementation Framework (Component 2c):
                         Activities will assess the relevant existing feedback and grievance redress mechanisms and
                         arrangements (FGRMs), and either strengthen the existing FGRMs or, as necessary and appropriate,
                         establish a new FGRM, to address any relevant feedback and grievances during the REDD+
                         readiness process. In addition, analysis and consultation on options for the development of a benefit
                         sharing plan (for carbon and non-carbon benefits) will be carried out.
                         •        Social and Environmental Impacts during Readiness Preparation and REDD+
                         Implementation (Component 2d):
                         Activities will support the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) and the
                         development of the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).
                         Support is limited to technical assistance, analytical studies, capacity building, goods, operating
                         costs, and consultation processes and does not include the implementation of site-specific REDD+
                         programs on the ground. The activities have been prioritized based on the comparative advantages of
                         the FCPF, on-going work supported by other development partners and the likelihood of follow up
                         work by other actors active in the REDD+ space in Côte d’Ivoire.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project management unit (the REDD+ Permanent Executive Secretariat) will be at the Ministry
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of Environment (MINESUDD) in Abidjan but the project is of a national scope and will take place
                           throughout the country.
                           This project does not entail activities on the ground. Rather, it is focused on providing technical
                           assistance to the government for the development of technical and institutional capacities to
                           participate in a future international REDD+ mechanism.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Recipient's capacity is at best moderate. An existing project on management of parks is being
                           well managed as concerns safeguards and is managed by an entity under MINESUDD, allowing for
                           transfer of experience and lessons learned. World Bank agricultural projects are also ongoing in the
                           country and have involved developing safeguards expertise in areas related to this project. It is likely
                           however that the REDD+ Permanent Executive Secretariat (PES) will need considerable training and
                           support to become sufficiently proficient in managing key safeguard issues.
                           The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) for the national REDD+ Readiness
                           process will be led by the REDD+ Permanent Executive Secretariat (PES) and carried out through
                           inclusive consultations, and in close coordination with other analytical studies / processes. The
                           exercise will be directly supervised by a National SESA Overseeing Committee, made up of
                           representatives from government, civil society, and the private sector. This Committee will be in
                           charge of overseeing the preparation of the SESA and of ensuring it feeds into the preparation of the
                           National REDD+ Strategy.
                           The SESA exercise itself will assess the national capacity needs required for the country to be
                           capable of monitoring and implementing the safeguards related to a national REDD+ mechanism and
                           will make recommendations for institutional strengthening.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Alexandra C. Bezeredi (OPSOR)
                           Lucienne M. M'Baipor (GSURR)
                           Abdoulaye Gadiere (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The Strategic Environmental and Social
                           BP 4.01                                               Assessment (SESA) to be carried out under the
                                                                                 project will serve to identify, avoid, mitigate
                                                                                 and compensate the potential negative
                                                                                 environmental and social impacts associated
                                                                                 with future activities to be supported by the
                                                                                 final REDD+ strategy by providing guidance
                                                                                 and key elements for the preparation of an
                                                                                 Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                 Framework (ESMF). The SESA will also
                                                                                 influence the final national REDD+ strategy, by
                                                                                 ensuring that social and environmental risks are
                                                                                 factors in the preparation of the strategy.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   The application of this policy seeks to ensure
                                                                 that all options proposed in the National REDD
                                                                 + Strategy take into account the conservation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 biodiversity, as well as the numerous
                                                                 environmental services and products that natural
                                                                 habitats provide to human society. Overall,
                                                                 REDD+ activities are expected to have
                                                                 significant positive impacts on natural habitats,
                                                                 as the country puts in place an effective strategy
                                                                 to reduce loss of natural forests. The SESA will
                                                                 address issues related to natural habitats and
                                                                 potential impacts of the National REDD+
                                                                 Strategy, which will later be included in the
                                                                 ESMF.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have
                                                                 significant positive impacts on forest, in that the
                                                                 main goal of the program is to reduce
                                                                 deforestation and forest degradation, while
                                                                 contributing to the well-being of forest-
                                                                 dependent communities. Potential impact of the
                                                                 National REDD+ Strategy on natural forests
                                                                 will be assessed through the SESA and included
                                                                 in the ESMF. The SESA and associated ESMF
                                                                 will reflect the requirements of the Bank’s
                                                                 Operational Policy regarding forest
                                                                 management, in particular as these relate to the
                                                                 establishment of plantations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   Agricultural intensification and reforestation
                                                                 activities, among others, are REDD+ activities
                                                                 which could require pest management in the
                                                                 course of project implementation. The SESA
                                                                 will address critical issues related to pest
                                                                 management, as necessary, and these will also
                                                                 be included in the key elements of the ESMF, as
                                                                 well as in a specific plan related to pests and
                                                                 pesticides management.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   REDD+ activities are likely to be implemented
                         BP 4.11                                 in areas containing sites deemed physical
                                                                 cultural resources by rural communities living
                                                                 there (e.g. holy/secret sites such as sacred
                                                                 groves, sacred forests, etc.). Though it is not
                                                                 anticipated that the project will have negative
                                                                 impacts on any such sites, the SESA will
                                                                 address issues related to a chance find of
                                                                 physical cultural resources and potential impacts
                                                                 of the National REDD+ Strategy, which will
                                                                later be included in the ESMF and a specific
                                                                dedicated framework.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No    The country has over sixty ethnic groups ,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                whose linguistic and cultural identities and
                                                                interrelationships are diverse and complex, but
                                                                nonw are Indigenous Peoples. The SESA will,
                                                                however, take into account the interests of all
                                                                relevant stakeholders, in particular, vulnerable
                                                                populations, consult with them adequately,
                                                                ensure that they participate in, and benefit from
                                                                REDD+ activities.

                                                                The five main cultural clusters are: the dominant
                                                                Akan-speakers, who make up 42 percent of the
                                                                population, mainly in the center, east and south-
                                                                east; Northern Manding (Mandé), mainly in the
                                                                north-west; Voltaic peoples, including Senoufo
                                                                in the north and Lobi in the central region; Krou
                                                                in the south-west; and Southern Manding
                                                                (Mandé) in the west. Around 28 percent of the
                                                                population of Côte d'Ivoire consists of migrants
                                                                from elsewhere in Africa; the largest number of
                                                                these come from Burkina Faso, while others are
                                                                from Mali, Ghana, Guinea, Nigeria, Benin,
                                                                Liberia, Senegal and Mauritania.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   REDD+ activities will trigger Involuntary
                         4.12                                   Resettlement in situations involving involuntary
                                                                restrictions of access to legally designated
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                parks, protected areas, or forest management /
                                                                reforestation areas. The policy aims to avoid
                                                                involuntary resettlement to the extent feasible,
                                                                or to minimize and mitigate its adverse social
                                                                and economic impacts in cases where
                                                                resettlement or other involuntary restrictions
                                                                cannot be avoided. Through the SESA process,
                                                                any issues related to land acquisition or
                                                                involuntary resettlement will be identified, and a
                                                                Resettlement Policy Framework will be
                                                                prepared. With regard to restrictions of access to
                                                                protected areas, parks, forest concessions, etc., a
                                                                Process Framework will be prepared as well.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No    The project does not involve dams.

                         Projects on International        No    N/A
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No    N/A
                         7.60
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2017
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The
                                      specific studies and their timing will be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS

                                      The main safeguard instrument to be launched is the Strategic Environmental and Social
                                      Assessment (SESA).

                                      The SESA exercise will be launched, once the consultancy team hired, and will be completed
                                      under the close supervision of a National SESA Overseeing Committee, composed of
                                      representatives from the government, civil society, and the private sector. An Environmental and
                                      Social Management Framework (ESMF), three related frameworks and one plan:
                                      -       Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF);
                                      -       Process Framework;
                                      -       Physical Cultural Resources Management Framework;
                                      -       Pests and Pesticides Management Plan;
                                      will complement the set of safeguards instruments.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Laurent Valiergue

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 28-Sep-2014
                                 Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Benoit Bosquet (PMGR)                                                                                                Date: 29-Sep-2014
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
