                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA8383
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Russian Federation                Project ID:    P133201
                            Project Name:     National Urban Transport Improvement Project (P133201)
                            Task Team         Jung Eun Oh
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         27-May-2014                       Estimated   29-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    ECSTR                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            GEF Focal         Climate change
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Transportation (25%), General information and
                                              communications sector (10%), Urban Transport (65%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (60%), Municipal governance and
                                              institution building (40%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     272.13           Total Bank Financing:               117.50
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
                              Borrower                                                                              117.50
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                 117.50
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                       9.13
                              Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country                              28.00
                              Total                                                                                 272.13
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?



                                                                      Page 1 of 7
                          2. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)
                            A. Project Development Objective(s)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The project aims to improve urban mobility, accessibility, safety and environmental sustainability
                            of transport systems in selected cities of the Russian Federation.
                            B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                            The project aims to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in transport sector of the Russian
                            Federation.
                          3. Project Description
                         Component 1. Improvement of the National Policy for Sustainable Development of Urban Transport
                         Systems (US$5 million IBRD loan, US$5 million federal budget and US$1,632,420 GEF grant). This
                         component will support improvement of the federal-level legal and institutional basis for sustainable
                         development of urban transport systems in Russian cities.

                         Component 2. Sustainable Urban Transport Pilot Program in Three Russian Cities (US$100 million
                         IBRD loan, US$100 million federal budget, US$5,500,000 GEF grant, and parallel financing from
                         budgets of three cities at about $20 million). Three cities—one small (population less than 300,000),
                         one medium-sized (300,000 – 1 million), and one large (greater than 1 million)—were selected
                         jointly by the Ministry of Transport, Moscow Oblast Government and the World Bank, based on the
                         review of the cities’ preparedness, interest and willingness, and the likelihood of demonstration
                         effects.

                         Component 3. Development of Institutional and Technical Capacity in Municipalities for Urban
                         Transport System Planning and Management (US$10 million IBRD loan, US$10 million federal
                         budget, US$2 million GEF grant, and parallel financing from budgets of selected cities at about $8
                         million). This component finances technical assistance to multiple cities, which will be competitively
                         selected according to the selection framework to be approved by the Interagency Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Implementation Board. The selected cities will receive technical assistance for analytical work or
                         project preparation activities in support of environmentally and socially sustainable urban transport
                         systems.

                         Component 4. Project Management ($2.5 million IBRD loan and $2.5 million federal budget). This
                         component will finance activities to be carried out by the Project Implementation Unit (PIU)
                         Implementation Unit (PIU) during implementation under the tripartite Agency Agreement with the
                         Ministries of Finance and Transport, as well as project preparation activities if a subsequent IBRD-
                         financed project is proposed to be implemented by the Ministry of Transport.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project would support urban transport pilot projects in three selected cities (St. Petersburg,
                         Lipetsk, and Balashikha). Candidate areas for pilot projects would include (i) improvement of traffic
                         management systems, potentially including advanced technologies of intelligent transportation
                         systems (ITS), (ii) improvement of public transport infrastructure, vehicles and services, (iii)
                         development and implementation of a city-wide parking plan, (iv) improvement of road traffic safety
                         and non-motorized transport, and (v) implementation of various transportation demand management
                         measures. It is expected that planned interventions will be small scale and limited to specific
                         locations. Physical impacts may include standard small-scale construction and reconstruction of
                         various elements of urban transport infrastructure (improvement of geometry of crossings, public

                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         transportation stops, parking space within the pavement areas, etc) and their negative environmental
                         impacts can be mitigated by good construction and housekeeping practices. Project activities may
                         lead to some temporary relocation and/or loss of income or productive assets of businesses and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         individuals who operate on project sub-sites. Also, the project will have overall positive
                         environmental effect which will be achieved through reduction of air emissions (both GHG and local
                         pollutants) from urban transport due to better urban spatial planning and traffic congestion
                         management.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexei Slenzak (ECSEN)
                         Nicolas Perrin (ECSSO)
                         Jennifer Shkabatur (ECSSO)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project will finance improvements in urban
                         BP 4.01                                             transport infrastructure and services.
                                                                             Environmental impacts will be limited and site-
                                                                             specific and will be mitigated by good
                                                                             construction and housekeeping practices.
                                                                             Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
                                                                             was prepared and will serve as a basis for
                                                                             preparation of site-specific EMP Checklists.
                                                                             Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA/OVOS)
                                                                             will be prepared for each site as part of design
                                                                             documentation. EMF and site-specific EMP
                                                                             Checklists will be followed by Contractors, as
                                                                             part of preparation of final construction drawings.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No              Due to their physical/technical nature project
                         BP 4.11                                             activities are not expected to have an impact on
                                                                             physical cultural resources. In case project
                                                                             activities take place in the historic part of St.
                                                                             Petersburg (central districts Admiralteisky,
                                                                             Vasileostrovsky, Petrogradsky, and Central) , the
                                                                             design documentation will be reviewed and
                                                                             cleared by local governmental body for protection
                                                                             of the cultural heritage. Activities to be
                                                                             implemented within the protection zones for the
                                                                             cultural heritage objects of St. Petersburg (historic
                                                                             buildings, monuments, etc.) shall include
                                                                             historical-cultural (historical-architectural and
                                                                             historical- town planning) master plan. In this


                                                                     Page 3 of 7
                                                                                 case Physical Cultural Resources Action Plan will
                                                                                 be prepared for specific project activities. All
                                                                                 contracts for works will include provisions for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 chance finds procedure.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes             The project will finance improvements in urban
                            4.12                                                 transport infrastructure and services. All project
                                                                                 activities will be implemented on public land
                                                                                 (municipal or federal). Project activities which
                                                                                 require private land acquisition will not be
                                                                                 eligible for financing. The Safeguards Policy on
                                                                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12 is triggered as
                                                                                 the project may involve some temporary
                                                                                 relocation and/or loss of income or productive
                                                                                 assets during Project-related activities. A
                                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared and
                                                                                 it will be disclosed by MinTrans and in the three
                                                                                 participating cities prior to appraisal. Site Specific
                                                                                 resettlement action plans (RAPs) will be
                                                                                 prepared, as required, based on the RPF after
                                                                                 identification of the sub-project sites, disclosed,
                                                                                 consulted with the Project affected people, and
                                                                                 implemented prior to commencement of works
                                                                                 under any subproject which triggers OP/BP 4.12
                                                                                 Involuntary Resettlement.
                                                                                 The Ministry of Transport together with the PIU
                                                                                 will conduct initial pre-screening of project sites
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 to check for squatters/informal use of land, and
                                                                                 will communicate World Bank safeguard
                                                                                 requirements to municipal authorities.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The activities to be financed under the project would involve mostly small-scale construction (i.e.
                              bus stops, information stands, road signs, minor adjustment of alignment to arrange bus stops and
                              crossings, etc.). Also, the activities may involve generation of small volumes of construction and
                              other waste (disposal of old public transport stock). Significant part of the investments will involve


                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                           procurement and introduction to operation of GIS, communication and monitoring systems,
                           meteorological stations, and other electronic equipment and devices for traffic management, and
                           training (Category C-type of investments). Overall, the project is assigned Environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Category B.

                           No large-scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are expected.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Overall, the project will have positive long-term social and environmental effects. No indirect and/
                           or long-term impacts are anticipated a s a result of project activities.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           A Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was prepared by the Borrower in 2014, , and it
                           will be disclosed in the Ministry of Transport and the three participating cities, as well as on the
                           World Bank website prior to appraisal. The EMF documents potential negative impacts, proposed
                           mitigation measures and monitoring plan for implementation of mitigation measures during
                           implementation of the sub-project. Site-specific EMP Checklists will be prepared at the stage of
                           detailed design of the sub-projects. The site-specific EMP Checklists for sub-projects in St.
                           Petersburg, Lipetsk and Balashikha will take into account comments and proposals received
                           during public consultations on EMF.

                           A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared by the Borrower in 2014, and it will be
                           disclosed in the Ministry of Transport and the three participating cities, as well as on the World
                           Bank website prior to appraisal. Site Specific resettlement action plans (RAPs) will be prepared, as
Public Disclosure Copy




                           required, based on the RPF after identification of the sub-project sites, disclosed, consulted with
                           the Project affected people, and implemented prior to commencement of works under any
                           subproject which triggers OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key project stakeholders include the general public of the municipalities involved in the project,
                           Ministry of Transport, local administrations.

                           Public consultations on the EMF are being organized by MinTrans and the PIU upon EMF's
                           disclosure. They will solicit comments and proposals from interested stakeholders. Disclosure of
                           and public consultations on site-specific EMP Checklists will take place in participating
                           municipalities at a later stage, upon completion of preparation of design documentation, including
                           preparation of OVOS for specific sub-projects.

                           Public consultations on the RPF are being organized by MinTrans and the PIU upon RPF's
                           disclosure. They will solicit comments from a wide range of stakeholders in the participating
                           municipalities.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other


                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-May-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Russian Federation                                               21-May-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      17-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-May-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Russian Federation                                               21-May-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?



                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Jung Eun Oh
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Esma Kreso (RSA)                             Date: 23-May-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Juan Gaviria (SM)                            Date: 23-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 7 of 7
