                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC5571

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Armenia                           Project ID:       P146318
                            Project Name:       Armenia Social Protection Administration II Project (P146318)
                            Task Team           Ivan Drabek
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           26-Nov-2013                       Estimated         25-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSH3                             Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Social safety nets (70%), Improving labor markets (10%), Social risk mitigation
                                                (10%), Other social protection and risk management ( 10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     25.50                       Total Bank Financing:           21.20
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                               4.30
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                     21.20
                              Total                                                                           25.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are to (i) improve efficiency of social
                           protection service delivery for social protection beneficiaries and (ii) strengthen analytical and
                           monitoring and evaluation functions of the agencies delivering social protection benefits and
                           services.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed project will take further the achievements from the Social Protection Administration
                         Project (SPAP). The previous project developed the model of integrated delivery of pensions, social
                         assistance, employment and disability certification through functional integration within the ISPCs. It
Public Disclosure Copy




                         is currently implemented on the pilot basis in 19 ISPCs that have been established, equipped and
                         trained under the project. The proposed project would support the roll-out of the integrated social
                         protection delivery country-wide involving additional 37 ISPCs.
                         The work under the new project would be closely coordinated with the World Bank’s Social
                         Inclusion and Labor Knowledge for Reforms, Operations and Advancing Dialogue (SILK ROAD)
                         Technical Assistance project, particularly with regard to the possible FBP reform options and
                         ongoing in-depth gender and work study for Armenia.

                         The FBP has a good targeting accuracy but, as already noted, its coverage of the poor is low and has
                         gone down in recent years (along with the total number of beneficiaries). Extending the program’s
                         coverage while maintaining its targeting efficiency is one of the targets of the planned Armenia
                         Development Policy Operation (P143040) – during the DPO project design phase it was expected
                         that the number of FBP recipient households will reach 104,000 in May 2015 and this target has
                         already been met. Additional focus would be on provision of active support and beneficiaries’
                         integration in the labor market.

                         The World Bank is also working with the Government of Armenia on strengthening the livelihood of
                         the poor and vulnerable population of Armenia, supported by the Japan Social Development Fund
                         ($2.7 million). The project is in an early implementation stage and has the objective of piloting self-
                         reliant livelihoods and generation of employment opportunities combined with the provision of vital
                         services to 4,000 persons with disabilities and other extremely poor people. Specifically, the project
                         finances: i) vocational training and self-employment, ii) community-based social and health care
                         services, and iii) access to information and advocacy education. The implementing agency of the
                         project is the local non-governmental organization Mission Armenia. As such, the JSDF grant
                         focuses on helping the “hard to reach? beneficiaries who are sometimes overlooked by mainstream
Public Disclosure Copy




                         labor market programs.

                         Other key partners involved in different components of the social protection reform carried out under
                         the MLSI are UNICEF and USAID. UNICEF supports the development of case management within
                         the piloted integrated social service centers and related performance monitoring indicators and
                         procedures. A close collaboration between UNICEF and World Bank was established in the previous
                         SPAP project. USAID is providing comprehensive support to the state social security service
                         development. Overall coordination among different donors and stakeholders is carried out by the
                         MLSI in order to prevent possible overlaps across different reform areas.

                         The proposed project is organized around five components, which relate to the following two major
                         dimensions: rolling out of integrated social services delivery model including public employment,
                         pension, and social assistance benefit and service provision (Component I) and strengthening the
                         capacity of institutions for reforms in the areas of labor market, pensions, and social assistance
                         (Components II-V). Some of the proposed interventions are a continuation of activities undertaken in
                         the previous Social Protection Administration Project (SPAP, P087620 and Additional Financing)
                         and are presented as such in the project description.

                         The proposed project would comprise five components as follows:
                         Component I: Rolling-Out of Integrated Social Protection Service Delivery (US$16.6 million, of
                         which World Bank credit US$13.9 million). This component would support rolling-out of integrated
                         social protection service delivery that was initiated and piloted under the SPAP project. The
                         proposed types of activities are the following:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         i)       Civil works, IT equipment, furniture, and other goods for 37 ISPCs (Integrated Social
                         Protection Centers). During the implementation of the SPAP, the government has designed and
                         piloted a model of functional integration of four existing agencies responsible for pensions, social
                         assistance, employment, and disability certification. 19 ISPCs have been established under the first
                         project (SPAP). The proposed project would finance the design/supervision, refurbishments, and
                         equipment for the remaining 37 ISPCs nationwide. This may also involve investments in the
                         electricity, water and sewage systems, as well as strengthening the buildings against seismic shocks
                         and carrying out adjustments to improve the physical access for the disabled people.

                         ii)      Strengthening of the ISPCs management information systems. The proposed project would
                         support the implementation of the new management information system across all ISPCs, further
                         software development, and IT support. The new modules will enable interface with various MLSI
                         and external databases . This is of particular importance in the process of determining/verification
                         of benefit eligibility. Additionally, some parts of the existing management information system need
                         to be refined to reflect the changes in regulations governing the work of reception staff and case
                         managers of the ISPCs. Finally, the software will be enabled to collect sex-disaggregated data along
                         with other data needed for monitoring and analytical purposes.

                         iii)    Drafting of legislation for the implementation of the adopted model of integrated social
                         protection service delivery. This subcomponent would finance consultant services in support of
                         continuous adjustments of the existing social protection legislation, including drafting of new laws
                         and by-laws. The project will ensure that the new social protection legislation is gender equal or
                         gender neutral.

                         iv)      Training for ISPC staff. The activity would include development of training materials and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         manuals, practical training for MLSI/ISPCs staff in integrated social protection service delivery, as
                         well as follow up support to the local staff through mentoring and on-the-job training.
                         v)       Public outreach. This activity consists of both design and implementation of public
                         awareness campaigns, including the printed materials.

                         The proposed project would build on the lessons learned from the ISPCs piloted under the SPAP. It
                         would draw from the ISPC pilot project evaluation undertaken by the MLSI and UNICEF and from
                         the SPAP Implementation Completion Report (see preliminary findings from the report in Annex 3
                         of this document). Both documents are due this fall.

                         Component II: Supporting the Implementation of the New Employment Strategy by the Government
                         (US$2.5 million, of which World Bank credit US$2.1 million). The activities would cover four
                         specific areas:
                         i) Building nationwide career orientation services by supporting the introduction of an information
                         system(IT software and hardware, and consultants services) for methodical assistance and software
                         to test professional orientation. These services would be targeted to beneficiaries of all ages with an
                         aim of reducing the mismatch between disciplines chosen by students or lifelong learning chosen by
                         adults and labor demand. The activities would also include online consultancy and distance-training
                         programs, development of short films about professions, as well as public awareness campaigns.
                         ii) Strengthening SESA’s capacity by supporting training activities, investing in IT infrastructure
                         (incl. upgrading the GORTS management information system), furniture and other goods, and
                         refurbishing its central office building. At the decentralized level, SESA’s services will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         progressively integrated into the ISPC. Although this will in principle help stretch the service’s
                         capacity, detailed responsibilities still need to be worked out.

                         iii) Supporting the design and implementation of a pilot project involving one or more active labor
                         market policies (ALMPs). The MLSI has developed a preliminary list of possible ALMPs which
                         include: employment of women with small children through child care activities; development of
                         business incubators for returning migrants; employment program targeting young people without
                         education; lump-sum compensation to employer for job placement of those who are hard-to-employ;
                         support to small businesses in order to foster self-employment; and, support to farmers through
                         temporary employment. It remains to be decided which of these pilots would be supported under the
                         project. The first proposal involving child care activities has been discussed to the greatest extent. A
                         high share of Armenia’s qualified unemployed has qualifications in medical or pedagogical fields,
                         equipping them for a variety of public services (ETF Country Report 2010). At the same time,
                         several essential public services, including child care, are under provided. For example, below 40
                         percent of age-eligible children in Armenia attend preschool (World Bank, SABER Armenia, 2013),
                         missing out on the benefits that early childhood education provides. One possibility to address this
                         and unemployment issues would be the creation of childcare centers as workfare. Irrespective of the
                         choice of the ALMP to be piloted, the project will look at gender differentiated impacts or constraints
                         in the selected ALMP.

                         iv) Supporting impact evaluation of new employment programs. This subcomponent would finance
                         consultant services. The Government’s Employment Strategy as well as the new Employment Law
                         emphasizes the need to monitor and rigorously evaluate any new program. The p rospective ALMP
                         pilot would be apt for a rigorous impact evaluation. This could be done in a cost-effective manner,
                         combining the inscription of beneficiaries for the pilot with an application form that serves as
                         baseline survey. A transparent awareness campaig n would inform applicants that places in the pilot
Public Disclosure Copy




                         are not guaranteed. A randomly selected number of applicants would then participate in the pilot
                         while the non-participants would serve as control group. The entire pool of applicants would be
                         surveyed again about a year after the intervention has taken place.

                         Component III: Modernization of the Pension System (US$0.9 million, of which World Bank credit
                         US$0.7 million). The pension component of SPAP II would support the State Social Security Service
                         (SSSS) in improving its core business processes. SSSS would focus on strengthening its technical
                         capacity through completing its electronic document management system, intranet and internet
                         services, building analytical, forecasting, and statistics capacity supporting the MLSI policymaking
                         activities, introduction of the risk-based-supervision of insured individuals' statuses (i.e. disability),
                         and providing information to the insured individuals on covered service periods on a 24/7 basis.
                         Along with supporting development of these business processes, SPAP II would help SSSS
                         strengthen its technical capacity (IT hardware equipment) and train staff to engage in the revised
                         business processes. Specific project activities would include the following:

                         i)       Designing SSSS's analytical capacity and risk-based fraud and error supervision functions.
                         These business processes would be established as new modules of the SSSS's integrated business
                         software (developed under SPAP), as basis for new business functions in the SSSS. The objective of
                         this activity is to design the model for the development of these functions, including methodology,
                         contents of the additional software modules, organizational framework for the fraud and error
                         system, data interfaces for the analytical functions, and other system design issues.

                         ii)     Upgrading electronic pension information system by establishing interfaces with other social
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and other databases (citizens registry, family benefits, child allowance, etc.) in order to improve the
                         process of pension benefit determination and payment, and provide timely information on pension
                         benefits paid to other systems.

                         iii)    Investment in IT equipment aims to improve the efficiency of SSSS by replacing around 25
                         percent of personal computers of SSSS staff, mainly in the field offices.

                         iv)     Training of SSSS staff in various pension reform issues.


                         The evaluation of integrated social services pilots may result in augmenting the SSSS functions
                         within the social protection system. The list of SSSS's activities to be supported under the proposed
                         project might be upgraded accordingly.

                         Component IV: Strengthening MLSI Analytical Capacity and Monitoring and Evaluation Systems
                         (US$1.3 million, of which World Bank credit US$1.1 million). Activities under this component are
                         aimed at strengthening the capacity of the monitoring and evaluation unit within the MLSI and
                         developing an integrated system of monitoring and evaluation of social protection benefits and
                         services (in total 84 different programs). This would enable the MLSI to streamline the indicators
                         and methodology for monitoring the implementation of its policies on the ground (both in general
                         and gender-mindful manner), analyze possible reform options and their impacts, adjust policy
                         solutions, and eventually increase efficiency of the system of social protection. Part of the activities
                         would be focused on case management, continuous training and supervision of case managers in
                         ISPCs. Research activities on poverty and different forms of monetary and non-monetary
                         deprivations, for different vulnerable groups including youth and women, would also be financed
                         under this component. The proposed component would additionally cover the cost of IT equipment,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         software development, and training of the MLSI’s monitoring and evaluation specialists.

                         Component V: Project Management (US$1.9 million, of which World Bank credit US$1.3 million).
                         This component would finance the standard operation of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) at
                         MLSI for the duration of the project, trainings, and incremental operating costs. The PCU is in
                         charge of technical aspects of the project and ensures overall monitoring and supervision of project
                         activities. The cost of project management would also partially cover the Foreign Financial Project
                         Management Centre (FFPMC) staff time, for those who will perform fiduciary activities for the
                         SPAP II project, as well as maintenance costs.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented countrywide. Individual investments will be made in multiple
                         locations, not all of which are known upfront.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         In 2012, the government approved the Decree on the Approval of the Operational-Structural Model
                         of Comprehensive System of Integrated Social Service Provision. The Decree sets out a clear
                         concept of the model of integrated social service provision and an outline of the implementation plan,
                         with a clear division on the piloting and roll-out phases. The Government chose a model of
                           functional integration of four existing agencies (responsible for pensions, social assistance,
                           employment and disability certification) that would be placed under one roof in 56 locations across
                           the country. The piloting of integrated service delivery within the ISSCs has first been initiated in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           four sites (Masis, Ararat, Vedi in Ararat marz, and Avan community in Yerevan), financed under the
                           Bank-supported Social Protection Administration Project (SPAP) and implemented by the MLSI.
                           Some 19 ISSCs were renovated and equipped under the SPAP. The Project Implementing Entity for
                           SPAP II will also be the MLSI, which, after having implemented the first project, has basic
                           understanding of the Bank's safeguard policies. However, the first Social Protection Administration
                           Project was classified as environmental Category C, and the MLSI will now have to expand its
                           institutional capacity in applying safeguards under a more complex Category B project by recruiting
                           staff of consultant, or assigning an existing staff to safeguards management, including supporting and
                           overseeing implementation of the Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) and Resettlement
                           Policy Framework (RPF). For the EMPs this may be one of the engineers currently on staff (with
                           appropriate supplementary training), or a qualified new staff, or a consultant engaged for this
                           purpose. For the RPF it may be the MLSI’s social development policy expert or another staff or
                           consultant who will be in charge of preparation of RPF, determining whether any sub-projects
                           require a RAP, and preparing, implementing, and monitoring RAPs as needed. These persons will
                           work closely with safeguards and social development specialist of the Bank team and receive on-the-
                           job training sufficient for handling safeguards issues under a low risk Category B project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The Project will finance refurbishment and area
                           BP 4.01                                              landscaping works at 37 ISSCs, including the
                                                                                possibility of small scale new building
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                construction, which will be selected over the
                                                                                Project preparation and early implementation
                                                                                phases. The envisaged civil works will have
                                                                                modest local environmental and social impacts,
                                                                                which would be easy to mitigate by ensuring
                                                                                that works providers adhere to the conventional
                                                                                good construction and environmental practices.
                                                                                The Project triggers OP/BP 4.01 and OP/BP
                                                                                4.12 and, based on the principles of this Policy,
                                                                                is classified as environmental Category B.

                                                                                The 37 ISSCs will be selected, and detailed
                                                                                designs for their refurbishment/constructioning
                                                                                will be developed on the rolling basis.
                                                                                Therefore, not all of these decisions will be
                                                                                made and not all designs be prepared by
                                                                                appraisal. However, the environmental and
                                                                                social risks related to the works at all of these
                                                                                centers will be pretty similar and insignificant,
                         and most of them are already known. Because
                         of the above, due diligence for the Project
                         preparation requires development of an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental and Social Management
                         Framework (ESMF), which would describe the
                         main types of expected environmental and
                         social impacts of the expected Project
                         investments, and will provide a generic set of
                         their mitigation measures. ESMF will also
                         provide guidance for screening upcoming
                         investment proposals, so that no activity gets
                         supported if, by chance, it is associated with
                         higher risks then a Category B Project should
                         finance. Sitde -specific simple Environmental
                         Management Plans (EMPs) will be prepared for
                         individual investments once detailed designs get
                         ready for them. ESMF will carry a suggested
                         template of an EMP Checklist for Small
                         Construction and Rehabilitation Activities.

                         The 37 ISSCs will be selected, and detailed
                         designs for their refurbishing or construction
                         will be developed on the rolling basis.
                         Therefore, not all of these decisions will be
                         made and not all designs be prepared by
                         appraisal. However, the environmental and
                         social risks related to the works at all of these
                         centers will be pretty similar and insignificant,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and most of them are already known. Because
                         of the above, due diligence for the Project
                         preparation requires development of an
                         Environmental and Social Management
                         Framework (ESMF), which would describe the
                         main types of expected environmental and
                         social impacts of the expected Project
                         investments, and will provide a generic set of
                         their mitigation measures. ESMF will also
                         provide guidance for screening upcoming
                         investment proposals, so that no activity gets
                         supported if, by chance, it is associated with
                         higher risks then a Category B Project should
                         finance. Side -specific simple Environmental
                         Management Plans (EMPs) will be prepared for
                         individual investments once detailed designs get
                         ready for them. ESMF will carry a suggested
                         template of an EMP Checklist for Small
                         Construction and Rehabilitation Activities.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The majority of physical works to be financed
                                 4.12                                                                                            from the Project will be for the refurbishment of
                                                                                                                                 the existing buildings and upgrading land plots
                                                                                                                                 assigned to these buildings, however there is a
                                                                                                                                 possibility of several small-scale new building
                                                                                                                                 constructions. Also, there is certain likelihood
                                                                                                                                 of minor encroachment to the publicly owned
                                                                                                                                 land plots around the buildings to be
                                                                                                                                 refurbished, Therefore, a precautionary
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
                                                                                                                                 prepared. RPF will provide detailed guidance
                                                                                                                                 for developing investment-specific Resettlement
                                                                                                                                 Action Plans (RAPs), to be prepared and
                                                                                                                                 implemented prior to commencement of works
                                                                                                                                 at a site where resettlement is taking place.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 20-Nov-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      ESMF and site-specific EMPs for a set of priority individual investment sub-projects will be
                                      developed before appraisal, disclosed in-country and through the InfoShop, finalized after
                                      discussion with a relevant audience of stakeholders and re-disclosed. Other site-specific EMPs
                                      will undergo similar procedures once the detailed designs and EMPs are ready. Commencement of
                                      works will not be allowed at any site till the respective EMP is disclosed and consulted with local
                                      stakeholders. A precautionary RPF will be developed before appraisal, disclosed in-country and
                                      through the InfoShop, finalized after discussion with a relevant audience of stakeholders, and re-
                                      disclosed.
                         IV. APPROVALS




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Ivan Drabek

                         Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)    Date: 09-Oct-2013
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Andrew D. Mason (SM)   Date: 17-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
