INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR12106
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Feb-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Tanzania                   Project ID:   P101645
Project Name: TZ-Energy Development & Access Expansion (P101645)
Task Team       Nataliya Kulichenko
Leader(s):
Estimated       27-Sep-2007                Estimated     13-Dec-2007
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEDR                       Lending       Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (86%), Other Renewable Energy
(8%), Central government administration (3%), Hydropower (3%)
Theme:          Infrastructure services for private sector development (40%), City-wide
Infrastructure and Service Delivery (20%), Rural services an d infrastructure
(20%), Climate change (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                   No
O
U         Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:     191.56            Total Bank Financing:   147.96
o        Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               6.80
International Development Association (IDA)                    147.96
Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                6.50
Local Sources of Borrowing Country                              13.55
Bilateral Agencies (unidentified)                                3.20
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified)               13.55
Financing Gap                                                    0.00
Total                                                          191.56
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Page 1 of 10


﻿Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
0
2. Current Project Development Objectives
This ISDS is being updated to reflect the inclusion of the Energy SME (ESME) grant in the amount
of US$ 6.5 million funded by the Russian Trust Fund for the ESM                     E
development in Sub-Saharan Africa.
- The objective of TEDAP is to improve the quality and efficiency of the electricity service
provision in the main three growth centers of Dar es Salaam,
Arusha , and Kilimanjaro and to establish a sustainable basis for
energy access expansi                         on.
- The project's global environmental objective is to abate greenhouse gas emissions through the use
of renewable energy in rural areas to provide electricity.
- The Project Development Objective would be slightly reformulated to highlight project's enhanced
focus on renewable energy development. The new Project Develo
pment Objective will read: The Project Development Objective is to improve the q
uality and efficiency of the electricity service provision in the main three gro
wth centers of Dar es Salaam, Arusha, and Kilimanjaro and to establish a sustain
able basis for energy access expansion and renewable energy development in Tanza
nia. The global environmental objective will not change.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
This ISDS is being updated to reflect the inclusion of the Energy SME (ESME) grant in the amount
of US$ 6.5 million funded by the Russian Trust Fund for the ESM                     E
U         development in Sub-Saharan Africa.
- The objective of TEDAP is to improve the quality and efficiency of the electricity service
provision in the main three growth centers of Dar es Salaam,
o        Arusha                            , and Kilimanjaro and to establish a sustainable basis for
energy access expansi                         on.
- The project's global environmental objective is to abate greenhouse gas emissions through the use
of renewable energy in rural areas to provide electricity.
- The Project Development Objective would be slightly reformulated to highlight project's enhanced
focus on renewable energy development. The new Project Develo
pment Objective will read: The Project Development Objective is to improve the q
uality and efficiency of the electricity service provision in the main three gro
wth centers of Dar es Salaam, Arusha, and Kilimanjaro and to establish a sustain
able basis for energy access expansion and renewable energy development in Tanza
nia. The global environmental objective will not change.
3. Project Description
TEDAP consists of three components: (A) a grid component focusing on investments in the national
Page 2 of 10


﻿utility's transmission and distribution network; (B) an off-grid component, including a grant from the
Global Environment Facility (GEF), to support institutional set-up for the Rural Energy Agency
(REA) and to develop and test new off-grid electrification approaches for future scale up; and (C) a
technical assistance component.
o
TEDAP's On-grid component consists of five sub-components implemented by TANESCO (i)
Transmission and Distribution investments; (ii) Distribution System Upgrade Investments; (iii) On-
grid Access Expansion; (iv) Commercial and Institutional Capacity Development; (v) and Ongrid
Technical Assistance for implementation.
TEDAP's off-grid component has four subcomponents: (i) Small Power Projects (SPPs), including
renewable power generation and mini-grids; (ii) Sustainable Solar Market Development, supplying
solar PV systems for public institutions and for individual households and businesses in rural areas;
and (iii) Technical Assistance to the Rural Energy Agency (REA) and other stakeholders; and (iv)
Rural/Renewable Energy Credit Line that provides qualifying commercial banks in Tanzania with
long-term funds in local currency following financial closing of loans to compliant renewable energy
project companies. These activities are implemented through: (a) provision of grants to the private
sector (including NGOs and cooperatives) to partially offset investment costs of new service
connections (through performance grants), and for pre-investment studies, business  and
market development (through matching grants); and (b) supply, installation and provision of
maintenance and other associated services for the Sustainable Solar Market Packages, as well as the
provision of goods, consultant services and training for the technical assistance subcomponent, and
related operating expenses.
Since its effectiveness, the Project has been restructured twice. The first restructuring (Level 1) was
approved on April 6, 2010. The restructuring has scaled-up the activities of Component B (off-grid
electrification) by providing an Additional Financing of US$25 million to establish a Credit Line for
small rural and renewable energy projects and to extend the Project's original closing date by three
years, to March 31, 2015. The second restructuring (Level 2) approved on April 7, 2011, provided
Additional Financing of US$ 27, 880,000 to cover cost escalations caused by: (i) substantial cost
increases of the transmission and distribution rehabilitation contracts (against original cost
estimates); (ii) implementation delays of the transmission rehabilitation contract; and (iii) higher than
anticipated costs for various consulting assignments under Component C. The restructuring included
a        the cancellation of components, which TANESCO financed as part of their agreed contribution of
US$15 million.
The third restructuring is requested (Level 2 restructuring) because of implementation delays that
mainly occur under Ongrid Component (Component A). The proposed changes to the Tanzania
Energy Development and Access Expansion Project (TEDAP, P101645) include: (i) cancellation of
certain activities; (ii) reallocation of loan proceeds between disbursement categories; and (iii)
extension of the Project closing date by 18 months (from March 31, 2015 to September 30, 2016).
There are no changes to the Project Development Objective (PDO) or safeguards. Approval by the
Regional Vice President is sought since the cumulative extension of the closing date will be more
than two years. Due to cost increases under the Project, this restructuring is expected to be followed
by an Additional Financing. This restructuring, combine d with the proposed Additional Financing,
will ensure that Project implementation can be fully completed and the PDO achieved.
Component A: Transmission and Distribution Network Investments (implemented by TANESCO)
Page 3 of 10


﻿The Transmission and Distribution sub-components (sub-components A. 1 and A.2) have made
noticeable progress to date, providing reasonable assurance and evidence to the Bank Task Team that
the completion is achievable within the new proposed extension period while meeting the required
quality standards. The requested extension of the project closing date by 18 months (to September
O
2016), if approved by the Bank, would allow for the closure of the on-going construction contracts.
The following changes are therefore proposed under Component A:
Cancellation and reallocation of costs: In light of the cost increases in Component A (Sub-
Components A. 1 and A.2 for the Transmission and Distribution), TANESCO proposes to cancel a
number of activities under IDA 43700, and reallocate funds as follows:
i.     Reallocation of US$ 540,000 allocated for Part C. lb (strengthening TANESCO's personnel
capacity for managerial skills, all through the provision of technical advisory services, training and
workshops) from category 2 to category 1. It is proposed to finance the activities through the IDA-
supported Energy Sector Capacity Building Project (ESCBP - P126875).
ii.    Reallocation of the remaining US$ 4,509,618.10 for Part C.2 earmarked for the development
of the Recipient's capacity to develop private and public power generation projects, through the
provision of technical advisory services including, high quality legal, technical, financial,
environmental and social expertise), is being reallocated to Category 1. However, Part C. lb will be
cancelled and activities financed through the IDA-supported Energy Sector Capacity Building
Project (ESCBP - P126875). Part C.la has already been completed under TANESCO funds.
Other cancelled activities under Component A, include: (a) the procurement of 100,000 units of three
phase whole-current split type meters (A.3) that will be financed by TANESCO; (b) procurement of
test instruments for meter installation and servicing (A.2); (c) procurement and installation of 1,800
solid state remote meters (A.4); and (d) the procurement of Corporate IT systems, including
Commercial Management System (CMS), Technical Service Management System (TSMS), and
Resource Management System (RMS) (A.4). It is proposed to finance the activities through the IDA-
supported Energy Sector Capacity Building Project (ESCBP - P126875).
Change in Results Framework: The following results indicators will be deleted since activities linked
to these indicators will be canceled under the Project and financed by other sources:
-      Improved IT systems for commercial, technical service and resource management functional.
-      Pilot Project for low loss high voltage system implemented.
o        -      Timely and equitable development of the identified least cost large power generation project
- TA related.
-      TANESCO/MEM Institutional capacity development needs identified and a plan to address
these agreed and implemented.
Change in Procurement: The Procurement Plan has been revised to reflect cancelled activities.
However, there are no proposed changes in procurement methods and approaches. As noted above,
for cost saving purposes the following procurements will be cancelled:
-      Procurement of 100,000 units of three phase whole current split type meters (A.3);
-      Procurement of test instruments for meter installation and servicing (A.2);
-      Procurement and installation of 1,800 solid state remote meters (A.4);
-      Procurement of Corporate IT system: Commercial Management System (CMS); Technical
Service Management System (TSMS); Resource Management System (RMS); and
-      Consultancy for project management (A.3/A.4).
Change in loan closing date: It is proposed to extend the Project closing date by 18 months, from Ma
Page 4 of 10


﻿rch 31, 2015 to September 30, 2016. This will allow for completion of activities under the Project,
particularly those under Component A and B.
Component B: Small Power Projects (implemented by Rural Energy Agency, REA)
U         It is proposed that under Component B (off-grid electrification), the Rural Renewable Energy Credit
Line (Credit Line, hereafter) for small renewable energy projects also will be extended to September
30, 2016, to ensure the full disbursement of the available funds. The Credit Line was designed under
the first Additional Finance (US$25 million), to address the issue of availability of long-term credit
in Tanzania's banking system by giving local banks access to long-term credit resources to make
financing available for small renewable energy projects. To date, the funds from the Credit Line were
disbursed to three renewable energy projects . As of January 2015, the total commitment to Small
Power Producer's (SPP) projects was US$15,700,799. The total resource pool of the Credit Line is
US$ 22.87 million, constituting the amount of available funds at US$ 7,169,201 available. The SPP
projected pipeline includes two additional projects that are expected to close in the first half of 2015.
Component C: Sectoral Technical Assistance (MEM and REA)
Under this Component, GoT has asked reallocation of the remaining funds under advisory contracts
estimated US$ 4.5 million to meet financing gap under component A
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Ongrid investments are located in urban/peri urban areas of Daresaalam, Kilimanjaro and
Arusha. The off grid investments (rural/renewable energy projects) supported by the restructuring are
located in rural areas throughout Tanzania.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Helen Z. Shahriari (GSURR)
Naima A Hasci (GSURR)
Thomas E. Walton (GENDR)
0
6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The restructuring do not require any changes in the
OP/BP 4.01                               existing environmental safeguards documents, which
consist of environmental audits for existing
substations, an environmental and social
management framework for the off-grid component,
and ESMPs for individual substations. Disclosure of
the original documents was completed in March
2007. Restructuring is for the extension of the
closing date to ensure the project meets it PDOs.
With regards to Dar es Saalam on grid, some changes
were made to transmission line routes, and the 132-
kV lines into Kurasini Substation were changed from
overhead to underground cables. TANESCO already
reported that these route changes under Sub-
Component A. 1 (Transmission) did not have any
implications for environmental safeguards.
Page 5 of 10


﻿Moreover, the Environmental and Social
Management Framework for sub-component B.4,
Rural / Renewable Energy, was updated and
disclosed in Infoshop on January, 31, 2014.
Environmental safeguards performance in the project
continues to be fully satisfactory.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes         This policy is triggered for the off-grid component
a                                                 but is not relevant for on-grid, which is the focus of
restructuring.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          Forest management is not being supported.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          No pesticides are being procured or employed.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes        The policy is triggered as a precaution, mainly for
OP/BP 4.11                              the off-grid component, in case graves or sacred
places are encountered during the environmental
assessment of individual investment projects.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes       The restructuring do not require any changes in the
BP 4.12                                  existing social safeguards documents, as explained
under OP.4.01. The restructuring is for the extension
of the project closing date to allow for the project to
reach its PDO).
The original Resettlement Plan (RAP) was prepared
in 2007, approved by the Bank and disclosed in the
Infoshop on October 2007 and in the country in
January 2006. The RAP was updated in 2014 to
reflect the current route changes in Dar es Salaam
between Mbagala, Kurasini and Gongo la Mboto as
well as construction of the transmission line from
Factory zone III (Gongo la Mboto) substation to
Factory Zone II (Kiwalani) substation. As a result of
route changes 43 additional people were affected and
are fully compensated. The updated RAP was
approved by the Bank and disclosed on September
23, 2014.
Finally, the Resettlement Management Framework
(RMF) for sub-component B.4, Rural / Renewable
Energy, was updated and disclosed in the Infoshop
on Sept. 23, 2014
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   Yes         Originally triggered for the off-grid component, not
relevant for on-grid.
Projects on International   Yes         Originally triggered for the off-grid component, not
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                    relevant for on-grid.
Page 6 of 10


﻿Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No       There are no disputed areas along the Tanzania
BP 7.60                                 borders.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
O
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
- The restructuring and time extension is expected to have overall positive environmental and
social impacts on both ongrid and off grid investments. The on grid component would improve the
capacity of existing networks, thus improving the service quality for existing customers and
allowing new customers to connect to the grid in the key urban areas which are the main growth
centers of Tanzania. Furthermore, these investments will improve the capacity of existing
networks thus improving power system performance by reducing system losses, frequent outages
due to overloaded transformers and old equipment, low and fluctuating voltage conditions and
poor system power factors.
The key benefits for off grid component include:
* Reduced and avoided CO2 emissions and other pollutants from fossil fuel-fired generation
plants;
* Increased generation capacity and diversification of the generation mix, helping to alleviate the
recurrent power shortages;
* Increased access to modem energy services in rural areas;
* Contribution to local rural development as most of the project sponsors are local SMEs situated
in rural areas.
- The Restructuring is not expected to trigger any additional safeguards policies. OP/BP 4.37
(Safety of Dams) and OP/BP 7.50 (International Waterways) were originally triggered under
TEDAP. These policies were triggered since TEDAP's off grid component was expected to
involve mini-hydro development. Consequently riparian notification in accordance with OP 7.50
was carried out by the Bank in 2007 (at the request of the Government) and no comments were
received opposing the project. OP 4.37 was triggered as a precautionary measure, as only small,
run-of-river dams were expected and have been proposed to date. The ESMF prepared for
Component B explains the application of dam safety to the small dams, and the review of
proposed mini-hydro projects includes ensuring that designs are prepared by engineers qualified to
incorporate standard dam safety measures.
- Environmental/social impact and resettlement. It is not anticipated that the time extension and
restructuring would result in any significant potential negative impact, or in any impacts beyond
those already identified in TEDAP. As the type and size of projects supported by the credit line are
the same as those already included in TEDAP's off-grid component, the restructuring will apply
the same instruments and procedures already in place for TEDAP's off-grid component. These
include the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), the Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) and the Riparian Notification letter. ESMF and RPF were publicly disclosed on
July 1, 2007. These documents were re-disclosed under the Additional Financing that was
approved on April 6, 2010.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Page 7 of 10


﻿No indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area are
foreseen.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Borrower's compliance with safeguards policies under the existing TEDAP components has
been satisfactory.
- The Restructuring is not expected to trigger any additional safeguards policies. As the type and
size of projects supported by the credit line are the same as those already included in TEDAP's off
grid component, the restructuring will apply the same instruments and procedures already in place
for TEDAP's off grid component. These include Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF), and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
- In line with the provisions of TEDAP Financing Agreement, the responsibility for safeguards
compliance for the component B (off grid) have passed from the Ministry of Energy and Mines
(MEM) to the Rural Energy Agency (REA) based on REA's satisfactory capacity assessment.
REA has recently hired an experienced environmental and social specialist, former National
Environment Management Council (NEMC) staff. External expertise also complements REA's
capacity for safeguards implementation. Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
training has been provided to REA under the institutional capacity building program financed by
SIDA in order to enhance the expertise in screening and practical operational exposure. NEMC
staff from the districts and the project developers has also received environmental and social
training.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
- The key stakeholders are communities, households and businesses in the project areas, which
on one hand may potentially be affected by the sub-project developments, and on other hand are
O
expected to be beneficiaries of electrification.
- The ESMF and RPF have been disclosed in the country and are available at REA, including on
its website. The ESMF and RPF form part of project's Operating Guidelines and are binding for
project developers. Project developers are required to carry out and document consultations with
the communities.
- Furthermore, the project aims at involving communities in the project implementation (many of
the projects are expected to be community-owned) and monitoring (e.g. s Quality Control Agents),
with a view to ensure that their voices and inputs are taking into account early on in the process.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              15-Dec-2005
Date of submission to InfoShop                           26-Mar-2007
Page 8 of 10


﻿For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  //
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                10-Dec-2005
Date of submission to InfoShop                             26-Mar-2007
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes[X]  No[       NA
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes[X]   No[       NA
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                     Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA [    ]
Page 9 of 10


﻿Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?  Yes [ X] No [   ]   NA [ ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                Yes [X] No [     ]   NA [  ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
O
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
O          the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Nataliya Kulichenko
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Lucio Monari (PMGR)                 Date: 27-Feb-2015
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


