INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCIO82
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Nov-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Lao People's Democratic    Project ID:  P149599
Republic
Project Name:   Power Grid Improvement Project (P149599)
Task Team       Rome Chavapricha
Leader:
Estimated       21-Apr-2015                Estimated    30-Jul-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (50%), Energy efficiency in Heat
and Power (50%)
Theme(s):       Other environment and natural resources management (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     30.00            Total Bank Financing:   30.00
U       Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                             Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
o         IDA Grant                                                      15.00
IDA recommitted as a Credit                                    15.00
Total                                                          30.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to help improve efficiency and reliability of power distribution
in the selected load areas served by EDL.
C. Project Description


﻿The main proposed project components include:
a. Smart metering and reduction of distribution losses [US$ 18 million]: This component will
introduce advanced metering technology in the project area to help reduce distribution losses and
0
improve metering, billing and collection system. In addition, this component will help improve
reliability of power supply and reduce losses in selected parts of the distribution network through
strengthening of power distribution infrastructure (upgrading of conductors, increasing transformer
capacity, placement of capacitors for reactive power and voltage control, installing load break
*       switches and reclosers, etc.). The upgrading of conductors involves the rehabilitation of an estimated
366 km of power distribution lines, including about 127 km of medium voltage lines (22 kV).
b. Management Information System [US$ 7 million]. There are three subcomponents: (i) Supply and
installation of optical fiber communication links in the project area; (ii) Extension of Geographic
Information System (GIS) to support power distribution operation and maintenance; and (iii) Supply
and installation of an updated corporate financial management system. This sub-component will
focus on the modernization of financial management in EDL, including through the improvement of
billing and collection system and its integration with other functions in a modern corporate-wide
financial management system
c. Institutional capacity building and technical assistance (TA) [US$ 5 million], including: (i) expand
testing and certification facility of distribution materials and equipment, (ii) applications of advanced
metering infrastructure, (iii) applications of energy balancing and power flow software, and (iv)
project implementation support.
d. Contingent emergency response [US$ 0 million]. The objective of this "zero component" is to
allow a rapid reallocation of IDA proceeds from other components to provide emergency recovery
and reconstruction support following an adverse natural disaster event. This component would
finance public and private sector expenditures on a positive list of goods and/or specific works,
goods, services and emergency operation costs required for emergency recovery. A Contingency
O
U       Emergency Response Component (CERC) Operational Manual will apply to this component,
detailing financial management, procurement, safeguard and any other necessary implementation
arrangements.
Status of the Project, Procurement, Financial Management and Disbursement
EDL, supported by the Bank team, has prepared a preliminary cost estimate for the three components
under the proposed IDA Credit and grant budget of US$ 30 million. The actual cost will be
determined upon completion of procurement for each procurement package.
The implementing agency EDL is expected to utilize its existing expertise in procurement, financial
management, disbursement, and environmental and social management gained through the on-going
REP II and the GMS Power Trade Project. The Bank team will carry out an updated assessment of
EDL's fiduciary as well as safeguard capacity and provide the necessary training and support during
preparation, appraisal and implementation.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The geographical scope of the project is limited to the urban and suburban area of Vientiane.
Specifically, the intended project area is located in Xaythany district of Vientiane capital, about 10


﻿kilometers north of Vientiane city center, with a distribution loss of almost 25 percent at present. The
Vientiane capital area accounts for about 40 percent of the country's demand for electricity. The
Xaythany district comprises low- and high-income residential customers, commercial, and industrial
customers. There are currently about 46,000 residential and 1,100 non-residential customers in
O
U       Xaythany.
The number of kilometers of power lines to be rehabilitated is about 366 (of which 127 for medium-
voltage). Small-scale works linked primarily to installation of meters, capacitors, upgraded medium-
voltage transformers and conductors of low- and medium voltage lines are linked to the proposed
rehabilitation of existing medium and low voltage distribution lines and reinforcement of selected
electricity networks. The planned activities within the project do not include construction of new
transmission or distribution electrical lines. The physical installations of meters, power distribution
equipment, communication links, computing hardware, testing equipment are expected to be done on
existing power poles, power lines, and buildings owned by EDL or by electricity customers. No land
acquisition or physical relocation of existing residences is expected as construction work will be
done on the existing power distribution infrastructure. However, a due diligence work is required to
review in situ the power lines identified for rehabilitation, including access routes to associated
facilities such as sub-stations, as relevant, for encroachments or other types of land use or informal
land occupation which may hinder access to a safe working space or pose a safety risk to people
living or working in the right-of-way. EDL will notify affected customers for any power cut
requirements during project implementation in accordance with its established procedure.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
EDL has experience with Bank safeguard policies through the on-going Rural Electrification Phase II
and GMS Power Trade Projects. This experience will be carried over to the proposed Power Grid
Improvement Project.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Juan Martinez (GSURR)
Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (GENDR)
Satoshi Ishihara (GSURR)
O
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes          Small scale installation works pertain to the
OP/BP 4.01                              rehabilitation of distribution of medium voltage (MV
22kV) and low-voltage (LV 0.4 kV) lines and the
installation of electronic meters, replacement of
capacitors (LV line), upgrading of conductors (on
LV and MV lines) and replacement and upgrading of
transformers (for MV). Given the nature of the
rehabilitation works the project is proposed as
category B as certain mitigation measures and
monitoring actions will have to be implemented
during the civil works in order to minimize, prevent
and reduce possible temporary impacts on the
environment. Temporary environmental impacts


﻿during works may include noise and air pollution,
soils and water surfaces pollution due to disposal of
fuel oils and other chemicals related to works and
disposal of waste materials from installations to be
replaced, and physical hazards to workers. Special
attention will be given to management of hazardous
electrical waste (old transformers) including
handling, transportation and final disposal of
materials contaminated by PCBs, as well as to
impacts from disconnection of power lines and
interruption of service to beneficiaries during works.
These potential impacts could be managed through
clear environmental due diligence obligations of
contractors (which will be stipulated in the EMP) and
use of adequate technical construction standards. To
ensure that the environmental issues are
appropriately addressed, the Client will prepare a
standardized EMP including ECoPs that will meet
Bank safeguard policies and national applicable
legislation. The WBG Environmental, Health and
Safety (EHS) Guidelines for Power Transmission
and Distribution will be followed during project
implementation, including provisions for
beneficiaries and worker health and safety. The
ECoPs should include specifications for the proper
disposal of excess/discarded electric materials,
lubricants, etc. In addition, proper dissemination of
service disruption, traffic management, etc. should
be required of all contractors.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No           The works will take place in urban areas where there
are no natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No           No project activities are involved with forest
management of affecting forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09       No           The project does not involve the purchase or increase
use of pesticides. EDL does not use toxic herbicides
to prevent vegetation growth around poles.
Physical Cultural Resources   Yes          The policy is triggered as precautionary measure to
OP/BP 4.11                                 avoid impacts to stupas, pagodas or other cultural
and historical resources. A rights-of-way survey
undertaken before project appraisal may facilitate
early identification and planning for physical cultural
resources which may need special measures for their
avoidance and protection. Work in proximity to
physical cultural resources should be carefully
planned and specifications for minimizing potential
impacts on stupas, pagodas or other cultural and


﻿historical resources should be included in the ECoPs.
Special work schedules when working in these areas
might also be needed.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No           The project will be implemented within the
4.10                                     Xaythany district which is an urban district within
Vientiane Capital. Indigenous Peoples communities
(known as Ethnic Groups in Lao PDR) are not
known to be present in the project areas. The absence
of IP communities will be confirmed during the early
phase of the project preparation. In the unlikely event
that an ethnic group is known to be present in or
have collective attachment to the project zone of
influence, the policy will be triggered, free, prior and
informed consultations will be conducted with them
and an Ethnic Group Plan will be developed in line
with the OP 4.10 requirements.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  TBD        The project will finance the physical installations of
BP 4.12                                  meters, power distribution equipment,
communication links, computing hardware, testing
equipment which are expected to be done on existing
power poles, power lines, and buildings owned by
EDL or by electricity customers. No land acquisition
or physical relocation of households or commercial
entities is expected as construction work will be done
on the existing power distribution infrastructure. At
this stage ofproject design more field work is
required to determine if the policy is triggered or not,
specifically: (1) field surveys should be undertaken
to check the power lines identified for rehabilitation,
(including access routes to associated facilities such
as sub-stations, as relevant,) for encroachments or
other types of land use or informal land occupation
which may hinder access to a safe working space or
pose a safety risk to people living or working in the
right-of-way; and, (2) review corporate safety
standards and related operations criteria with respect
to land use in the 22kV power line rights-of-way to
determine if any displacement, (physical or
economic; temporary or permanent) would be needed
to ensure that: (i) safety standards and access
requirements are met for the rehabilitation of the
power lines; and (ii) if there is a future need to
displace people or modify land use in order to
comply with safety standards. As an outcome of this
process, a due diligence report will be prepared. If
needed, a specific management protocol will be
developed prior to appraisal in line with OP4.12


﻿requirements to manage and mitigate access-related
displacement impacts on people living or using land
in the MV line rights-of-way
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           The project will not support construction or
rehabilitation of dams nor will support other
investments that rely on the services of existing
dams.
Projects on International    No           No project activities are involved in international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         No project activities are involved in disputed areas.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Mar-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
For environmental category B rating, the implementing agency will be preparing an environmental
and social management plan including Environmental Codes of Practice before project appraisal.
One public consultation with relevant stakeholders including people affected will take place to
discuss and disseminate the EMP timely to meet project appraisal conditions.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:     Name: Rome Chavapricha
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Name: Josefo Tuyor (RSA)                          Date: 09-Dec-2014
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/     Name: Julia M. Fraser (PMGR)                    Date: 10-Dec-2014
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


