                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6413
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Moldova                           Project ID:    P132443
                            Project Name:      District Heating Efficiency Improvement Project (P132443)
                            Task Team          Shinya Nishimura
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          08-Sep-2014                       Estimated   23-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEEDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (40%), Public administration- Energy and
                                              mining (40%), Thermal Power Generation (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Urban services and housing for the poor (40%), Debt management and fiscal
                                              sustainability (30%), Corporate governance (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      61.10           Total Bank Financing:                  40.50
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   20.60
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      40.50
                              Total                                                                                      61.10
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the proposed project is to contribute to improved operational efficiency and
                           financial viability of the new DH company and to improve quality and reliability of heating services
                           delivered to the population of Chisinau, Moldova.



                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         3. Project Description
                         The Project, proposed to be financed by an IBRD Credit of US$40 million, will comprise of three
                         components, each focusing on the issues identified in the PDO:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Priority investments in the DH system (IBRD: US$ 33.4 million).

                         This component will support priority investments aimed at optimizing and modernizing the heat
                         distribution network, with the objective to achieve reduced heat losses, improved service quality and
                         more efficiency and secure supply of heat and hot water to end-user consumers. The DH network
                         operated by Termocom is old, worn-out, and with large heat and water losses, and requires urgent
                         rehabilitation and modernization. The low quality of service and lack of ability by the consumer to
                         control their heat has resulted in significant disconnections from the DH system, mainly among the
                         wealthy population who can afford to invest in individual boilers. Also a large number of public
                         buildings (state and municipality owned) were disconnected from the DH system about 15-10 years
                         ago. As a result, the vulnerable population of Chisinau will stand to be disproportionately affected
                         should there be interruptions in the DH services. Therefore, the investments proposed under the
                         Project will focus on ensuring the operational sustainability of Termocom, as well as efficiency.
                         Specifically, financing would be provided for: (i) modernization of selected pumping stations to
                         reduce electricity consumption and provide for modern and efficient variable flow operation mode of
                         the DH system; (ii) rehabilitate selected segments of the distribution network to ensure continued
                         secure DH service and reduce losses of heat and hot water; (iii) replace old and inefficient central
                         heat substations (CHS) with modern fully automated individual building level heat substations (IHS)
                         for more efficient, secure and affordable heat supply to end-users (iv) reconnect about 40 public
                         buildings, which were earlier disconnected, to the DH system to improve the usage of the DH
                         system.

                         Component 2: Support for streamlining operations (IBRD: US$5.6 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will support the Government’s decision to streamline operations and corporate
                         structure of Newco, including closing down of CHP-1 operation. The Plant is being operated well
                         beyond the designed life and being operated very inefficiently. Closing down CHP-1 itself would
                         have a net benefit of over MDL 8 million per year for the energy consumers. In order to ensure
                         stability of DH operations after CHP-1 ceases its operations and smooth transition in corporate
                         restructuring process, the following programs will be supported under the component: (i) Connection
                         of alternative heat distribution network and construction of new pumping station to service area
                         supplied by CHP-1, (ii) Social Impact Mitigation Program for staff who may be affected by the
                         restructuring, and (iii) Environmental Audit for CHP-1 site.

                         Component 3: Project Management and Technical Assistance (IBRD: US$1 million).

                         This component will provide technical and financial support for project management. The
                         implementation agency for the proposed project will be the Ministry of Economy (MoE). The
                         Moldovan Energy Projects Consolidated Unit, which is directly subordinated to MoE, has more than
                         10 years of experience in implementing the World Bank and will serve as a fiduciary agent for the
                         implementing agency. This component will finance activities such as: (i) MEPIU staff and
                         operations, including Monitoring and Evaluation activities; (ii) public awareness campaigns for
                         dissemination of the benefits of energy efficiency improvements and efficiently operating DH


                                                                     Page 2 of 7
                           systems. The MEPIU will also monitor a gender indicator, specifically number of female
                           beneficiaries of the improved DH sector.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will be implemented in Chisinau city, the capital of the Republic of Moldova.

                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Arcadii Capcelea (GENDR)
                           Klavdiya Maksymenko (GURDR)

                            6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Project will generate mostly positive socio-economic benefits due to the improvement of
                              population hot water supply and heating services along with improved environmental conditions
                              on the Chisinau Municipality territory. At the same time it might also generate a series of adverse
                              impacts: noise; impact on water quality and resources; impact on water by the construction run-
                              offs; disturbance of traffic during construction and rehabilitation works; construction dust; and
                              workers safety, etc. However, these impacts will be temporary and site specific and could be easily
                              mitigated through implementing adequate avoidance and/or mitigation measures. Conducted
                              project EIA concluded no major impacts are expected and no sensitive or protected areas will be


                                                                        Page 3 of 7
                           affected during the proposed civil works. Furthermore, no any physical cultural resources will be
                           involved/or impacted.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Consultant was hired to conduct a social assessment. The SA revealed that rehabilitation and
                           upgrading works planned on the heating pipelines under Component 1 will cause temporary
                           disruption of livelihoods of the street market, the construction of the boiler house will require
                           acquisition of the small state owned land plot that is under the lease by Moldovan Cooperatives
                           Union (MOLDCOOP), therefore OP4.12 is triggered. The Abbreviated RAP to address the
                           adverse impacts of the project is prepared and was disclosed in the Municipality in local language
                           on Trmocom’s web-site and in Bank’s Infoshop.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Potential long term impacts are positive and relate to improved heating services and hot water
                           supply for the city population.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           To address potential environmental impacts the client prepared an EMP which includes along the
                           WB safeguards policies applied to the current project a description of the policies, legal, and
                           administrative framework in place in the Republic of Moldova regarding environmental
                           management and district heating sector. It contains also: (a) a series of activities targeted at
                           mitigating identified adverse impacts; (b) monitoring plan for EMP implementation; (c)
                           implementing arrangements as well as a short analysis of project beneficiary (Termocom) EA
                           capacity. The EMP stipulates all adverse environmental impacts associated with the Project will be
                           prevented, eliminated, or minimized to an acceptable level. This will be achieved through the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           mechanism for the continuous refinement and effective implementation of the environmental
                           mitigation measures, including careful selection of project sites; replacing of old pipes and pumps
                           and conducting rehabilitation works in a way that would prevent as much as possible cutting of
                           trees, destroying vegetation in parks, pollution of air and soil; ensuring labor safety and health
                           impacts during welding operations etc. The monitoring section of the EMP provides: (a) details, of
                           monitoring measures, including the parameters to be measured, methods to be used, sampling
                           locations, frequency of measurements; and, (b) monitoring and reporting procedures to (i) ensure
                           early detection of conditions that necessitate particular mitigation measures, and (ii) furnish
                           information on the progress and results of mitigation. The EMP implementation will be supervised
                           by MEPIU and Termocom staff periodically (as per monitoring schedule), as well as by the WB
                           (during its supervision missions) and by the local ecological and environmental construction
                           inspectors. Furthermore, Termocom semiannually will present short information about the EMP
                           implementation as part of the Progress Reports to be presented to the WB by the client. The EMP
                           provisions will form part of the design documents for the project, and will be included in
                           construction contracts for proposed activities, both into specifications and bills of quantities.
                           Furthermore the Contractors will be required to include the cost in their financial bids and required
                           to comply with the EMP provisions while implementing the project activities. As the project will
                           include CHP 1 closure, the EIA&EMP report contains the draft TORs for its environmental
                           auditing focused on assessing the cost of “decommissioning, dismantling, and environmental
                           remedial measures” for several alternative scenarios – starting from maintaining the site at present


                                                                      Page 4 of 7
                           condition with minimal cleanup to meet environmental compliance and ensure safety and finishing
                           with the full decommissioning (i.e., dismantle all equipment; demolish all buildings and structures;
                           clean up entire site per required environmental standards).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The main implementing agencies (the Ministry of Economy) as well as the implementing entity
                           (MEPIU) have good experience in successfully implementing safeguards issues within two World
                           Bank projects (Energy II; and Competitiveness Enhancement Project). MEPIU is staffed with
                           highly qualified and experienced professionals, both in technical and safeguards aspects, will
                           ensure project implementation in accordance with the Operations Manual (OM), as well as that the
                           EMP provisions are fully integrated into project implementation, conducting monitoring and
                           reporting required by the World Bank. The main responsibilities with regard to day to day
                           implementation of safeguards requirements are assigned to district heating company “Termocom”
                           which is well prepared and has long time experience in this regard. The company is currently
                           certified under both ISO 14001 (Environmental Management) as well as under ISO 18001
                           (Operational Health and Safety Management System) and has in its structure three subdivisions
                           responsible for the issues related to environmental safeguards (Chemical Service, in charge of all
                           environmental issues; Safety and Occupational Hazards division; and Technical Supervision
                           division, which is responsible for ensuring all civil works financed by the company are done in
                           compliance with the design documents and existing norms and standards). These entities have
                           very experienced staff with all necessary licenses and certificates. The proposed mitigation
                           measures will be implemented by the Contractors, being monitored and supervised by
                           Construction Supervision Company and Termocom staff.

                           The corporate restructuring of Termocom, CHP1 and CHP2 will have a social impact as the need
                           in some categories of personnel is expected to be decreasing gradually. However given that details
                           of the corporate structure have not been finalized during project preparation it was not possible to
                           prepare detailed Social Impact Mitigation Plan. In order to assist the borrower in addressing the
                           social impact of the corporate restructuring the Social Impact Mitigation Framework was prepared
                           and disclosed prior to appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The draft EIA&EMP report was consulted with all key stakeholders. On November 8, 2013
                           disclosed the document on its website. On November 23, 2013, it conducted a public briefing on
                           the document which concluded that the draft report covers practically all potential impacts and
                           possible mitigation measures along with clear procedures from environmental screening and
                           monitoring. The draft document was revised after the meeting, taking into account outputs from
                           the previous consultations. The final version of the EIA&EMP (in English and summary in
                           Romanian) were posted on the Termocom website and submitted to the World Bank for its
                           disclosure in Infoshop. The EMP will be used by the Termocom during the project
                           implementation.

                           The draft ARAP was prepared and consultations with affected parties held on December 30, 2013.
                           The ARAP was disclosed in Chisinau, Moldova in local languages (Romanian and Russian) and in
                           the Infoshop. Termocom will be responsible for the implementation of the ARAP. The
                           implementation will be monitored by the MEPIU.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other


                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   30-Jun-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Moldova                                                          23-Nov-2013
                           Comments: Disclosed on Termocom website. Submission to Infoshop was made after the project
                                         implementation structure was confirmed.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Moldova                                                          20-Dec-2013
                           Comments: The document was also physically available in the office of Termocom
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:     Name: Shinya Nishimura
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/     Name: Arturo S. Rivera (PMGR)                    Date: 17-Sep-2014
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 7 of 7
