                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA2195
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:    P117341
                            Project Name:      HaJia Railway (P117341)
                            Task Team          Gerald Paul Ollivier
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          24-Sep-2012                        Estimated   22-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Railways (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Regional integration (50%), Rural services and infrastructure (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      5566.00                Total Bank Financing:         300.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  5266.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      300.00
                              Total                                                                                     5566.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the Project is to improve accessibility and mobility by responding to existing and
                           anticipated transport demand along the Harbin-Jiamusi corridor through the provision of additional
                           railway capacity and reduction of transport time for passengers and freight.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project will support the construction of a 343 km-long double-track, electrified, mixed use

                                                                       Page 1 of 11
                         (passenger and freight) railway line between the cities of Harbin and Jiamusi (HaJia line) in
                         Heilongjiang Province in northeast China. The project will include construction of twelve new
                         stations, acquisition and installation of goods, maintenance equipment, and rolling stock, as well as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         land acquisition and resettlement. Several additional short sections of track (in total about 25.5 km)
                         connecting to the existing stations at Harbin and Jiamusi are also included in the project.

                         The proposed Bank loan will finance the procurement of goods associated with the construction of
                         the line and with its track, electrification, signaling, and communication systems as well as operation
                         and maintenance equipment and possibly technical assistance on policy aspects. The scope of such
                         technical assistance, if any, will be identified during implementation.

                         In northeast China, road traffic can be disrupted in winter months by heavy snow, ice and thick fog
                         for up to 70 days a year. With the building of this new line a more reliable year round option will be
                         available. The rail distance for passengers as well as freight between Harbin and Jiamusi will be
                         reduced by approximately 164 km, from the existing 507 km to 343 km. The new line will offer a
                         rapid link between cities in northeast Heilongjiang and Harbin, and from the railway hub in Harbin to
                         the core of the Chinese high-speed railway network. This line will also provide a substantial increase
                         in capacity for passenger trains between these cities. The travel time for passenger trains will be
                         reduced from the current average of over 7 hours to less than two hours for express trains. Frequency
                         will also be greatly improved.

                         The existing mixed-use double track railway line between Harbin and Jiamusi takes an indirect
                         northerly route following an old alignment that was primarily built to service the coal produced in the
                         region. This existing line will continue to be used for freight traffic and local passenger trains, but
                         through passengers and a large volume of freight traveling from Jiamusi to Harbin and beyond will
                         be diverted to the new line. Thus more capacity will be made available on the old line, and the
                         service standards of both markets and both lines will be enhanced, allowing railways to compete
                         more effectively with transportation services offered by highways and airlines.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in northeast of China in Heilongjiang Province between the cities of Harbin
                         and Jiamusi. The proposed alignment mainly traverses alluvial plain, low mountains and rolling hills.
                         Urban areas and agricultural areas are prevalent throughout the entire corridor. About 48% of the line
                         will be bridges and tunnels which significantly reduces footprint and farmland occupation.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Songling Yao (EASCS)
                         Peishen Wang (EASCS)
                         Ning Yang (EASCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project includes the construction of a high-
                          BP 4.01                                             speed railway line of about 343 km, which the
                                                                              project has the potential to cause substantial
                                                                              social and environmental impacts in terms of land
                                                                              acquisition, loss of surface vegetation, soil
                                                                              erosion, spoil material disposal and social


                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                                                                         disturbance during construction. The operation of
                                                                         the new railway line will also result in increased
                                                                         noise, potential safety concern and community
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         severance impacts etc. The proposed project is
                                                                         classified as a Category A project.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes             The proposed project will traverse through the
                                                                         experimental zone of a planned wetland
                                                                         protection area. Therefore, the policy is triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              This project will not involve forestry sector
                                                                         activities and will not have significant impact
                                                                         upon forested areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              The project will not involve procurement of
                                                                         pesticide or have any impact on pest management
                                                                         practice. This policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             There are some local farmers’ graves scattered
                         BP 4.11                                         along the alignment to be impacted by the project.
                                                                         These graves are considered as physical cultural
                                                                         resources as per Bank interpretation, therefore,
                                                                         OP4.11 is triggered.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              A social screening and the completed social
                                                                         assessment concluded that there is no ethnic
                                                                         minority village present in, or collective
                                                                         attachment to, the project area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             The railway line and stations need land
                         4.12                                            acquisition and resettlement. Based on the RAP,
                                                                         in total, about 14,342 people would be affected
                                                                         by land acquisition for construction. This would
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         include about 4,625 people (1,062 households) in
                                                                         rural areas affected by land acquisition (3494
                                                                         people/844 households) or demolition and
                                                                         resettlement (1,318 people/275 households),
                                                                         including 187 people and 57 households impacted
                                                                         by both, 5,167 people (1,210 households) in
                                                                         urban areas affected by demolition and relocation,
                                                                         and 4,550 people impacted by the resettlement of
                                                                         39 enterprises. About 23,394 mu (1,560 ha) land
                                                                         will be permanently acquired (compared with 2.7
                                                                         million ha of arable land available in the two
                                                                         cities) and 12,819 mu (855 ha) of land will be
                                                                         temporarily acquired for the project construction.
                                                                         Based on estimates in the environmental
                                                                         assessment, another 1,487 households may need
                                                                         to be relocated to avoid excessive noise and
                                                                         vibration impacts during operation.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              The project does not involve any dam, therefore
                                                                         this policy is not triggered.


                                                                 Page 3 of 11
                            Projects on International        No                  The project does not involve international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                waters, therefore, this policy is not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The project is not located in any disputed areas,
                            7.60                                                therefore, this policy is not triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental Impacts

                             Due to the large scale of civil works involved and project characteristics, the project has the
                             potential to cause substantial social and environmental impacts, especially during construction,
                             which have been thoroughly assessed and can be adequately avoided, minimized and/or mitigated
                             with engineering measures developed either in project design or included in the EMP and RAP
                             for the project. Manageable adverse impacts are primarily related to: (i) crossing sensitive sites, i.
                             e. Longshan Forest Park, Mayihe River wetland, and water resource protection areas for Yilan
                             County ; (ii) community impacts such as land acquisition and resettlement; (iii) noise, dust, soil
                             erosion and social disturbance during construction; (iv) noise, safety and community connectivity
                             during operation.

                             There were a number of environmentally sensitive sites identified in the vicinity of the project
                             corridor during alternative analysis stage, including nature reserves and cultural heritage sites. The
                             project alignment has been carefully selected and fine-tuned to avoid most of them. However, due
                             to the necessity to access major economic centers and restriction on railway alignment curve
                             requirements, the proposed alignment will inevitably pass through or nearby three sensitive areas,
                             including:
Public Disclosure Copy




                             (1) The alignment will traverse the edge of a Longshan Forest Park through embankment and
                             bridge, with a length of 7.28km, including the Gaoleng station. The Longshan Park belongs to
                             forest harvesting farms of Fangzheng Forest Bureau, and is mainly for tourism and recreation
                             purposes. The Park comprises of a number of function zones, including Wanbaoshan Ecological
                             Vacation Zone, urban recreation zone, mountain relaxation zone, Xiangshui River rafting zone,
                             natural forest tourism zone. The zone where the alignment traverses is the urban recreation zone,
                             which is mainly the township built-up area and farmland, located far away from other tourism
                             zones. The railway construction and operation will not have adverse impact on the forest park in
                             terms of scenic spots, tourism and ecological function.

                             (2) The alignment will cross Mayihe river using an extra-large bridge. Currently, a wetland
                             protection area along Mayihe River is being planned by local government. The protection area
                             plan has given full consideration of the railway corridor by excluding the alignment corridor from
                             both core and buffer zones. The main natural wetland of Mayihe River is located at the estuary
                             area which is 8 km away from the alignment location. Current land use at the bridge location is all
                             farmland. Therefore, the proposed railway project will not result in degradation or conversion of
                             natural habitat, will not result in loss of biodiversity or change of plant community structure, and
                             will have little impacts on river hydrology.



                                                                        Page 4 of 11
                         (3) The proposed alignment will pass nearby the groundwater wells serving as the drinking water
                         source for Yilan County. However, the alignment avoids the protection zone for all wells. The
                         distance to the closest well is above 1.5 km, and over 400 m away from the boundary of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         protection zone. The alignment at this section is an embankment, which will be constructed well
                         above the groundwater level and thus has little impact on groundwater quality. It is also noted that
                         groundwater is recharged by the Mudanjiang River, where the railway alignment does not have
                         blocking effects.

                         Overall, based on field survey and ecological analysis, the land use along the proposed alignment
                         is significantly modified by human development (i.e. intensive farming activities and development
                         along the corridor and the existing dense transport network including an expressway, existing
                         railway and a national highway within the same corridor), which mainly features with farmland
                         due to intensive agricultural development in the region. It is also confirmed that the flora and
                         fauna along the alignment are common species, and there is no special endemic or protected,
                         endangered wildlife using the project alignment area as habitats. Therefore, the proposed project
                         will not result in significant degradation or conversion of natural habitats.

                         The project alignment selection has avoided all physical cultural resources through field survey,
                         consultation with relevant authorities and local communities. There are about 648 household
                         graves scattered along the alignment to be impacted by the project. These graves were identified
                         and consultations were conducted with concerned families. These graves are considered as
                         physical cultural resources as per Bank interpretation, therefore, OP4.11 is triggered. As graves are
                         a common aspect addressed under infrastructure projects in China, there are well established
                         national/local regulations governing the consultation, relocation and compensation, they have been
                         incorporated into the RAP in line with OP4.12. In addition, chance-find procedure has been
                         developed and included in the EMP, and will be enforced during implementation.

                         Social Impacts. The potential major social impact is from involuntary resettlement and a RAP with
                         a RPF was prepared to cover the following aspects: i) stations, ii) rail lines including the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         connection lines, tunnels and bridges, iii) attached facilities such as power, sanitation,
                         management houses, iv) construction activities, such as access road, disposal/borrow areas, camp,
                         etc. The project resettlement planning indicates that the land acquisition and resettlement happens
                         in ten counties and districts in two municipalities.

                         In total, about 14,342 people would be affected by land acquisition for construction. This would
                         include about 4,625 people (1,062 households) in rural areas affected by land acquisition (3494
                         people/844 households) or demolition and resettlement (1,318 people/275 households), including
                         187 people and 57 households impacted by both, 5,167 people (1,210 households) in urban areas
                         affected by demolition and relocation, and 4,550 people impacted by the resettlement of 39
                         enterprises. About 23,394 mu (1,560 ha) land will be permanently acquired (compared with 2.7
                         million ha of arable land available in the two cities) and 12,819 mu (855 ha) of land will be
                         temporarily acquired for the project construction. Based on estimates in the environmental
                         assessment, another 1,487 households may need to be relocated to avoid excessive noise and
                         vibration impacts during operation.

                         A gender impact analysis was conducted as part of the RAP and SA, considering various angles
                         such as education, employment, decision making, rights and interests. The SA elaborated
                         recommendations. These included providing women with microfinance loans and training to help
                         them develop small businesses offering services at construction sites and later on at railway

                                                                   Page 5 of 11
                           stations, encouraging the hiring of women for railway operations, and giving them priority when
                           recruiting staff. Women will have access to at least one female worker in every resettlement group
                           for their grievance.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           IP screening, including interviews with counterpart staff and local people at the visited sites, did
                           not identify any ethnic minority group in project areas. A social assessment (SA) was prepared for
                           the project, including a screening of all the villages within a 5 km width belt along each side of the
                           line and concluded that no indigenous people, as defined by OP 4.10, are present in, or are
                           collectively attached to, the project areas. The project triggers social safeguard policies OP 4.12
                           and OP4.11, for which the potential impacts and mitigation measures have been adequately
                           addressed in the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), and found acceptable to the Bank. The
                           Resettlement Action Plan has been disclosed locally and in InfoShop.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The railway will provide valuable opportunities for local development such as local business trade,
                           transportation and construction. Urbanization is expected around the terminal and station areas.
                           CRC has maintained extensive dialogue with local governments in the selection of locations of
                           alignment and terminal stations to ensure that they are fully in line with the local land use,
                           socioeconomic development and environmental plans.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The process of alignment selection has been an important environmental tool for this project.
                           Alternative analysis has been extensively conducted during project proposal, pre-feasibility study/
                           feasibility study and EA preparation. The analysis was conducted both at the regional level and
                           specific section levels within selected corridor, with comprehensive considerations of economic,
                           technical, environmental and social factors. Through this process, the selected alignment has
                           avoided a number of sensitive sites including nature reserves and cultural heritage sites. The major
                           analysis includes:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           - Regional Corridors. During the project proposal and feasibility study, four corridors at the
                           regional level were studied, namely the Existing Railway Line, North Songhua River line, South
                           Songhua River line and a relative straight line between Harbin and Jiamusi in north Songhua
                           River. Comparative analyses of these four corridors were carried out considering the current
                           environmental and social situation, and development planning of the regional railways. In
                           summary, the South Songhua River line is the most efficient alignment, to effectively link the
                           local economic hubs, alleviate poverty and improve socio-economic development, while avoiding
                           key environmental sensitive areas. This alignment is fully supported by local governments.

                           - Alternative Alignment by Sections. Within the selected regional corridor, i.e. South Songhua
                           River line, alternative alignments for two sections have been studied to choose the optimal scheme
                           in terms of environmental and social impact, technical feasibility and financial and economic
                           benefits. Consultation with local governments and relevant authorities in charge of environmental
                           sensitive areas were conducted and fully incorporated into the alternative selection process.
                           Considerable effort has been made to avoid ecological sensitive areas, geological unstable zones,
                           floodplains and wetlands, relocation of houses, cultivated lands, and cultural resources in order to
                           ensure the environmental feasibility of the alignment. The final alignment thus minimizes
                           environmental and social impacts, avoids natural hazards, and connects the economic hubs in the
                           region.

                                                                      Page 6 of 11
                           On the social side, some critical measures were taken to minimize impacts from land occupation
                           and house demolition. First, bridges and tunnels will be constructed for more than 48 percent of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the alignment to significantly reduce permanent land occupation. Second, realignment
                           modification to minimize impacts on density urban area and house demolition.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           CRC has prepared an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), an Environmental Management
                           Plan (EMP) and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) including a Resettlement Plan Framework
                           (RPF) for the project. These documents meet the Bank requirements of OP 4.01, 4.04, 4.11 and
                           4.12 respectively.

                          Mitigation Measures. To address potential impacts, CRC requested the Third Railway Survey &
                          Design Institute (TSDI), a Class A licensed EIA consultant in China, to prepare an Environmental
                          Impact Assessment with guidance and advice from the Bank’s environmental team. In summary, a
                          three-fold approach to minimize environmental and social impacts has been adopted:

                          - Avoidance: Alternative analysis has been carefully conducted to avoid the environmental and
                          social sensitive areas to the extent possible, as one of the most important mitigation measures to
                          minimize potential adverse environmental and social impact. The selected alignment led to
                          reduced house and structure demolition, especially in the urban areas, and has avoided a number of
                          sensitive sites, including nature reserves and cultural heritage sites.

                          - Reduced footprint: The project has been designed with state-of-the art engineering. Bridges and
                          tunnels will be constructed for 48 percent of the alignment (45 percent bridges, 3 percent tunnels).
                          As such, it reduces the ecological footprint and the need for land acquisition.

                          - Comprehensive mitigation. Detailed environmental design plans (green corridors and
Public Disclosure Copy




                          landscaping), environmental management plans, and resettlement action plans have been prepared
                          in order to minimize or compensate for unavoidable impacts from the project.

                          Environmental Management Plan. A stand-alone EMP has been developed based on the findings
                          of the EIA report. The EMP detailed the environmental management and supervision
                          organizations and responsibilities, mitigation measures, capacity training plan, monitoring plan,
                          and budget estimates of EMP implementation. EMP measures to be implemented by the
                          contractors will be incorporated into bidding documents and contracts to ensure effective
                          implementation. EMP implementation will be managed by HRC under the supervision of CRC.
                          An environmental management unit has been established in HRC with dedicated environmental
                          staff. The contractors and supervision engineers will need to assign qualified environmental staff
                          to their team to ensure effective implementation of the EMP.

                          Compensation and Restoration Measures. The RAP provides for livelihood restoration in line with
                          OP4.12. Compensation for permanently and temporarily acquired land will be conducted
                          according to the provincial land regulation and Bank Policy stated in the Resettlement Action
                          Plan. No village, except two, will lose more than five percent of their land. The two villages will
                          lose less than ten percent of their farmland and have designed compensatory measures for affected
                          farmers. Livelihood restoration for affected farmers includes allocation of reserved collective land
                          to land losing farmers through land readjustment, or non-agricultural resettlement in the form of


                                                                    Page 7 of 11
                         cash compensation, employment and skills training when alternative land is not available. Social
                         security will be provided for those that meet applicable policy standards. The cash compensation
                         to affected people covers resettlement allowance plus land compensation. Temporarily used land
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be paid annually according to the agreed standard in the resettlement plan, and will be
                         restored and returned to the affected farmers.

                         People who lose rural houses will be compensated at the full replacement cost of the house plus a
                         plot of land provided by the village committees. People who lose an urban house will be
                         compensated in cash according to replacement value, or with replacement houses, which
                         municipal governments are constructing, and will receive full replacement costs including
                         relocation expenses and transition fees.

                         The 39 affected enterprises will be compensated based on a commercial evaluation. About 27 of
                         these will be moved out with compensation to rebuild and restore production, including a
                         relocation fee and compensation for losses due to resettlement. For enterprises, which do not plan
                         to rebuild, the resettlement department and the enterprises should give a public notice to staff six
                         months in advance to facilitate their transition towards new jobs, and should provide free training
                         and recommend new jobs. Affected staff will be compensated for shutdown/transition and will
                         have the priority to get new jobs after the enterprises are relocated.

                         All compensation will be based on agreements to be reached with the affected farmers, urban
                         citizens and enterprise owners after meaningful consultation. Infrastructure restoration will be
                         directly financed and conducted as part of contractor’s contracts. The concerned counties and
                         cities have confirmed their concurrence with the compensation rates. The total resettlement
                         estimated cost is 2.5 billion CNY.

                         Monitoring and Evaluation. Environmental monitoring reports will provide key and timely
                         information twice a year focused on environmental impacts and mitigation to the borrower and the
                         Bank to evaluate the success of environmental management. Both internal and external monitoring
Public Disclosure Copy




                         is planned for resettlement implementation. HRC, together with the local resettlement offices, will
                         be responsible for the internal monitoring and supervision of compensation payment, housing
                         reconstruction, land acquisition, living restoration and appeals. CRC will prepare monitoring
                         reports every six months and will submit them to the World Bank till the end of the
                         implementation of the RAP. CRC will then submit a post-resettlement evaluation report to the
                         World Bank. In addition, CRC will entrust the external monitoring and evaluation to an
                         independent monitoring agency. External monitoring reports will be given to CRC every six
                         months till the end of the implementation of the RAP.

                         Capacity. MOR and its successor, CRC, have many years of experience with Bank projects. HRC
                         and local governments will be trained to enhance their implementation capacity in accordance with
                         the EMP and RAP, which include detailed internal and external monitoring arrangements for their
                         implementation. External consultants on environmental aspects and land acquisition will monitor
                         the implementation of both these plans by all parties involved and provide guidance to HRC
                         accordingly.

                         Grievance Handling. A contact point has been set up to collect and respond to grievances and the
                         contact information, including contact agencies, contact persons and telephone numbers, for this
                         grievance channel have been made public as part of the consultation. The RAP indicates that any



                                                                   Page 8 of 11
                           grievance should be rapidly handled through the HRC resettlement management system, external
                           monitor, local government system, or even court system.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Consultation. Public consultations were conducted in accordance with the Bank’s OP4.01 and
                           OP4.12 during the EIA and RAP preparation in 2010, as well in 2012 and 2013 for the project
                           design changes. These consultations were conducted through a combination of opinion surveys
                           and public meetings in all townships, village committees and affected villagers’ homes.
                           Stakeholders such as local authorities, civil society, and the affected population were consulted
                           through diverse ways like television, newspaper, meetings, and focus groups on land acquisition
                           matters. Local governments were consulted on the alignment of the railway line and location of
                           stations. All the affected villages are informed, investigated and consulted. Specific public
                           concerns raised during the consultation have been incorporated in project design, the EMP and
                           RAP.

                           Disclosure. The Safeguards documents have been disclosed in accordance with the Bank’s policy
                           and were sent to Infoshop. Information related to the EA has been disseminated using posters and
                           bulletins in townships and villages, a local newspaper (Heilongjiang Daily) and through the
                           internet. The draft EIA document was disclosed on August 10, 2010 and on February 5, 2013
                           through the website of TSDI as announced in the Heilongjiang Daily, as well as at the Harbin and
                           Jiamusi Provincial Environmental Protection Bureaus and the HaJia Railway Company.
                           Information disclosure on project land acquisition and resettlement was distributed in the affected
                           villages and communities during the resettlement impact investigation and planning process. After
                           project design changes, the updated EIA and RAP were locally disclosed again on August 12,
                           2013 and September 7, 2013 respectively. The final Chinese and English versions of the EIA and
                           EMP documents were disclosed in InfoShop on November 27, 2013 and November 26, 2013
                           respectively. The English and Chinese versions of the RAP were disclosed in InfoShop on
                           November 7, 2013, and appendices to the RAP were disclosed on November 27, 2013.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                  22-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                               26-Nov-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  06-Dec-2013
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                        12-Aug-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                  22-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                               26-Nov-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                        07-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the


                                                                     Page 9 of 11
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?


                                                                    Page 10 of 11
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Gerald Paul Ollivier
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                          Date: 06-Dec-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                         Date: 06-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 11 of 11
