                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA10452
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Oct-2013, 07-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          West Bank and Gaza                Project ID:    P117449
                            Project Name:     Hebron Regional Wastewater Management Project - Phase 1 (P117449)
                            Task Team         Pieter David Meerbach
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         30-Sep-2014                       Estimated   30-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GWADR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (20%), Wastewater
                                              Treatment and Disposal (60%), General water, sanitat ion and flood protection
                                              sector (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Municipal governance and institution building (20%), City-wide Infrastructure
                                              and Service Delivery (80%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      61.65           Total Bank Financing:                 0.00
                            Financing Gap:            5.50
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 14.23
                              US Agency for International Development (USAID)                                           4.82
                              EC European Commission                                                                   18.73
                              FRANCE Govt. of [MOFA and AFD (C2D)]                                                     13.87
                              Special Financing                                                                         4.50
                              Total                                                                                    56.15
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?



                                                                      Page 1 of 8
                          2. Project Development Objective(s)
                         The objective is to reduce the environmental pollution from wastewater produced in the Hebron
                         Municipality.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          3. Project Description
                         The Project would implement the first phase of the Hebron Wastewater Master Plan, including: (i)
                         the design, construction, and operation of a regional wastewater treatment plant for the Hebron
                         Governorate, treating the waste stream from the existing sewer network for Hebron Municipality (a
                         subsequent project is anticipated that would expand the service area and the capacity of the plant);
                         (ii) capacity building of the organizations in charge of operation and maintenance of the WWTP; (iii)
                         establishing a Project Implementation Unit to manage the project in Hebron Municipality.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Hebron Governorate, West Bank and Gaza.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         John R. Butler (GSURR)
                         Tracy Hart (GENDR)
                         Nina Bhatt (GSURR)
                         Hana Salah (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The client has completed an Environmental,
                          BP 4.01                                            Social, and Cultural Heritage Impact Assessment
                                                                             (ESCHIA)/Environmental, Social and Cultural
                                                                             Heritage Management Plan (ESCHMP), which
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             was cleared in draft form for appraisal by the
                                                                             Regional Safeguards Secretariat on July 8, 2013.
                                                                             The ESCHIA/ESCHMP covers all project
                                                                             components and complies with the requirements
                                                                             of the Palestinian Authorities as well as the
                                                                             procedures of the World Bank, including
                                                                             Operational Policy 4.01, "Environmental
                                                                             Assessment" OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural
                                                                             Heritage specific to chance finds, and OP 4.12 on
                                                                             Involuntary Resettlement. An updated ESCHIA/
                                                                             ESCHMP includes reference to a Environmental
                                                                             Documentation and Review Report, which
                                                                             provides a more detailed mitigation and
                                                                             monitoring plan for the WWTP access road and
                                                                             utilities. The ESCHIA/ESCHMP has been
                                                                             amended and most recently disclosed on October
                                                                             1, 2014.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No




                                                                     Page 2 of 8
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No           The Bank’s Operational Policy OP 4.11 does not
                         BP 4.11                                        apply to this project. A Cultural Heritage Impact
                                                                        Assessment was included as part of the impact
                                                                        assessment work in order to inventory possible
                                                                        cultural heritage sites in and around the site; this
                                                                        inventory confirmed that there are no physical
                                                                        cultural heritage sites to be protected. Chance
                                                                        find procedures are included in the ESCHMP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No           The Bank’s Operational Policy OP 4.12 does not
                         4.12                                           apply to this project. There is no acquisition of
                                                                        private property, nor are there any livelihoods
                                                                        impacts on communities under this project. The
                                                                        Bank has received confirmation accompanied by
                                                                        relevant documentation from the Public Works
                                                                        Authority (PWA) and Hebron Municipality that
                                                                        no lands under private owners or communities are
                                                                        impacted. The land needs for the waste water
                                                                        treatment plant is met through public lands owned
                                                                        by the PWA. It was also confirmed by the
                                                                        Hebron Municipality that both the trunk line and
                                                                        access road are in the public domain in Hebron
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        municipality. The USAID financed access road
                                                                        located by the Wadi had 9 landowners and land
                                                                        transaction was voluntarily carried out, which was
                                                                        based on fully and informed consent. The sheet
                                                                        with signatures of those who voluntarily provided
                                                                        their land reflects this and the broad consultations
                                                                        further attest to this. Documentation on how the
                                                                        project is meeting land needs has been provided
                                                                        to the Bank and is also confirmed in the analysis
                                                                        presented in the Bank approved environment and
                                                                        social assessment report (cleared in July 2013). A
                                                                        social safeguard mission visited the site in June
                                                                        2014, further confirming that there were no OP
                                                                        4.12 issues.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International         No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50




                                                                Page 3 of 8
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed project falls under the World Bank environmental category A classification due to
                              the potential environmental impacts that might be adverse.

                             Potential environmental impacts, construction phase:
                             •       Increase in noise levels and ground vibrations during construction activities such as
                             excavation, movement of vehicles and heavy equipment.
                             •       Dust generation due to earthworks, construction machinery and stockpiling of construction
                             material. In addition, generation of gases and particles such as SOx, NOx, CO, CO2, and PM10
                             due to vehicle induced emissions.
                             •       Pollution due to construction waste and improper handling of hazardous waste;
                             •       Risks of damaging chance-find cultural resources;
                             •       Worker accidents;

                             Potential environmental impacts, operational phase:

                             •       Air emissions, odor, vibration, and noise pollution;
                             •       Wastewater effluent loss and/or wastewater treatment stoppage due WWTP failures or
                             accidents; and
                             •       WWTP operating staff accidents.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Project mitigation and monitoring measures are detailed in the Environmental Management and
                             Monitoring Plan (EMMP and the Social Management Plan (SMP) of the Environmental, Social
                             and Cultural Heritage Impact Assessment (ESCHIA)/Environmental, Social and Cultural Heritage
                             Management Plan (ESCHMP) reports. The ESCHIA includes a cultural heritage impact
                             assessment which inventoried possible cultural heritage sites in and around the site; this inventory
                             confirmed that there are no physical cultural heritage sites to be protected. Chance find procedures
                             are included in the ESCHMP.

                             The Bank’s Operational Policy OP 4.12 does not apply to this project. There is no acquisition of
                             private property, nor are there any livelihoods impacts on communities under this project. The
                             Bank has received confirmation accompanied by relevant documentation from the Public Works
                             Authority (PWA) and Hebron Municipality that no lands under private owners or communities are
                             impacted. The land needs for the waste water treatment plant is met through public lands owned
                             by the PWA. It was also confirmed by the Hebron Municipality that both the trunk line and access
                             road are in the public domain in Hebron municipality. The USAID financed access road located by
                             the Wadi had 9 landowners and land transaction was voluntarily carried out, which was based on
                             fully and informed consent. The sheet with signatures of those who voluntarily provided their
                             land reflects this and the broad consultations further attest to this. Documentation on how the
                             project is meeting land needs has been provided to the Bank and is also confirmed in the analysis
                             presented in the Bank approved environment and social assessment report (cleared in July 2013).


                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                           A social safeguard mission visited the site in June 2014, further confirming that there were no OP
                           4.12 issues.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                           The proposed Additional Financing to theHRWMP-1, supporting operation and maintenance,
                           capacity building for the management of wastewater services, and the reuse of treated effluent in
                           irrigated agriculture, will be prepared, appraised, and submitted for donor financing in order to be
                           effective prior to the commissioning of the WWTP. As part of this second phase, more detailed
                           treatment of environmental and social aspects and mitigations associated with the reuse of treated
                           effluent in irrigated agriculture will be supported by a separate set of safeguards documentation,
                           which will incorporate additional information and lessons gained from construction phase of
                           HRWMP-1.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Project alternatives were considered with respect to the selection of wastewater treatment options
                           as well as site selection. Multi-criteria analysis used to select the optimal wastewater treatment
                           option included environmental and social factors, including land use, energy and chemical inputs
                           demanded, and odor emissions. The Conventional Activated Sludge (CAS) treatment process
                           obtained the highest scores and was recommended as the preferred option for the Hebron Waste
                           Water Treatment Plant. Similarly, four sites were evaluated as potential locations for wastewater
                           treatment and reuse facilities in Hebron Governorate. The selected site, located 2 to 3 kilometers
                           south of Hebron City, has been approved by all parties, including the Joint Water Committee and
                           the Israeli Civil Administration of the West Bank. The selected site is within the larger
                           depression through which a wadi currently flows with untreated wastewater. The wadi has been
                           selected as the conduit for releasing wastewater discharge at the end of Phase-1, as any other
                           alternative would require lift out of the wadi depression, thus more costly.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Palestinian Water Authority (PWA) has acquired and retained considerable capacity to
                           monitor safeguards compliance. The institutional strengthening plan specific to safeguards
                           compliance includes tailored training on (i) the Environmental Management and Monitoring Plan
                           (EMMP); (ii) environmental aspects of recovery water distribution and networks; (iii)
                           environmental auditing and inspection; and (iv) social assessment, including communication
                           skills, mass communications, social surveys, sampling, analysis, and reporting. In addition to the
                           ESCHIA/ESCHMP as the base document for safeguard compliance, there are additional sources of
                           guidance, such as an Occupational Health and Safety monitoring plan and a grievance mechanism
                           system to be put in place. Lastly, there is a Environmental Documentation and Review Report
                           specific to the WWTP access road and utility lines which gives a more detailed mitigation and
                           monitoring plan for those project elements.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project, especially through the ESCHIA, carried out project stakeholder consultations in a
                           number of settings; using an array of methods, to ensure the broadest possible outreach to all key
                           constituents. Project stakeholders consulted with included respective village council members,
                           key figures of local authority, household members affected under the project, women, farmers,
                           craftsmen and managers of various economic businesses and stone cutting industries. In addition,
                           government officials were consulted with to discuss project design and to elicit feedback on design


                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                         elements; as well as the socio-economic and environmental aspects of the project. Consultations
                         with the government were with: the Ministry of Local Government (MoLG), Ministry of Tourism
                         and Antiquities (MoTA), Palestinian Water Authority (PWA), Ministry of Labour (MoL),
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Ministry of Planning (MoP), Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), Ministry of Public Works and
                         Housing (MoPWH), Ministry of Environment Affairs (MEnA), and Hebron Municipality.

                         The methods used to carry out consultations included focus group discussions; key informant
                         interviews; large town hall type meetings; among others. Several meetings were sex
                         disaggregated to ensure adequate voice and representation of women. Participants stressed that the
                         project would alleviate the impact of the current untreated wastewater flow and associated hazards
                         on local communities and agricultural lands; they anticipate that local residents will be both be
                         connected to the public wastewater network as well as be able to make use of treated wastewater
                         for agricultural and purposes. Further details on the nature of these consultations as well as the
                         outcomes are detailed in the Bank approved and disclosed ESCHIA/ESCHMP document. The
                         initial ESCHIA/ESCHMP was translated and disclosed on July 25, 2013 at the INFOSHOP and
                         was made locally available in an accessible manner on July 12, 2013 through the PWA web site.
                         An updated ESCHIA/ESCHMP was translated and disclosed on October 1September 20, 2014 at
                         the INFOSHOP and was made locally available in an accessible manner on October 1, 2014
                         through the PWA web site. The ESCHIA/ESCHMP documents are also publicly available in hard
                         copy at the PWA office in Ramallah.

                         This ESCHIA/ESCHMP has been written to support the construction of the wastewater treatment
                         plant and all associated works. AfD and the EU are financing all civil works associated with
                         construction of the wastewater treatment plant, whereas USAID is assisting to finance the
                         extension of the sewer trunk line from the boundary of Hebron Municipality to the WWTP, the
                         electrical power line to the WWTP, the upgrading of the access road, and the water supply line for
                         the WWTP which will lie within the right-of-way of the access road. This ESCHIA/ESCHMP
                         serves as the collaborative environmental impact assessment and mitigation document across all
                         financing partners. USAID and PWA have used the Disclosed ESCHIA Report of July 2013 as the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         base for capturing the current required safeguards specific to contracting of associated works
                         under its financing; accordingly that document, “The Environmental Documentation and Review
                         Report for Hebron WWTP Access Road and Utilities” concords with both World Bank and
                         USAID relevant environmental impact assessment and management policies.

                         The World Bank will ensure that civil works financed by AFD and the EU, and USAID through
                         parallel co-financing arrangements will be supervised in line with World Bank safeguard policies
                         in order to meet environmental and social compliance. Civil works financed by AfD and the EU
                         will be supervised through the Hebron Wastewater Management Project HWWMP, which funds
                         consulting services for supervision of civil works and contract management, project management,
                         and special studies to inform the redesign of the second phase, whereas civil works financed by
                         USAID will be supervised by USAID-financed technical assistance consultants.

                         The updated ESCHIA/ESCHMP of October 1, 2014, includes the following changes: (i) the final
                         alignment of all associated works; (ii) clarification of the roles of co-financiers; (iii) additional
                         land ownership documents confirming that OP 4.12 is not applicable; (iv) a comparative analysis
                         of ‘no project’, ‘phase 1 only’, and ‘phase 1 and phase 2’; and (v) clarification of the coordinating
                         role of PWA and the PMU in coordinating safeguards supervision, monitoring, and reporting for
                         the World Bank as well as USAID associated works.



                                                                    Page 6 of 8
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        21-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     01-Oct-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        18-Jul-2013
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           West Bank and Gaza                                                 12-Jul-2013
                           Comments: The ESCHIA/ESCHMP was disclosed on the Palestinian Water Authority web site
                                         and was also made publicly available in hard copy at the PWA office in Ramallah.
                                         A revised ESCHIA/ESCHMP has been similarly disclosed on October 1, 2014.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         Not Applicable
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?


                                                                    Page 7 of 8
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Pieter David Meerbach
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Nina Chee (RSA)              Date: 01-Oct-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Steven N. Schonberger (SM)   Date: 07-Oct-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Page 8 of 8
