                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA5781
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Congo, Republic of                 Project ID:    P145263
                            Project Name:      LISUNGI - Safety Nets System (P145263)
                            Task Team          Phillippe George Pereira
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          11-Nov-2013                        Estimated   05-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTSW                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Social safety nets (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          17.00             Total Bank Financing: 2.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           15.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                   2.00
                              Total                                                                                        17.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           "Establish the key building blocks of a national safety net program and Pilot a cash transfer program
                           to improve access to health and education services of poorest households in participating areas."
                            3. Project Description
                           The project aims to improve safety nets in Congo by putting in place the first phase of a cash transfer
                           program targeted to the poorest and vulnerable groups in selected areas, and building and

                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                         strengthening the administrative building blocks of a national safety nets program. The overarching
                         and long term objective is to mitigate poverty in the country and help poorest families to invest on
                         children human capital, which can help reduction of intergenerational transmission of poverty. This
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project will support the current ongoing reform of the existing social safety net programs in the
                         country by moving from sporadic and fragmented social assistance towards a more systematic
                         approach of delivering safety nets targeted to the poorest and most vulnerable and facilitating their
                         access to and use of social services such as education and health care.

                         The overall Government objective for this project is to have the basic building blocks of the effective
                         safety nets program developed and a pilot tested during the next 4 years. Then, the Government can
                         make the necessary adjusts before expanding coverage of cash transfer programs for up to quarter of
                         the Congolese population when this project ends. Despite recent economic growth, a significant
                         share of the Congolese population (25% or about 181 thousand households) have difficulties to cover
                         the basic required expenditures on food, that is, have adult equivalent household consumption below
                         FCFA 20,596.20 (US$ 41.2) a month. The Government long term plan is to support all poorest
                         individuals (households) in the country with the National Safety nets program. However, given the
                         limited experience of MASAHS with long term cash transfer projects, Government decided to start
                         with a pilot phase where the main elements for implementing a large scale program will be
                         developed. Moreover, a small pilot in areas where the basic infrastructure needed is adequate will
                         provide MASAHS the experience of managing such type of program, and also test it before going to
                         the national scale. Similar approach was taken by Mexico when launched the PROGRESA in 1997 as
                         a pilot of 4 years, before making it national in 2000, and then adapted and renamed
                         OPORTUNIDADES.

                         Therefore, this project will support the first phase of the long term Government objective. This
                         project will support the government objective through the finance of a small cash transfer
                         intervention for 5,000 households and 1,000 elderly and the finance of the main building blocks of
                         the national program so that Government can not only set the main elements for a cost-effective
                         national system but evaluate whether cash transfer program generates the expected impacts before
Public Disclosure Copy




                         going to the national scale, that is, before reaching about a quarter of the population as planned.
                         Thus, the project supports the first phase of the government’s own cash transfer program.

                         In line with the phased approach the project will start operating in areas with sufficient capacity,
                         while building capacity in other areas to allow subsequent national scale up. The three areas selected
                         are the urban and peri-urban areas of Pointe-Noire, Brazzaville and Cuvette in which a large share of
                         the poorest population of Congo resides (high urbanization rate) and where the supply of health care
                         and primary schooling are adequate for implementing a conditional cash transfer program. For
                         children aged 0-14 the transfers will be conditional on school attendance or regular health center
                         visits. Because the project also provides support to enhance the knowledge of the existing social
                         assistance workers both at local and central level, after the project, the Government will be able to
                         expand the program also to other poorest and more rural areas as the provision and quality of health
                         and education services allow.


                         A.       PROJECT COMPONENTS
                         The proposed project will be implemented using an Investment Project Financing (IPF) for a period
                         of 4 years starting in FY14. The project is expected to be financed by: an IDA credit of US$2.00
                         million and a contribution from the Government US$15.00 million. Specifically, the project will
                         establish the key building blocks of a safety net system, while launching the first phase of a targeted

                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         cash transfer program in the country.

                         The project design envisages the three following components: (a) Establishment of key building
Public Disclosure Copy




                         blocks of a national safety net system and Enhancement of local capacities, (b) Strengthening the
                         demand-side of services through Cash transfer program, and (c) Project management & Management
                         and Evaluation (M&E).

                         Component 1: Establishment of key building blocks of a national safety net program and
                         enhancement of local capacities
                         This component will cover the set-up of basic elements of safety nets to support a long term
                         sustainable and effective system in the country. This component will include activities to strengthen
                         the institutions needed for coordinating, implementing and monitoring the Government’s safety net
                         system. To this end, activities financed by this component will include (i) the development of a MIS;
                         (ii) the set-up of a Unique Registry (UR) of potential beneficiaries of safety nets programs; (iii) the
                         set-up of an Information Education and Communication Campaign (IEC); (iv) the set-up of
                         monitoring and evaluation procedures; (v) technical assistance to evaluate and finance studies to
                         address the needs of specific population such as the disabled and the indigenous population, (vi)
                         equipment costs / software developments for making the system functional, and (vii) training of
                         LISUNGI personnel and studies.


                         Component 2: Strengthening the demand-side of services through Cash transfer programs
                         This component will support the development and implementation of the cash transfer program,
                         which is expected to become the cornerstone of the social safety net system in the country. The cash
                         transfer programs intend to increase the consumption of the poorest through the direct provision of
                         transfers to the poorest households with children and/or elderly. Households without children or
                         elderly are not eligible for this program but other MASAHS interventions such as micro-credit can
                         be offered for them.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The household structure determines benefit structure and maximum benefit amount.
                          
                         Households with children are subjected to conditionalities on health and education. The poorest
                         household with children (household types: 2 and 4) receives a fixed transfer amount per month, plus
                         a variable transfer per child (max 3 children per household) conditional on the investment of
                         household in the human capital of the children. The variable transfer is, then, conditional and intends
                         to support families to keep children longer in school, increase completion rates, and improve the use
                         of preventative health care. The conditionalities are determined together with the Government
                         (especially the Ministries of Health and Basic Education) and aligned with the upcoming World
                         Bank supported health project P143849 (RBF pilot) which will cover the same areas. The idea is to
                         combine the RBF supply-side incentives for improved health service delivery with the cash transfers
                         demand incentives for boosting health indicators of children and pregnant women in the most
                         disadvantaged households.

                         The conditionalities on health and education, which follows the official sector protocols, are:
                         (a)       Health: Regular health center visits including pre/post natal exams, and age relevant check-
                         ups and vaccination. More specifically:
                               (i) 4 pre-natal care exams and 2 post-natal exams within 40 days of delivery,
                          (ii)     Full vaccination card for 0-9 months-old children,
                               (iii)       Monthly check-ups for 0-11 months-old children for growth monitoring,

                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                              (iv)        Bi-monthly check-ups for 12-24 months-old children growth monitoring.
                         (b)     Education: Minimum of 80% regular primary school attendance a month.
                         The beneficiary child 14 years-old or under that complete the primary cycle continues to receive the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         beneficiary until it reaches the age cut-off, but social workers will follow close these cases to provide
                         information and necessary support to those children to continue secondary education.

                         Transfer to poor elderly is individual and unconditional. However, elderly will benefit from social
                         workers information campaign targeted to utilization of health care as preventive care service.

                         Project. These transfers for about 5,000-5,500 households will last for 4 years, where households are
                         eligible for the cash transfer program for two years, before having their situation re-evaluated for
                         continuity of benefits. During this phase, Government evaluation plans will inform the needs for
                         adapting the program as they plan the National scale program that intends to reach a quarter of the
                         population.

                         Beneficiary selection. The program will use a combination of methods: community based targeting
                         and proxy means test to identify the poorest households in the locality.

                         For the pilot phase, the program will also make use of a lottery for the final selection of beneficiary
                         households. In this pilot phase, the identification process has three stages: stage 1: the community
                         committee selects the potential beneficiaries for the program; stage 2, the LISUNGI team utilizes the
                         proxy means test to attribute a welfare score for each household and selects those with proxy scores
                         below the poverty threshold; and stage 3, a lottery will be drawn among the selected households from
                         stage 2 to select the final list of beneficiaries of the pilot program. Those not selected will compose
                         the control group needed for the impact evaluation of the program.

                         The project will be implemented only in the peril-urban or urban areas of Pointe-Noire, Brazzaville
                         and Cuvette who need assistance to meet ends need in terms of food consumption. Within these 3
                         areas, the program will cover the zones with well-established CAS that are: Makélékélé, Bacongo,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Moungali, Talangai, Mvoumvou, Makoua and Oyo. The partition of the number of beneficiaries in
                         each of the three regions and per CAS is based on quotas determined by poverty rates and population
                         of the geographical zones. The estimated total number of primary beneficiaries of the direct cash
                         transfers is:
                         a.       5,000 households, with children under age of 14 years old, and
                         b.       1,000 Elderly aged 60 years-old or above.


                         The LISUNGI project sets three types of benefits: a fixed per household, an individual (variable) per
                         child and an individual per elderly. The Fixed benefit (F) per household is set at FCFA 10,000 (US$
                         20) per month, a Child benefit (C) is set at FCFA 5,000 (US$ 10) per child per month; and an Elderly
                         individual benefit (E) is set at FCFA 10,000 (US$ 20) per elderly per month. Due to the combination
                         of benefits in certain households, the cash transfer program will limit the total household transfer of
                         these households at FCFA 45,000 (US$ 90) a month. The Economic analysis shows that on average
                         the total transfer for the average beneficiary household will represents about 25% of the food poverty
                         line and 15% of the poverty line in the country.

                         One or more payment agencies will be recruited to make payments to beneficiaries. Payments are
                         expected to be made quarterly during the project lifecycle. During project preparation, special
                         attention will be given to identification of agencies in rural areas, which has been an important

                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                         constraint in the implementation of cash transfer projects in other countries.

                         Component 3: Project management, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will ensure that the LISUNGI team is operational and implements the Project in
                         conformity with the Financing Agreement, project document and the Project Implementation Manual
                         (PIM). This component can finance: (i) staff (civil and non-civil servant) including operational costs
                         at the central and at regional level ; (ii) equipment and operating costs for LISUNGI directly linked
                         to the daily management of the project (office space, utilities and supplies, communications, vehicle
                         operation, maintenance and insurance, building and equipment maintenance costs, travel and
                         supervision costs, etc.) at the central and at regional level; (iii) regular internal audits and annual
                         external audits (as per Bank legal requirements audits of financial and procurement aspects); (iv)
                         training of personnel of LISUNGI (at both central and local levels) on general aspects of social safety
                         nets programs such as financial, procurement and other capacity building activities as participation in
                         south-south forums, and (v) development of project manuals and procedures. This component will
                         also finance training (including South-South forums participation) for staff at the central and regional
                         levels will also be supported to ensure proper implementation of the program.

                         Moreover, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) is a key subcomponent in the project because project
                         must be analyzed regularly to inform the Government, the World Bank and other development
                         partners about its results and impacts. The designed MIS will transform data collection, processing
                         and the information management to facilitate the operation of project components through the entire
                         implementation period (4 years), and across all levels (CAS, Department and National), to follow the
                         program’s progress and measure its results. Among key activities for monitoring and evaluation of
                         the cash transfer component project will finance: (i) annual process evaluations between 2014 and
                         2018 starting 6 months after first payment and one mid-term review to be evaluate the first 2 years of
                         program implementation; (ii) Regular process evaluations to assess program's operations and to
                         verify if the program’s operational guidelines are being applied in practice as described in the PIM;
                         (iii) Regular spot checks (beneficiaries’ surveys and qualitative evaluations) at the CAS, CSS and CS
Public Disclosure Copy




                         level; (iii) one targeting assessment; (iv) one full impact evaluation with two rounds of data
                         collection, which is likely to benefit or be in full synchronized with the RBF health operation
                         (P143849) impact evaluation; and (v) annual independent audits of the system.


                         B.      PROJECT FINANCING
                         Lending Instrument
                         The proposed LISUNGI - Safety Nets System Project is an Investment Project Financing (IPF)
                         project of US$ 17 million with a contribution of US$ 15 million from the Government of Congo. The
                         duration of the project is 4 years. The IPF is preferable to Development Policy Lending and
                         Performance for Results, because: (i) the project does not support a policy and/or institutional action
                         program; (ii) fiduciary mechanisms in the sector are weak; and (iii) there is insufficient information
                         available for the use of an instrument with purely output-based disbursement.

                         PROJECT COST AND FINANCING
                         The modus operandi for projects under the current Country Partnership Strategy is to leverage the
                         Bank’s resources to raise counterpart funds. This design recognizes the Bank’s limited country
                         allocation and the growing Government revenues. In accordance herewith, the Government will
                         finance US$ 15 million (88.2%) of the proposed project cost of US$ 17 million, while IDA
                         contribution is set at US$ 2 million (11.8%).

                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                         C.       LESSONS LEARNED AND REFLECTED IN THE PROJECT DESIGN
                         Lessons learned from the implementation of the past projects led by MASAHS and development
Public Disclosure Copy




                         partners are being taken into consideration in this project, as well as other countries experiences in
                         implementing similar projects. In addition, the evaluation of implementation of Country Partnership
                         Strategy for FY10-12 identified a number of lessons relevant to the design of this proposed project
                         that are being taken into consideration and highlighted in the ORAF.

                         The following are the most important lessons and recommendations incorporated in the current
                         project:
                         (a)      Improve institutional framework for social protection policy: The development of a system
                         of effective social safety nets begins with the definition of a long-term vision and a coherent policy.
                         Because social protection is a multi-sectoral area, the strategic and institutional framework has to be
                         carefully established and defined. This should consist of: (i) an inter-ministerial steering committee
                         to provide direction and make policy decisions on safety nets as well as to play a coordinating role
                         and (ii) a technical and administrative unit in charge of the day-to-day management and
                         implementation of safety nets programs.
                         (b)      Develop a Management information system (MIS) that informs strategic decision-making:
                         An MIS would inform the design and implementation of programs, makeit possible to demonstrate
                         their impact to political decision-makers, development partners, and civil society, and enhance global
                         knowledge on the subject of safety nets.
                         (c)      Build capacity of public administration: The project supports strengthening of Government
                         capacity for planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation ofinterventions.
                         (d)      Finding a lasting solution to counterpart funding: Previous Bank project have been delayed
                         due to delays in release of counterpart funding and delay in effectiveness, in part due to lengthy
                         delays in government ratification. Efforts are underway to resolve this persistent problem, but it
                         remains a risk factor for this project. To mitigate this risk the project uses the standard cost sharing
                         arrangements used by all Bank projects in RoC where each disbursement category is shared between
                         the Bank and the Government using the ratio of IDA and Government total project financing.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (e)      Building synergies within the WB group interventions in the country: During design and
                         implementation, the proposed project will develop synergies with the other operations in country to
                         increase impact of the program on the human capital development of the children.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project has been screened for the presence of Indigenous Peoples (Pygmies) in the Cuvette rural
                         area as per OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples. However, from information provided by the
                         Government, local authorities, and experience from two World Bank financed projects, there are no
                         Indigenous Peoples in Cuvette (but, rather, in Cuvette Ouest).

                         The LISUNGI technical team that works on the project preparation shared with the Bank the most
                         recent study done at the Ministry of Social Affairs. According to the study, there are very few
                         Indigenous Peoples in the three areas of project implementation; the few that identify themselves as
                         such are migrants to local towns from rural areas.

                         In summary, analysis done by the Bank safeguards specialist, based on the most recent project IPP
                         reports and recent discussions and research, suggests that OP 4.10 is not likely to be triggered in the
                         proposed project areas.



                                                                       Page 6 of 9
                           No civil works will be undertaken and no adverse environmental or social impacts are expected. The
                           project does not require any land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of
                           access to resources and livelihood. The project is expected to have a positive impact for all direct and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           indirect beneficiaries, including vulnerable groups such as children, pregnant women and elderly
                           people who constitute some of the main target beneficiaries of the project

                           For these reason the project is classified as Category C.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Hocine Chalal (AFTN1)
                           Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (AFTCS)
                           Abdoulaye Gadiere (AFTN1)

                            6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Analysis done by the Bank safeguards specialist, based on the most recent project reports and
                              recent discussions and research, suggests that OP 4.10 is not triggered in the proposed project
                              areas.

                             No civil works will be undertaken nor are any adverse social impacts expected. In addition, no
                             adverse environmental impacts are expected. The project does not require any land acquisition
                             leading to involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of access to resources and livelihood.

                                                                         Page 7 of 9
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            The project is expected to have a positive impact for all direct and indirect beneficiaries,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           including vulnerable groups such as children, pregnant women and elderly people who constitute
                           some of the main target beneficiaries of the project.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.

                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            An institutional capacity assessment will be carried out during project preparation if needed.

                           Capacity building and training in environmental and social management will be provided under
                           component 3 of the proposed project

                           A Social Assessment has been prepared to examine vulnerability and inclusion issues in the
                           national program; social assessments have also been for communities in the project area.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Minister of Social Affairs, and the World Bank are the key stakeholders and no adverse impacts
                           is expected under this project.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                          Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                          be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                          issue, been prepared
                          Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the OP?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies



                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Phillippe George Pereira
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 09-Oct-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Stefano Paternostro (SM)                       Date: 09-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
