                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                      Report No.: ISDSA5547

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Oct-2013
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Oct-2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Mozambique                        Project ID:    P146402
                                                        Parent         P083325
                                                        Project ID:
   Project Name:      Mozambique Roads and Bridges Management and Maintenance Project Phase 2
                      - Additional Financing (P146402)
   Parent Project     Roads and Bridges Management and Maintenance Program - Phase II
   Name:              (P083325)
   Task Team       Kulwinder Singh Rao
   Leader:
   Estimated       07-Oct-2013                          Estimated   19-Dec-2013
   Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
   Managing Unit: AFTTR                                 Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                        Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (80%), Central government
                     administration (20%)
   Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (70%), Climate change (20%), Natural disaster
                     management (10%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:     183.75           Total Bank Financing:                  3.15
   Financing Gap:           73.60
     Financing Source                                                                       Amount
     Borrower                                                                                 40.00
     Climate Investment Funds                                                                 15.75
     Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery                                      15.00
     IDA Credit from CRW                                                                       3.15
     IDA Grant from CRW                                                                       36.25
     Total                                                                                   110.15
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:


                                              Page 1 of 9
Is this a           No
Repeater
project?

2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The primary objective of the overall Roads and Bridges Management and Maintenance Program
   (RBMMP), is to stimulate growth and contribute to poverty reduction through improved road
   infrastructure, better sector policies, and enhanced roads sector management. More specifically by
   (i) improving the coverage and conditions of roads and bridges in the territory of the Recipient;
   (ii) strengtheningthe Recipient's institutional capacity to manage and administer the road sector;
   (iii) establishing financing mechanisms for road maintenance; (iv) promoting the use of local
   resources in roads construction and management; and (v) improving road transport safety.
   The project development objective of this phase of the APL is to improve access of the population
   to all-season roads through maintenance, rehabilitation and upgrading of the classified road
   network.
   The indicators to assess the achievement of the PDO are (i) the percentage of classified roads in
   good and fair condition, and (ii) the percentage of the rural population within 2 km of an all-
   season road. Intermediate outcomes have been defined as follows: (a) improved road sector
   management capacity; (b) enhanced execution of the road maintenance program; and (c) timely
   and cost-effective implementation of the IDA financed rehabilitation and upgradingof sections of
   the National Road N1.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
There are no changes in the Project Development Objectives (PDOs), its design/scope, or the project
outcome indicators.

The proposed additional financing is to support the phase 2 of the Road and Bridges Management
and Maintenance Project (RBMMP), which has the following components:

(A)    Support to road maintenance program on paved and unpaved classified road network
Estimated allocation is about US$40.23 million. All these works are complete.

(B)    The funding of upgrading works on the national network. This essentially is rehabilitation
and upgrading works on N1 from Maputo to Maxixe that were not financed under phase one of the
APL due to cost increases. Estimated allocation is US$83.4 million. All the planned works are
complete.

(C)       Capacity building of the following activities were covered under this component: (i)
outsourcing of the services of ANE at the provincial level during its transformation to a road agency;
(ii) axle load control measures; (iii) road safety measures; (iv) the preparation of local government
policy and strategy; (v) TA, training and equipment for ANE, RF and the planning unit at MOTC;


                                             Page 2 of 9
(vi) preparation of design and bidding documents for the outer years of the program; (v) various
studies needed for the continuation of the program. Estimated allocation is: US$16.94 million.

The main purposes of the additional financing and Project Restructuring are to: (a) incorporate the
required emergency components related to the new floods of January 2013; and (b) extend the
project closing date, to allow for the implementation of the complementary project activities. The
additional project activities are being prepared under OP 10.00, paragraph 11 - Projects in Situations
of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints, include:

(A)     Emergency related works in the Limpopo River Basin (approximately US$110 million): The
January 2013 floods have severely damaged about 18 stretches of roads and bridges, including three
on the main national road (EN1). The unpaved roads of the secondary and tertiary road network, key
to accessing services in rural areas, as well as linking with other key national roads, have been
equally impacted causing major disruptions in transportation of the people and goods in the Limpopo
Valley and its surroundings. The damage needs urgent repairs to restore the normal life of the
affected population and businesses. The emergency works can be categorized into two major groups/
categories.

i.    Category 1: involves the relatively smaller urgent civil works which could be implemented
immediately by currently operating contractors and retroactively financed by the Bank.

ii.     Category 2: involves more complicated and intensive civil works related to substantive
medium and long-term technical solutions which will also prevent future floods and minimize their
adverse influence on the area. These will be prepared under design and build methodology using an
Output and Performance Based (OPRC) type of contract which transfers the majority of the risks to
the contracting party.

(B)      Development of Climate Resilient Roads infrastructure (approximately US$15.75 million):
In order to contribute to the Government's strategy of inclusive growth and rural development, the
proposed activity will focus on the investments to make rural roads more resilient to climate change
and it will also pilot improved local arrangements for tertiary roads maintenance to lower levels of
risk to climatic events in the medium to long term. An innovative approach shall be developed and
piloted in Gaza province. The pilot will be afterward subsequently scaled up through Government
and other Development Partner financing. This activity shall be co-financed by the Pilot Program for
Climate Resilience facility.

(C)     Incremental Operating Costs and Training of Road Fund and ANE staff (US$2.5 million):
This activity will contribute to the development of human resources and improvement of their
competence to adequately fulfill their professional obligations and be updated with the current
engineering aspects of road sector.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Limpopo flood plane in the Gaza Province, Mozambique.

 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
John Bryant Collier (AFTN3)
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)


                                             Page 3 of 9
6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes             The proposed project (AF) has triggered three
BP 4.01                                         safeguards policies, namely OP/BP 4.01
                                                (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.11
                                                (Physical Cultural Resources) and OP/BP 4.12
                                                (Involuntary Resettlement). Just as its parent-
                                                project, AF is a category B project because of the
                                                sites’ specific low impact nature of its foreseen
                                                Civil works, which are likely to have an impact
                                                on the biophysical environment for selected flood
                                                impacted roads sections and bridges. Borrower
                                                has since updated the ESIA/ESMP of the parent
                                                project to better capture some of the specificities
                                                of the targeted roads and bridges. Since this
                                                additional financing is being prepared under
                                                OP10.00, paragraph 11 - Projects in Situations of
                                                Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity
                                                Constraints, the updated ESMP will be disclosed
                                                both in-country and at the InfoShop as soon as it
                                                is cleared by the Bank.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

Pest Management OP 4.09           No

Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes            The ESMP that builds upon the former ESMF
BP 4.11                                         has included appropriate "Chance-find"
                                                mechanisms to ensure mitigation of any new
                                                discovery of PCRs during project
                                                implementation.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             There may be cases where encroachment on the
4.12                                            wayleave requires compensation and
                                                resettlement, though this is to be confirmed.
                                                Borrower is updating the 2006 RPF for re-
                                                disclosure as soon as cleared by the World Bank.
                                                An abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (RAP),
                                                if required, will be prepared, consulted upon, and
                                                disclosed during project implementation.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

Projects on International         No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50



                                        Page 4 of 9
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The proposed investment is typical of a Category B projects, just like its parent-project. The
     impacts of the proposed major restoration emergency works are spread throughout the Limpopo
     flood plane in the Gaza province and are estimated to have low negative impacts and site specific,
     both in the construction/rehabilitation phase and over the life of the roads and bridges operation
     phase, but these impacts can be reduced by the application of appropriate mitigation and support
     measures. Overall, these negative impacts are far outweighed by the positive social impacts of
     restoring the road network, and facilitating easy and affordable move of local communities and
     businesses.

     The environmental and social management measures proposed in the updated Environmental and
     Social Management Plan (ESMP) are generally straightforward. The majority of the measures
     relate directly to sound operating practices both during the construction/rehabilitation phase and
     subsequently over the operational life of the roads and bridges.

     There may be cases where encroachment on the wayleave requires compensation and resettlement,
     though this is to be confirmed.

     The proposed restoration works (reconstruction/rehabilitation) are not expected to require the
     physical resettlement of Project Affected Persons (PAP), nor will it result in massive loss of crops,
     assets, or livelihoods. Though unlikely, there might be insignificant encroachment in portions of
     surrounding farmlands, the width of the existing right-of-way is sufficient enough (by law, 15 m
     on each side of the road) to allow the easy move of machineries during the construction/
     rehabilitation activities. To ensure timely and adequate compliance with OP/BP 4.12 core
     requirements, the Borrower has updated the 2006 RPF, and appropriate budget is been provided in
     the project to ensure that, if required, an abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), is prepared,
     consulted upon, and disclosed during the course of project implementation.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     No negative environmental or social impacts are expected to result as a consequence of the
     emergency roadworks; rather, the medium and long term social and environmental impacts of the
     restoration works are hugely positive, since the implementation of the projectwill result in the
     improvement of the living conditions of population settled along the roads and the entire district in
     general thus contributing to poverty reduction.

     Moreover, travel time to trading centers as well as to basic socioeconomic services will be
     shortened and there will be improved access to markets and to sell their livestock products. The
     upgrading of the road will result in efficient traffic flow with savings in both time and cost thus
     there will be improved communication, which at present is a big concern.




                                                Page 5 of 9
  Restored roadworks will increase/ease access to schools and colleges, as well as other basic social
  and economic services. Restoration of the roadworks will result in reduction in accidents along the
  road and avoid the use of unsafe off-road routes. Women play an important role in agriculture
  throughout the country. However, the lack of a functioning road network makes it harder for
  women to access markets for their products. This is anticipated to change tangibly with the
  rehabilitation of the road networks, hence allowing women to free more time that could be further
  devoted to improve livelihood conditions of the household, and ultimately of the targeted
  communities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  Without the restoration of this vital transport network, the social impacts on the PAP will be
  immense, restricting their abilities to undertake commercial and agricultural practices, as well as
  limiting access to schools, hospitals, commercial centers, police stations, government offices, and
  other institutions. In addition, the impassability of the roads is leading to increased mortality and
  morbidity due to increased road accidents, and the necessity to utilize off-road routes.

  There is therefore no alternative to the project that would fulfill the immediate need to provide
  access to transport networks to the local affected populations.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Environmental and social management for all roadworks will be undertaken through the
  implementation a consolidated Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), which will
  follow both World Bank Operational Policies and guidelines, the ESMF/ESIA prepared for
  RBMMP1 in 2006, and the environmental and Social management requirements delineated in the
  Environmental and Social Guidelines for Road Works in Mozambique, prepared for the
  Administracao Nacional das Estradas (ANE) in September 2006. This document contains the
  Environmental and Social Management requirements for road rehabilitation and periodic
  maintenance projects in Mozambique. The guidelines are also compliant with the requirements of
  the World Bank Operational Policy OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment).

  The consolidated ESMP, which is being updated by the Government and will be disclosed, covers
  all necessary steps to mitigate negative impacts. These include but are not restricted measures
  during construction to: a) mitigate risks of erosion and sedimentation around watercourses; b)
  restrict water and soil contamination on work sites and around work camps (including littering and
  waste disposal); c) restrict generation of dust during construction; d) reduce risk of fire, cutting of
  trees for firewood, and trapping by construction workers; e) implement HIV/AIDS awareness
  programs f) ensure sustainable water management at worksites and construction camps; g) ensure
  use of “chance find? procedures under OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources); and h)
  minimize risks of accidents and ensure occupational safety and security of workers on construction
  sites. The borrower, ANE, has successfully completed environmental and social safeguards
  implementation on both RBMMP 1 and 2, and has in-house staffs that are well versed in Bank
  operational safeguards policies with proven experience on Bank financed operations. Provision is
  been made under this AF to further support the capacity building of the team on Safeguards.

  As described in paragraph 3, above, this emergency additional financing will cover three basic
  types of civil works that will encompass two approaches to safeguards mitigation:

  1)      For the smaller, urgent restoration civil works, implementation of the Environment and

                                              Page 6 of 9
  Social Clauses (ESC) contained in the ESMP will be systematically included, as a requirement, in
  each civil works contract. Additionally, supervision and reporting on the adequate implementation
  of the ESCs, and thus of the ESMP, will be required of the Resident Engineer contracted to
  supervise the works.

  2)       For the more complicated “build back better? works and the proposed climate resilient
  roads infrastructure (both of which will be undertaken on existing roads and will not involve new
  construction) , the design contractor will also prepare a site specific Environmental and Social
  Impacts Assessment (ESIA) that would include an ESMP, based on the initial ESMF/ESMP, for
  implementation as the works are being carried out. As in the case of the urgent civil works,
  supervision and reporting on the implementation of the ESMPs will be required of the Resident
  Engineer contracted to supervise the works.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Key stakeholders are the communities living along the road, in close vicinity to the road, as well as
  other potential road users. The former as well as some of the latter have been consulted about the
  proposed roadworks and are strongly vociferous in their wish that civil works commence as soon
  as possible, in order to resume normal life and restore their livelihoods. A grievance redress
  mechanism is detailed in the consolidated ESMP which will be/has been disclosed in country and
  in the InfoShop, prior to appraisal. The framework document (ESMF) was initially disclosed, in
  2006 and re-disclosed in 2010 at the time of the AF for RBMMP2. The ESMF is being updated
  for this emergency additional financing and will be disclosed as soon as it is completed.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Nov-2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Jan-2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Mozambique                                                       18-Oct-2006
  Comments: The ESMP was updated and re-disclosed, both by the Infoshop and in country, in
                2010 for the first Additional Financing. The ESMP is being revised by Government
                of Mozambique for the current emergency additional financing - once finalized, it
                will be reviewed by the Africa Regional Safeguards Team and disclosed both by the
                Infoshop and in country.
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Nov-2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Jan-2007
"In country" Disclosure
  Mozambique                                                       18-Oct-2006
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.


                                             Page 7 of 9
   If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
   OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    report?
    If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
    Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the credit/loan?
   OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
    Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    property?
    Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
   OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
    Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Sector Manager review the plan?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:       Name: Kulwinder Singh Rao
   Approved By


                                               Page 8 of 9
Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 28-Oct-2013
Advisor:
Sector Manager:     Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (SM)     Date: 28-Oct-2013




                                     Page 9 of 9
