                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC8424

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kazakhstan                      Project ID:      P150402
                            Project Name:      Kazakhstan: Fostering Productive Innovation Project (P150402)
                            Task Team          Karen Grigorian
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          16-Jun-2014                     Estimated        31-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSPF                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General industry and trade sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Other Private Sector Development (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       120.00                 Total Bank Financing:        100.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    20.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      100.00
                              Total                                                                      120.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The PDO is to promote high-quality, nationally relevant research and commercialization of
                           technologies.
                           C. Project Description
                           Building on the visible achievements under the TCP project, the new operation would expand and
                           adapt the range of instruments used in the TCP and offer new programs for financing innovation to
                           complement similar pilot innovation programs introduced by the government in recent years.
                         Component 1 - Development of the Knowledge Base for Innovation ($40 million): This component
                         will finance:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         a)       Grants to research teams ($30 million). Based on the TCP project, the sub-component will
                         finance two types of grant instruments for eligible R&D ideas: one for young researchers (a
                         continuation of the Junior Researcher Group Program) up to $0.6 million each and one for
                         internationally recognized researchers up to $1.5 million each (a continuation of the Senior Scientist
                         Group Program). Grantees must incorporate themselves as companies. Semiannual research progress
                         is monitored by the ISCB through field visits. The eligibility criteria would include new features,
                         such as emphasis on proven interest/partnership of private/corporate sector in the proposed research,
                         researcher/company co-financing. The grant could finance laboratory equipment, workshops, visiting
                         scholars, etc.

                         b)       PhD training abroad in technical areas strategic for Kazakhstan’s economy ($10 million).
                         This may include expansion of the Bolashak education program supporting PhD-level training and/or
                         a pilot higher education consortium between Kazakhstan and a relevant Western university of
                         excellence such as London’s Imperial College or the Colorado School of Mines. The Bolashak
                         program is about providing education grants for Kazakhstani students to pursue Master’s, PhD,
                         residency and internships in foreign universities based on an approved list of priority education areas/
                         specialties. The project would finance support of joint international research activities for student
                         already abroad, potentially with KZ diaspora.

                         Component 2 –Design of Innovation Consortia (technology platforms and engineering centers) ($35
                         million): This component will finance establishment of innovation consortia to promote collaboration
                         among the existing scientific research institutes and design bureaus. Selection of suitable laboratory
                         facilities in Kazakhstan to form a consortium will be done through open competition which mandates
                         international collaboration and the co-funding of users and clients as prerequisites. The grants would
                         be awarded for consortia addressing strategic problems relevant for Kazakhstan’s future (related to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         energy, minerals, metallurgy and agriculture). The winners would receive MoES grants for
                         upgrading to international standards. The grant conditions would allow purchase of additional
                         equipment, renovation and, among others, would require adoption of good laboratory practices,
                         international certification and launching and maintenance of peer reviewed journal for Senior and
                         Junior Research Groups. It is expected that up to 10 user-driven innovation clusters would be
                         developed between major Kazakh and global companies, including multinationals involved in oil and
                         gas drilling in the country. The IMSC is one example of such consortium in the current project,
                         although institutional configurations of consortia are expected to vary. A Call for Proposals could
                         include a separate window to promote research and technology commercialization projects with the
                         highly successful Kazakh diaspora working in the West.

                         Component 3 – Consolidation of the Technology Commercialization Cycle ($35million): This
                         component would draw on the activities of the TCP, utilizing results of technology audit, technology
                         commercialization grants program and comprehensive R&D regulatory framework review. In
                         addition to TCP experience, this component would draw upon technology commercialization
                         programs developed by the Ministry of Industry and New Technology (MINT) and other government
                         agencies. It would include the following three sub-components and finance the following activities:

                         a) Innovation matching grants to provide early stage support for commercialization of R&D results
                         ($20 million). This sub-component would draw on the existing grant program of NATD (National
                         Agency for Technology Development). The detailed design will be determined during preparation.

                         b) Funding program for innovative SMEs at the early stage of incubation of a firm for (i) Concept
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Development Grants (to support preparation and development of innovative business concepts,
                         strategies, studies and plans in order to then attract external investment in their business by
                         addressing key areas of risk) up to the amount of US$15,000 and (ii) for Equity Investment up to US
                         $1 million ($13 million). This activity will finance developing a private-public venture fund for
                         technology companies with a significant private sector contribution. It will be done in the form of a
                         public contribution towards establishing a Venture Fund, including management team remuneration.
                         The design options of the fund will be discussed with the client during the preparation mission.

                         c) Technology Acceleration Office Abroad ($2 million) to establish an office located at a recognized
                         center of excellence in technological innovation in one of the two major markets for Kazakhstan
                         technology commercialization (Silicon Valley, CA, Austin, TX, USA or Moscow or Skolkovo,
                         Russia).
                         d) Network of Technology Transfer Offices (TTO) at major Kazakh universities ($10 mln). This sub-
                         component will enhance capabilities of existing TTOs with an objective to reach a critical mass of
                         technology commercialization and transfer capabilities within a coherent network of 5-6 capable
                         TTOs. Operating in concert with innovation matching grants (sub-component 3a), this sub-
                         component will facilitate an adequate deal flow for the venture fund (sub-component 3b). It will
                         finance goods and services (training, study tours) to upgrade capabilities of TTOs.

                         Component 4 - Innovation Council ($5 million): Assure better coordination of the Innovation System
                         between key stakeholders of National Innovation System, including mainly the Ministry of
                         Education & Science, Ministry of Industry & New Technologies, Ministry of Agriculture, and
                         Ministry of Oil & Gas. The Council would benefit from collaboration and advice from the
                         International Science and Commercialization Board under TCP. This component would draw on the
                         experience of inter-agency Innovation Councils in such countries as Chile and Finland. The
                         component would finance TA to set up the Council and build-up its capabilities and operating costs
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of running the Council. This is a pilot component (it can be dropped after discussions with the
                         counter-part).

                         Component 5 - Project management, monitoring and evaluation, awareness raising and capacity
                         development ($5 million): During preparation, the team will take into consideration earlier requests
                         of MOES regarding TCP implementation arrangements in terms of expanding institutional learning
                         stemming from project implementation to its subsidiary organizations such as the Science Fund or
                         Science Committee that are directly responsible for R&D quality and technology commercialization
                         and have more flexibility and capacity in terms of implementation. For example, the team will be
                         looking into the practicality of the MOES delegating the responsibility for implementing certain
                         components to other entities under the auspices of the MOES (for example, the Science Fund, TCO
                         under the TCP, IMSC).
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is expected to cover entire country with matching grants and SME support, including
                         equity investments for all eligible entities in Kazakhstan. The project would target work and R&D
                         that addresses strategic problems related to key sectors such as energy, minerals, metallurgy and
                         agriculture. Project would also include developing and providing public funds for a private-public
                         venture fund for technology companies all around the country. The project will provide grants to
                           upgrade the chosen facilities (laboratories) to international standards. Some facilities might be
                           located in buildings of high cultural value.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           While the implementation arrangements for this operation have not yet been confirmed in detail,
                           there is the expectation that they will, to a large extent, build upon the implementation arrangements
                           already set up for the management of the existing Technology Commercialization project (TCP).
                           Objective of TCP is promoting high quality research, fostering industry-R&D linkages and the
                           commercialization of promising R&D outputs. TCP is category B project and has EMF. The team
                           will propose to the authorities that the MOES would be the implementing agency (same as for TCP)
                           with the possibility to delegate operational management of the project to the Science Fund, a joint-
                           stock company owned by the MOES, as the implementing entity. The current PMU of the TCP
                           would be integrated into the MOES as a separate unit. Overall quality oversight of the project would
                           be assured by a project steering committee led by the Vice Minister of Education and Science and
                           comprising two Directors in the MOES and representatives from other agencies (e.g. Science
                           Committee, Science Funds). Fiduciary and safeguards aspects of the grant would be managed by the
                           PMU of the MOES, which has relevant staff with adequate training and WB experience, including an
                           environmental specialist. It is envisioned that the MoES may delegate the responsibility for
                           implementing certain components to other entities under the auspices of the MoES (for example, the
                           Science Fund, TCO under the TCP, IMSC).

                           In addition, the government has expressed interest in setting up a higher level Innovation Council, so
                           as to ensure political support for the objectives of the project. Quality assurance would be provided
                           by an external advisory board (ISCB) as well as a stakeholder group to ensure that all actors, public
                           and private, can express their views on the design and implementation of the project.

                           Although client's institutional capacity is generally weak (little experience of collaborative projects,
                           little experience of international R&D collaboration, highly fragmented innovation system), there are
                           important exceptions created by the current TCP project. Nevertheless, to this point TCP project has
Public Disclosure Copy




                           not supported any activity that would trigger the use of EMF. This implies that additional safeguards
                           training would need to be organized for MOES, PMU and other participating agencies during project
                           preparation and if needed during implementation.

                           The implementing agency safeguards capacity assessment as well as of other participating entities,
                           will be in more detail assessed during preparation of the project. Training and capacity building plan
                           will be part of the EMF and will be agreed to bring the MOES’s/PMU’s into full compliance with the
                           World Bank requirements and improve their capacity to implement the project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Lola Ibragimova (ECSSO)
                           Natasa Vetma (ECSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The Environmental Management Framework
                           BP 4.01                                               will be prepared prior to appraisal and will
                                                                                 define environmental procedures and due
                                                                 diligence for the project as a whole. The EMF
                                                                 will be built on existing TCP and Croatian
                                                                 Science and Technology Project II, which
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 covers similar types (wide range) of research
                                                                 activities.
                                                                 For Component 1, Grants to research teams,
                                                                 Component 3, Innovation matching grants to
                                                                 provide early stage support for
                                                                 commercialization of R&D, and for Funding
                                                                 program for innovative SMEs to provide
                                                                 matching equity, an EMF will be developed
                                                                 focusing on variety of environmental impacts
                                                                 that come from R&D sectors. Sub-projects
                                                                 might range from low to high category B
                                                                 projects, implying possible preparation of
                                                                 various due diligence documents like: EIA,
                                                                 EMP, EMP checklist, for which criteria will be
                                                                 defined in EMF. Category A projects will be
                                                                 excluded, as well those listed on IBRD non-
                                                                 eligible project list. For smaller rehabilitation
                                                                 expected under category 1-3, EMP checklist for
                                                                 rehabilitation will be prepared and template will
                                                                 be part of the EMF. The EMF will make sure
                                                                 that the implementation of the project complies
                                                                 with both National and WB safeguards
                                                                 procedures.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    The project will not support R&D activities in
                                                                 protected areas or natural habitats of high value.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project will not support R&D activities in /
                                                                 on forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Project might support rehabilitation of buildings
                         BP 4.11                                 that are protected. The list of sites should be
                                                                 known prior the appraisal.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    TBD   At this stage the team had preliminary
                         4.12                                    discussion with the borrower where the client
                                                                 indicated willingness to exclude any activities
                                                                 that would involve land acquisition and do not
                                                                 meet “willing buyer/willing seller” criteria. The
                                                                 PMU would be responsible for confirming (as
                                                                 part of sub-project screening) that in any such
                                                                 case the seller was free to decline selling the
                                                                 land and also that any land purchased in this
                                                                 way was free of 'encumberances" that could
                                                                                                                                 include informal occupants. The team will
                                                                                                                                 proceed with further discussion to ensure the
                                                                                                                                 client understands the screening criteria as well
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 as the provisions of OP. 4.12 and the RPF if one
                                                                                                                                 is to be prepared.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 20-Jun-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      EMF and RPF will be prepared for the project and disclosed prior to project appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Karen Grigorian

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 13-May-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Paloma Anos Casero (SM)                                                                                              Date: 13-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
