                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA12203
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Feb-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Jan-2015, 11-Feb-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kyrgyz Republic                   Project ID:    P146970
                            Project Name:      Third Village Investment Project (P146970)
                            Task Team          Asli Gurkan
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          19-Jan-2015                       Estimated   26-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSURR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Public administration- Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Participation and civic engagement (55%), Rural services and infrastructure
                                              (45%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      12.00           Total Bank Financing:                 12.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               12.00
                              Total                                                                                     12.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The higher order objective is to alleviate rural poverty by building the capacity of local-level
                           institutions. This goal is to be addressed through the project development objective (PDO) of
                           building local capacity for participatory development and improving access to quality community
                           infrastructure services in targeted project areas.


                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         3. Project Description
                         The third phase of the Village Investment Project will target local community members, local
                         administration staff, and local council members who will receive direct capacity building support in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         participatory governance and participatory development (Component 1). The project will also
                         support the design and implementation of sub-projects and micro-projects from participatory local
                         investment plans (Component 2). Lastly, the project will finance the costs of the implementing
                         agency for project management, specifically coordination and supervision of implementation
                         activities, financial management, annual audits, and monitoring and evaluation (Component 3).

                         Component 1: Capacity Building

                         This component will support the achievement of the first part of the project development objective of
                         building local capacity for participatory development and will target both local communities and
                         local self-government bodies (local administrations and local councils). Project activities under this
                         component are broadly divided into three sub-components: (i) community mobilization, (ii) training,
                         and (iii) peer to peer learning. Targeted villages will be supported in developing local investment
                         plans through a participatory process in which local communities assess local needs, and carry out
                         participatory identification of priorities.

                         Component 2: Village Investments

                         This component will support and finance the design and implementation of community infrastructure
                         projects drawn from local development plans of municipal districts (ayil aymaks). The project will
                         finance a select number of community investments in four targeted regions of the country. The
                         investments to be financed will be determined by a competitive selection process. The application
                         packages to be submitted by interested ayil aymaks will be judged against a set of criteria, and those
                         ranked the highest will have their priorities funded.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Ayil aymaks can apply for two types of funding:
                         •        Sub-grants: (more than $20,000). Funding for sub-projects may cover new construction,
                         reconstruction, and major rehabilitation works. Although sub-projects will not have a specific size or
                         fiduciary cap , there will be at least two sub-projects per oblast per cycle (or one sub-project that
                         encompasses at least two ayil aymaks). Sub-project funding will make up 80 percent of the overall
                         funding allocated to this component.
                         •        Micro-grants: ($20,000 or less). Micro grants will only be available to ayil aymaks that are
                         classified by the central government as “subsidized” (i.e., they do not have budget for either capital
                         expenditures or to meet their running costs). Micro-grants will fund repair works, beautification
                         (landscaping, painting, etc.), and upgrading of facilities (procurement of new furniture, athletic
                         equipment, information and communication technology, etc.). Micro- grants may consist of one or
                         several smaller micro-projects, but their total combined amount will not exceed $20,000. Micro-grant
                         funding will make up 20 percent of the overall funding allocated to Component 2.

                         Component 3: Project Management

                         This component will finance the costs of the implementing agency for project management,
                         specifically coordination and supervision of implementation activities, financial management, annual
                         audits, and monitoring and evaluation.



                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will cover four out of seven regions of the country (Naryn, Issykul, Chui and Talas).
Public Disclosure Copy




                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (GSURR)
                         Cesar Niculescu (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment        Yes             Effective measures have been put in place under the
                          OP/BP 4.01                                      VIP-2 to address safeguards issues, and these
                                                                          measures were being applied and closely monitored
                                                                          under VIP-2 Additional Financing. They are laid out
                                                                          in the Environmental Management Framework and
                                                                          the Resettlement Policy Framework. Each
                                                                          community investment to be financed under the
                                                                          project will be reviewed for safeguard risks in line
                                                                          with the OP4.01. Implementation of environmental
                                                                          and social risk mitigation measures under the VIP-2
                                                                          Additional Financing was carried out by the
                                                                          construction contractor firms and monitored by ARIS
                                                                          PIU staff (engineers). This practice will continue
                                                                          under VIP-3. Appropriate training will continue to be
                                                                          provided under VIP-3 to PIU field staff, local level
                                                                          officials, and community members.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04     No
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Forests OP/BP 4.36              No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09         No

                          Physical Cultural Resources     No              This policy has not been triggered. However, as a
                          OP/BP 4.11                                      precaution, the project team will conduct regular
                                                                          screenings (as part of the Environmental Assessment
                                                                          (EA) process) to identify potential physical cultural
                                                                          resources in project-affected areas. In case the EA
                                                                          screenings identify new physical and cultural
                                                                          resources in project-affected sites, the project team
                                                                          will require the PIU to adopt measures for avoiding
                                                                          or mitigating negative impacts.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP        No              Indigenous peoples' as per OP 4.10 are not present in
                          4.10                                            the project area.
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/    Yes             Under Component 2, the project will finance grants
                          BP 4.12                                         for community level investments such as clinics,
                                                                          kindergartens, community centers, sports facilities,



                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                                                                             and bridges. The investments will be identified
                                                                             during project implementation based on community
                                                                             demand. Component 2 activities may result in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             involuntary acquisition of land and other resettlement
                                                                             impacts detailed in OP 4.12. However such impacts
                                                                             are expected to be minor. Community-level
                                                                             investments with resettlement costs exceeding 1
                                                                             percent of the sub-project amount will be excluded
                                                                             from the project.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No

                            Projects on International        Yes             Component 2 of the Project is designed to finance
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                             Micro-Projects and Sub-Projects identified on a
                                                                             rolling basis during the project's life. Some of these
                                                                             activities may involve the rehabilitation of rural
                                                                             water supply and irrigation infrastructure. Some of
                                                                             these may draw water from or discharge into
                                                                             international waterways or their tributaries. Such
                                                                             international waterways include the Chui, Talas and
                                                                             Naryn rivers. For these reasons, OP 7.50 has been
                                                                             triggered. However, the activities proposed are of
                                                                             very limited and localized scale and restricted only
                                                                             those that involve minor additions, renovation and
                                                                             rehabilitation of already existing schemes at the
                                                                             community level. An exception to the riparian
                                                                             notification requirement has been obtained from the
                                                                             Regional Vice President. The criteria for the
                                                                             selection of Sub-projects and Micro-Projects will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             exclude those that propose rehabilitation or works on
                                                                             new (as opposed to existing) irrigation or water
                                                                             systems which may involve the use or potential
                                                                             pollution of international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                            BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Safeguard issues and impacts are associated only with the Component 2 of the project.
                              Implementation of some of the sub-projects and micro-projects under Component 2 may result in
                              impacts envisioned in OP 4.12. However, such impacts are expected to be minor. The project will
                              not finance any sub-projects and micro-projects that will have significant impacts. In the context
                              of VIP-3, significant impact refers to the cases in which resettlement/land acquisition costs exceed
                              1 percent of the overall sub-project/micro-project amount.




                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                          In regards to environmental impacts, the project team does not expect large scale, significant and/
                          or irreversible impacts. The potential impacts are likely to be small, insignificant and reversible,
                          and they are normally expected in small/medium scale construction works. The impacts may
Public Disclosure Copy




                          include: generation of dust, noise and vibration; movement of the construction vehicles and
                          machinery; piling of construction materials; and accumulation of demolition/construction waste.
                          Other associated risks include improper disposal of construction waste, asbestos, minor
                          operational or accidental spills of fuel and lubricants from the construction machinery, and
                          improper reinstatement of construction sites upon completion of works.

                           In regards to international waterways, minor rehabilitations of existing community water supply
                           and irrigation systems could involve minor intakes or discharges into international waterways such
                           as the Chui, Talas and Naryn rivers. In this regard OP 7.50 has been triggered but these small
                           Micro-Projects and Sub-Projects will not adversely affect the quality or quantity of water flows to
                           downstream riparian states, or lead to the changes in water intake and/or discharge. Any potential
                           changes in the water quality during construction works would be mitigated through the
                           implementation of Environmental Management Framework and site-specific EMPs.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           From a land use perspective, involuntary land acquisition or temporary/permanent loss of access to
                           land may be possible as a direct result of the project. However, majority of construction works are
                           expected to be "rehabilitation" of existing facilities; thus, the project expects that the number of
                           projects involving involuntary land acquisition or temporary/permanent loss of access to land will
                           be minimal. The project will aim to avoid, minimize and mitigate impacts from involuntary land
                           acquisition and temporary/permanent loss of access to land.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The project will seek to avoid the involuntary acquisition of land and subsequent impacts as
                           detailed in OP 4.12. Where involuntary acquisition of land cannot be avoided, the project will seek
Public Disclosure Copy




                           to minimize impacts by adopting such changes as shifts in alignment, reductions of site footprints,
                           etc.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) including the mitigation measures for most
                           type of construction works and impacts to international waterways has been prepared by the PIU,
                           and will be followed by site-specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) that will be
                           prepared for each sub-project that will be implemented. For micro-projects (majority of them are
                           considered to be low risk because they involve minor rehabilitation of existing facilities or small-
                           scale works), the EMP checklist-type format will be used for implementing specific mitigation and
                           compliance measures. The implementation of the checklist-type format will be monitored by
                           project staff, community safeguards volunteers and local government officials. The procedures to
                           be followed are consistent with OP 4.01 and Kyrgyz national requirements and will ensure
                           compliance with safeguards procedures and issues.

                          The Borrower has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to guide the preparation of
                          site-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) later. A framework approach has been adopted as
                          the sub-project sites will not be known until project implementation is underway.



                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                           The Borrower has experience working on World Bank projects. The PIU has recruited an
                           experienced safeguard specialist for VIP-3, who will be responsible for both social and
                           environmental issues. The Borrower also has staff working on social mobilization - who will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           able to support consultations during implementation - and has recently recruited a gender
                           specialist. In addition, the VIP-3 design includes Community Development and Support Officers
                           in addition to the regional community development officers who will receive training on
                           environment, social, health and safety issues on a regular basis. Together with the Bank the
                           Borrower will explore opportunities for training on safeguards during the course of project
                           implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project is highly participatory and demand-driven. Primary stakeholders are community
                           members and local authorities and local council members. Other stakeholders include civil society
                           organizations representing or working on issues related to communities and local development,
                           contractors, and national level ministries providing technical or recurrent support to infrastructure
                           constructed/rehabilitated under the project. Consultations on general EMF and RPF were held on
                           October 8 in the Chui region, attended by 72 people. Specific questions that were raised included
                           compensation process and whether the project would be able to respond to the needs for poorer,
                           subsidized communities. It was agreed, with the authorization of the World Bank's Regional Vice
                           President, that the resettlement compensation will be financed out of project funds as a response to
                           concerns raised by poorer municipalities that they may not have the needed funding for
                           resettlement compensation. The finalized safeguards documents were disclosed in Infoshop and in
                           country on December 17, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Oct-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-Nov-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      ////
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kyrgyz Republic                                                  17-Dec-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Nov-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kyrgyz Republic                                                  05-Nov-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                                                      Page 6 of 7
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Asli Gurkan
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Elisabeth Huybens (PMGR)                         Date: 11-Feb-2015
                            Manager:

                                                                        Page 7 of 7
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
