                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC6213

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mexico                           Project ID:      P120417
                            Project Name:      Mexico FCPF Readiness Preparation Grant (P120417)
                            Task Team          Carole Megevand
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          11-Jun-2015
                            Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSAR

                            Sector(s):        Forestry (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          3.80                 Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                      3.80
                              Total                                                                         3.80
                            Environmental
                            Category:
                            Is this a     No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to support a participatory and inclusive process for the
                           finalization of Mexico’s National REDD+ strategy (ENAREDD+).
                           C. Project Description
                           COMPONENT 1: Organization and Consultation. (FCPF amount: $2,558,000)
                           The FCPF grant would support the continuing dialogue and participation process with stakeholder
                           groups, within and outside government as part of the preparation of the ENAREDD+.
                         Sub-Component 1a: National Readiness Management Arrangements
                         (FCPF amount: $950,000)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         REDD+ readiness is a complex and challenging process. To be successful, it requires a solid
                         consultation with, and coordination amongst the various platforms at the policy level and at the
                         multi-stakeholder level. CONAFOR has been leading the preparation of the ENAREDD+ through a
                         participatory process that is anchored by a multi-stakeholder technical advisory committee - Comité
                         Técnico Consultivo or CTC-REDD+, - which includes representatives of key governmental
                         institutions (forestry and non-forestry), NGOs, indigenous peoples, forest community-based
                         organizations, the academic sector and financial institutions. Their mandate is to provide an open and
                         transparent participation platform for the preparation of the ENAREDD+. In addition, CONAFOR
                         also works closely with other important platforms that have been established such as the Technical
                         Advisory Committee of the REDD+ Working Group under the CICC (Comité Técnico Asesor del
                         Grupo de Trabajo REDD+ or CTA del GT-REDD+) and the ENAREDD+ working group of the
                         Consejo Nacional Forestal (CONAF).

                         At the local and state level, existing platforms will be strengthened in order to ensure that potentially
                         affected stakeholders have an opportunity to raise specific issues and concerns regarding REDD+
                         that affect them. For example, the approach of the Community Forestry program includes the
                         identification and integration of spaces for social participation and consultation (foros regionales or
                         regional natural resources committees) in order to better plan, evaluate and monitor the construction
                         of community development processes and to strengthen social capital. These regional spaces are
                         managed by Community Forestry Program staff and an average of 10 to 15 communities and ejidos
                         are represented in each meeting. All resolutions/decisions are taken by consensus, documented and
                         must be signed and sealed by the representatives.

                         Under this component, the FCPF grant would finance additional human resources in CONAFOR to
                         provide technical assistance for the REDD readiness and the participative process in México and to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         coordinate the preparation of the documents required by the FCPF. It would also support the
                         strengthening of the existing multi-stakeholder participative platforms both at the national (CTC-
                         REDD+, CTA del GT-REDD+, and others in complementarity with other initiatives) and the state
                         level (regional CTC in five states). At the local level, the FCPF grant would support the foros
                         regionales to hold a comprehensive meeting on REDD+ at least once per year.

                         Sub-Component 1b: Stakeholder Consultation and Participation
                         (FCPF amount: $1,608,000)

                         Context: The government of Mexico has been working to ensure a wide dissemination of REDD+-
                         related information to the various stakeholders in order to guarantee their full and effective
                         participation in the preparation of the ENAREDD+. Particular attention will be paid to Indigenous
                         Peoples and forest-dependent communities as well as to other vulnerable groups such as women and
                         youth. To date, the CTC REDD+, considered by many to be the most important representative
                         participation platform at the national level, has been very involved in the early discussions and
                         technical reviews of the ENAREDD+ [see details regarding the early information dissemination and
                         participatory process in Annex 8 SESA workplan of the Assessment Note]. Additionally, CONAFOR
                         and CDI signed a collaboration agreement in July 2013 that includes a mandate to design and
                         implement consultation and dissemination activities specifically targeted to indigenous people, as
                         well as the promotion of indigenous participation in the existing participatory platforms mentioned
                         above. It is expected that before the final draft of the ENAREDD+ is released for consultation, a
                         guiding document defining the plan for the national consultation (Consultation Plan )will be prepared
                         taking into account past experiences and existing inputs (to be ready by the end of 2013). During
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2014, the final draft of the ENAREDD+ will undergo a comprehensive multi-stakeholder
                         consultation process throughout the country, as per the approved Consultation plan.

                         Potential risks of the REDD strategy options applicable in Mexico will be widely discussed with
                         relevant stakeholders during consultations and also as part of the SESA process explained below.
                         Special attention will be given to Indigenous Peoples and other forest-dependent communities;
                         lessons learnt from ATREDD+ will inform the preparation of the subnational REDD+ strategies. In
                         order to foster an inclusive and informed consultation regarding ENAREDD+, particular efforts will
                         be made to ensure a wide dissemination of information on REDD+ at the local level and to use the
                         Programa de Fomento a la Organización Social, Planeación y Desarrollo Regional Forestal
                         (PROFOS) to channel culturally-relevant and user-friendly communication material on REDD+
                         through the local organizations that work directly with forest communities.

                         Under this component, the FCPF grant would finance the consultation process with relevant
                         stakeholders at the national, state and local levels in order to influence the final version of the
                         ENAREDD+. This process will be based upon other successful efforts such as the national
                         consultation for the National Climate Change Strategy. This activity will be closely articulated with
                         the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) under component 2d.

                         COMPONENT 2: Development of the REDD Strategy (FCPF amount: $1,242,000)

                         The FCPF grant would support further analysis and design policies and programs to tackle the
                         drivers of deforestation by analyzing barriers to inter-sectorial coordination, conduct dialogues on the
                         critical aspects identified related to REDD+, extensive consultation and participation and the
                         preparation of an ESMF that will provide guidance for the management of social and environmental
                         risks during the implementation of the ENAREDD+, while putting in place the necessary
Public Disclosure Copy




                         institutional and legal framework and the institutional arrangements to make them effective.

                         Sub-Component 2a: Assessment of Land Use, Forest Policy, and Governance
                         (FCPF amount: $288,000)

                         1.       Context: Mexico has made significant progress in assessing the main drivers of deforestation
                         and forest degradation and the potential options to promote REDD+ in the wider context of
                         sustainable rural development. As part of the preparation of the ENAREDD+, Mexico launched
                         REDD+ Early Actions (ATREDD+) at the subnational level: the ATREDD+ will pilot innovative
                         local governance models at the territorial level in order to plan, guide and assist communities to
                         promote landscape-based management and help harmonize government interventions in the rural
                         sector. Currently, ATREDD+ are being piloted in the States of Jalisco, the State of Oaxaca, the State
                         of Chiapas and three states of the Yucatán Peninsula (Campeche, Quintana Roo and Yucatán).

                         To complement these on-going activities, the FCPF would support analytical work and technical
                         assistance from experts in order to: further identify the barriers to inter-sectorial policy coordination
                         for REDD+ implementation; identify additional sites with potential for successful replication of
                         REDD+ Early Actions; and identify appropriate legal frameworks for the promotion of local
                         governance mechanisms for REDD+ implementation.
                         Sub-Component 2b: REDD Strategy Options
                         (FCPF amount: $124,000)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Context: Mexico has made significant progress over the past three years to identify potential strategic
                         options for the ENAREDD+ that would address deforestation and forest degradation. A third draft of
                         the ENAREDD+ has been prepared and circulated for comment. However, critical issues related to
                         the potential REDD+ strategic options (and particularly in terms of their potential social and
                         environmental risks and impacts) still need to be further defined and analyzed. For example, carbon
                         ownership and benefit sharing are critical issues that will be further analyzed as part of the SESA
                         process.

                         Under this component, the FCPF would finance studies to support the finalization of the ENAREDD
                         + and the design of potential REDD interventions and to develop scenarios to model the impacts of
                         strategic options for REDD+. The activities under this subcomponent will promote the dialogue
                         between different actors to broaden the discussion at the national and subnational level about
                         identified critical issues.

                         Sub-Component 2c: REDD Feedback and Grievance Mechanisms
                         (FCPF amount: $300,000)

                         Context: In order to provide adequate answers to Mexican citizens and to strengthen the existing
                         mechanisms for complaints, grievances, suggestions and requests of information, CONAFOR
                         established a Citizen Attention Mechanism or Mecanismo de Atención Ciudadana (MAC) that builds
                         on existing mechanisms such as the Servicio de Información y Atención Ciudadana (SIAC), the
                         Órgano Interno de Control (OIC) and the Unidad de Enlace del Instituto Federal de Acceso a la
                         Información y Protección de datos (Unidad de Enlace- IFAI). This mechanism is already functioning
                         in the context of the Forests and Climate Change project.

                         Under this component, the FCPF grant would support the further strengthening of the MAC
Public Disclosure Copy




                         specifically for REDD+ at the state level. Particular attention will be given to identifying and
                         analyzing the gaps in attention at the state level as well as existing mechan isms in the Early Action
                         Areas that could be strengthened. The specific needs of Indigenous peoples, women and vulnerable
                         groups will be emphasized and a pilot of the proposed methodology will be undertaken in order to
                         ensure its adequacy and relevance before it is finalized.

                         Sub-Component 2d: Social and Environmental Impacts
                         (FCPF amount: $530,000)

                         Context: The government of Mexico has historically shown a full commitment to working with local
                         communities and has recognized the rights of Indigenous Peoples and other forest dependent local
                         communities to their lands, forests and natural resources. CONAFOR has been emphasizing the
                         social dimensions of the REDD+ Strategy based on its past experience and lessons learned and the
                         National REDD Strategy is being designed with the full participation of a wide range of stakeholders
                         at various levels (national, regional and local) and also early information dissemination and dialogue
                         with key stakeholders [for more details regarding these meetings and the results, see Annex 8 SESA
                         workplan].

                         Given the amount of time that has passed since the prior discussions on SESA in 2011, a new draft of
                         the SESA workplan has been prepared by CONAFOR to better reflect the current priorities in terms
                         of identifying the risks and benefits associated with the strategic options that are now articulated in
                         the third draft of the National REDD+ Strategy (ENAREDD+). The SESA workplan includes a brief
                         summary of the work completed between 2011–2013 and identifies the priority activities to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         undertaken in the period 2013-2015. In addition, the SESA workplan includes information regarding
                         how the existing participation platforms will be involved in the participatory process, information
                         regarding the link between the SESA process and the preparation of the ENAREDD+ as well as a
                         budget and timeline for implementation. The SESA workplan was reviewed by various
                         representative groups of key stakeholders and their comments incorporated into the final version that
                         was submitted to the Bank on February 28, 2014.

                         Under this component, the FCPF grant would support the implementation of the activities outlined in
                         the SESA workplan. Activities financed under this component would be coordinated with the
                         Consultation plan supported under component 1b and with the analytical work carried out under
                         component 2b.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The FCPF Readiness Preparation Grant will support the preparation of the National REDD+
                         Strategy. Many of the activities that will be financed are national in scope although REDD+ activities
                         themselves are likely to be concentrated in the five Early Action Areas/ATREDD: Oaxaca, Jalisco,
                         Chiapas and the Yucatan Peninsula (Quintana Roo, Yucatan, Campeche).

                         In general, Mexico is extraordinarily diverse in terms of biodiversity, geography and culture. It is
                         characterized by its location in two of the major bio-geographical regions of the planet, the Nearctic
                         (characteristic of North America) and the Neo-tropical (characteristic of Central and South
                         America), factors that helped to form a mosaic of environmental conditions and micro environments
                         that promote a wide variety of habitats and life forms. Its high number of species, but also its wealth
                         of endemic species, ecosystems and the large genetic variety in many taxonomic groups, has placed
                         it among the 17 mega-diverse countries of the world; it is in fourth place among the set of countries
Public Disclosure Copy




                         that are home to 70% of the known species on the planet. Of the total surface area of the national
                         territory (196.4 million hectares), approximately 70% is covered by forest ecosystems (138 million
                         hectares, comprising forests, shrubs and other tree covered areas) and the rest corresponds mainly to
                         areas with agriculture, livestock and urban areas (29.7 %). With regard to forest ecosystems, 41%
                         corresponds to arid zones vegetation, (56.9 million hectares), 24% to temperate forests (33.5 million
                         hectares) and 23% to tropical forests (31.3 million hectares).
                         In terms of indigenous peoples, there are approximately 15.7 million indigenous peoples (14.9% of
                         the total population) that speak 62 distinct indigenous languages. These peoples have lived in Mexico
                         for thousands of years and developed highly complex societies that were fully functioning at the time
                         of contact with the Spanish in the 15th century. While this diversity makes a huge contribution to
                         Mexico’s natural and social wealth, it also makes the preparation of a national level policy such as
                         REDD+ extremely complex. In addition, Mexico has the distinction of having the vast majority of its
                         forests owned by local communities and indigenous peoples; between 65-80% are under community
                         management and ownership. This makes for a unique situation among FCPF countries and means
                         that most REDD+ activities will have to be implemented on a voluntary basis with co-benefits
                         directed at those who own and manage these forests.

                         The FCPF Readiness Preparation Grant is limited to analytical studies, capacity building, and
                         consultation processes at the national and sub-national levels. Activities to be financed by the FCPF
                         would not include any physical investment or the implementation of any REDD+ activities on the
                           ground but, instead, there is a particular emphasis on consultation, participation and implementation
                           of the activities outlined in the SESA workplan. In addition, the FCPF Readiness Preparation Grant
                           will also support strengthening the national feedback and grievance mechanism – Mecanismo de
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Atencion Ciudadana – at the subnational state level with a focus on the specific needs of indigenous
                           peoples, women and vulnerable groups. A small pilot in one of the Early Action Areas will be
                           financed by the Preparation Grant in order to test the new methodology.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The lead agency for REDD+ in Mexico is the National Forestry Commission (CONAFOR).
                           CONAFOR is also the implementing agency for the Forest Investment Program (FIP), the Forests
                           and Climate Change project and Component 2.1 of the GEF Coastal Watershed project. In addition
                           to successfully managing the World Bank safeguards for these projects, CONAFOR is also
                           developing a National Safeguard Information System for REDD+ (Sistema Nacional de Información
                           de Salvaguardas or SIS) and is piloting social and environmental standards in Jalisco and the
                           Yucatan Peninsula (both REDD+ Early Action Areas) through the REDD+ SES initiative. As a
                           result, CONAFOR has built considerable capacity both at the national and state level to manage
                           World Bank safeguards, the Cancun Agreements and UNREDD safeguards.They have a strong,
                           multi-sectorial team of safeguard specialists in each of the technical units as well as a safeguard
                           advisor in the International Affairs Unit (UAIFF). The FCPF Preparation Grant will further
                           strengthen this capacity by adding up to three specialized consultants to work on the consultation/
                           participation and dissemination activities. Additionally the FCPF grant will support CDI and
                           CONAFOR in the design, implementation and follow up of the consultation activities targeted to
                           indigenous peoples. The Bank will continue to provide on-going safeguard training and support.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Dora Patricia Andrade (C3PLA)
                           Kristyna Bishop (LCSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              As part of the readiness process, through the
                           BP 4.01                                              SESA, the country will assess key social and
                                                                                environmental risks and potential impacts
                                                                                associated with REDD+, and develop a
                                                                                management framework (ESMF) to give general
                                                                                guidelines to prevent and mitigate such risks
                                                                                and potential impacts, also will outline specific
                                                                                instruments that should be developed to
                                                                                implement the strategy in a sustainable manner,
                                                                                taking into account the results of consultations
                                                                                with stakeholders.CONAFOR in advance has
                                                                                been working to integrate into institutional
                                                                                operational processes, activities to mitigate risks
                                                                                and prevent possible environmental impacts.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes              The National Biodiversity Commission
                                                                                “Priority Areas” and “Gap Analysis” results will
                                                                                be mainstreamed early in the participatory
                                                                 planning process to ensure key policy and
                                                                 regulatory recommendations from the readiness
                                                                 phase will take into account and report on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 downstream impacts during the national REDD
                                                                 + strategy implementation. It is expected that if
                                                                 REDD+ strategies are successful, the impacts on
                                                                 critical forest habitats will be positive, however,
                                                                 the SESA will assess the possible risks
                                                                 associated with strategic options relating to
                                                                 forest habitats in protected areas and other
                                                                 sensitive habitats that are under private control
                                                                 or community. It is necessary to ensure that
                                                                 activities carried out in protected areas will be
                                                                 consistent with their management plans, and to
                                                                 integrate rules and guidelines from the
                                                                 preparatory phase to take into account possible
                                                                 future impacts during the implementation of the
                                                                 national strategy for REDD+ to ensure that
                                                                 critical habitats are not affected. This analysis
                                                                 should be worked in close coordination with the
                                                                 CONANP and the National Commission for the
                                                                 Knowledge and Use of Biodiversity
                                                                 (CONABIO).
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   The REDD+ Strategy will build largely on the
                                                                 experience of CONAFOR with the Community
                                                                 Forestry, Payment for Environmental Services
                                                                 (PES), and Sustainable Forest Management
                                                                 Certification programs. During the preparation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 phase, these and other forestry and rural
                                                                 development initiatives will be evaluated in
                                                                 order to ensure lessons are incorporated early in
                                                                 the design and key social and environmental
                                                                 risks and potential impacts associated with
                                                                 REDD+ are considered in the ESMF.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD   This policy may be triggered depending on the
                                                                 final scope of the National REDD+ Strategy and
                                                                 the results of the SESA process. If potential
                                                                 impacts are identified, mitigation measures will
                                                                 be included in the ESMF.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   This policy may be triggered depending on the
                         BP 4.11                                 final scope of the National REDD+ Strategy and
                                                                 the results of the SESA process. If potential
                                                                 impacts are identified, mitigation measures will
                                                                 be included in the ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   Within the first few months of the grant period,
                                                                 the ENAREDD+ Consultation Plan, which is a
                                                                condition of disbursement, will be prepared and
                                                                will outline the specific process for the free,
                                                                prior and informed consultation with indigenous
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                peoples as required by OP 4.10. This
                                                                consultation will be undertaken in collaboration
                                                                with the National Indigenous Peoples
                                                                Development Commission (CDI), National
                                                                Indigenous Language Institute (INALI) and the
                                                                key indigenous representative organizations
                                                                identified in the stakeholder map that will also
                                                                be updated and finalized. In addition, the SESA
                                                                workplan includes studies that will analyze the
                                                                potential impacts of the REDD+ strategic
                                                                options on indigenous peoples and these will be
                                                                used to inform the final version of the
                                                                ENAREDD+. The main product of the
                                                                consultation and SESA processes will be an
                                                                ESMF with a stand-alone Indigenous Peoples
                                                                Planning Framework (IPPF) or Indigenous
                                                                Peoples Plan as appropriate. Per the
                                                                requirements of OP 4.10 and the conditions of
                                                                this grant, a representative group of Indigenous
                                                                leaders will provide their broad community
                                                                support for the IPPF prior to approval. The IPPF
                                                                will be validated by a representative group of
                                                                indigenous leaders and will provide a clear
                                                                process for the development of specific
                                                                Indigenous Peoples Plans if required and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                process for attaining and documenting broad
                                                                community support at the regional/local level
                                                                for any future REDD+ actions financed by the
                                                                World Bank. In addition, section V.6 of the
                                                                third draft of the National REDD+ Strategy
                                                                (July 2013) refers to Mexico’s commitment to
                                                                the safeguards outlined in the Cancun
                                                                Agreement including compliance with the
                                                                principle of free, prior and informed consent for
                                                                indigenous peoples and rural communities for
                                                                the implementation of REDD+ related activities
                                                                in their territories.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   There will be no acquisition of land or
                         4.12                                   resettlement of persons and it is not anticipated
                                                                that use of natural resources in national
                                                                protected areas will be restricted by the strategic
                                                                options that are currently included in the
                                                                ENAREDD+. However, OP 4.12 has been
                                                                triggered as the strategic options have not been
                                                                                                                                 fully defined and they may change during the
                                                                                                                                 process of finalizing ENAREDD+. Duringthe
                                                                                                                                 SESA process, specific efforts will be made to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 review the potential risks and benefits of the
                                                                                                                                 strategic options identified in the ENAREDD+
                                                                                                                                 in relation to the use of natural resources in
                                                                                                                                 protected areas. If necessary, a stand-alone
                                                                                                                                 Process Framework will be prepared to
                                                                                                                                 accompany the ESMF in order to manage any
                                                                                                                                 negative impacts and to ensure that appropriate
                                                                                                                                 compensation or livelihood support for those
                                                                                                                                 affected is provided. It is anticipated that this
                                                                                                                                 Process Framework will be consistent with the
                                                                                                                                 Process Frameworks approved for other REDD
                                                                                                                                 +-related projects such as the Forests and
                                                                                                                                 Climate Change and Coastal Watersheds.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This policy is not triggered as the project will
                                                                                                                                 not support the construction or rehabilitation of
                                                                                                                                 dams nor will it support other investments
                                                                                                                                 which rely on the services of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            This policy is not triggered as REDD+ activities
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            will not be implemented in any international
                                                                                                                                 waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This policy is not triggered as REDD+ activities
                                 7.60                                                                                            will not be implemented in any disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Public Disclosure Copy




                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Mar-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             Given the highly specific nature of REDD+ Readiness, the Participant’s Committee of the FCPF
                             proposed using a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) as a way to address
                             social and environmental safeguards during readiness. SESA, as contemplated by the FCPF
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Participant’s Committee, combines analytical work and a participatory process to analyze the
                             strategic options being proposed in order to inform and generate inputs for the ENAREDD+. The
                             SESA process is characterized by a strong analysis of the drivers of deforestation and the strategic
                             options and a participatory approach to reviewing the potential environmental and social safeguard
                             issues that will need to be considered during the preparation of the ENAREDD+ and the REDD+
                             Readiness process.
                             Potential risks of the REDD strategic options will be widely discussed with relevant stakeholders
                             during consultations and also as part of the SESA process explained below. Special attention will
                             be given to Indigenous Peoples and other forest-dependent communities; lessons learnt from
                             ATREDD+ will inform the preparation of the subnational REDD+ strategies. In order to foster an
                             inclusive and informed consultation regarding the draft National REDD+ Strategy, particular
                             efforts will be made to ensure a wide dissemination of information on REDD+ at the local level
                             and to use the Programa de Fomento a la Organización Social, Planeación y Desarrollo Regional
                             Forestal (PROFOS) to channel culturally-relevant and user-friendly communication material on
                             REDD+ through the local organizations that work directly with forest communities and
                             indigenous peoples on a regular basis (4 per year) and ejidos.


                             Sub-Component 2d of the FCPF Readiness Preparation grant would support the SESA process and
                             finance the targeted consultation with key stakeholders and the analytical activities necessary to
                             identify the potential risks and benefits associated with future REDD+ investments under
                             ENAREDD+. The SESA process will be conducted in close coordination with the additional
                             analytical work on the REDD+ strategic options (Component 2) and the consultation process
                             outlined in the ENAREDD+ Consultation Plan (Component 1).
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The main product of the SESA process will be a comprehensive Environmental and Social
                             Management Framework (ESMF) as well as a stand-alone Indigenous Peoples Planning
                             Framework (IPPF) and/or a Process Framework (if required). The ESMF will provide guidance
                             regarding the management of environmental and social issues during the implementation of World
                             Bank financed REDD+ investments. An ESMF must be submitted as part of the R-Package in
                             order to be considered by the Carbon Fund.

                             A draft SESA workplan has been prepared by CONAFOR and will be finalized within the first six
                             months of the grant period. It reflects work already completed and underway as well as activities
                             focused on identifying the risks and benefits associated with the strategic options that have been
                             identified in the third version of ENAREDD+. The SESA workplan includes a summary of the
                             work completed on the drivers of deforestation and engagement with civil society since 2011,
                             concrete activities for the next 2 years of readiness preparation, institutional arrangements
                             including information regarding how the existing participation platforms will be involved in the
                             SESA process and the link between the SESA process and the preparation of the ENAREDD+ as
                             well as a budget and timeline for implementation. The implementation of the SESA workplan will
                             be managed by the CONAFOR safeguard advisor with support from the safeguard staff in each of
                             the technical units.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Carole Megevand

                         Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)   Date: 18-Mar-2014
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Victoria Stanley (SM)   Date: 20-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
