INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA5658
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Feb-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Nigeria                    Project ID:  P143842
Project Name: Nigeria Partnership for Education Project (P143 842)
Task Team       Olatunde Adetoyese Adekola
Leader(s):
Estimated       17-Mar-2015                Estimated    30-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Primary education (78%), Public administration- Education (11%), Sub-national
government administration (11%)
Theme(s):       Education for all (75%), Gender (25%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     100.00            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                    0.00
Education for All Supervising Entity                                      100.00
Total                                                                     100.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The PDO is to improve access and quality of basic education in selected States, with particular
attention to girls' participation.
3. Project Description
1.     The project will have three main components: 1) promoting school effectiveness and
Page 1 of 5


﻿improved learning outcomes; 2) increasing access to basic education for out-of-school children with
a focus on girls; and 3) strengthening planning and management systems including learning
assessment and capacity development.
Component 1: Promoting School Effectiveness and Improved Learning Outcomes (estimated total
cost: US$45.96 million) - by funding school grants for student and school materials and costs of
teacher development - in primary and pre-primary schools.
2. The main objective of this component is to improve the effectiveness of schools in enabling pupils
to enroll and stay in school, by promoting school-level resourcing and greater accountability for
results, providing increased resources for primary and pre-primary education and providing increased
resources for initiatives that target improved teaching and learning outcomes in reading, literacy and
numeracy especially in the early primary grades. Under this component, NIPEP will:
3. School Improvement Grants to Primary Schools to provide funds to support a decentralized
mechanism for funding non-salary expenditures related to improving school effectiveness, learning
and teaching by providing all eligible primary schools including integrated Islamiyya schools in the 5
NIPEP states with a School Improvement Grant (SIG). The grant will be channeled to school
accounts and will fund materials for students that are intended to aid access and retention of pupils in
school, e.g. school uniforms, book bags, student learning materials, classroom materials, etc.
4. School Improvement Grants to Pre-Primary Schools. This subcomponent will provide specific
funding support to benefit teaching and learning initiatives, materials and resources for pre-primary
education in the form of a grant to schools that already have established pre-primary classrooms,
including integrated Islamiyya schools. These pre-primary SIGs will also be channeled to school
accounts to be spent only on pre-primary education
5. Support to Teacher Professional Development. This subcomponent will provide funds to support
the costs of training and materials in state-led initiatives to develop the skills of primary teachers,
mentor teachers and head teachers in core areas of reading, literacy and mathematics - initiatives
which already have IDP technical support and which have government backing, including from
federal intervention funds (UBEC Teacher Professional Development funds) and states' own funds.
o        These funds will be channeled through the SUBEBs and LGEAs where appropriate.
Component 2: Increasing Access to Basic Education for Out-of-School Children with a Focus on
Girls (estimated total cost: US$43.0 million)
6. The objective of this component is to support the inclusion of girls in basic education and promote
gender equality.
7. Girls' Access to Primary Education. This sub-component will focus on demand-side activities to
encourage girls to attend school. It will provide cash as scholarship to primary caregivers to
encourage increased enrolment of girls in primary schools.
8. Scholarships for Female Teachers. This sub-component is designed to promote gender equality
and support the increase of the supply of qualified female teachers. It will fund female teachers to
upgrade their qualifications to the NCE.
Page 2 of 5


﻿9.     Community Mobilization and SBMC Training. This sub-component will provide capacity-
building and operational support to LGEA and school-level stakeholders (gender advisors, Social
Mobilization Officers (SMOs), SSOs, SBMCs, school staff) on issues affecting girls' retention and
ensure SIG-supported activities are designed with gender sensitivity. In addition, systematic
O
U         sensitization, outreach and community mapping will be conducted to encourage families to send their
girls to school.
Component 3: Strengthening Planning and Management Systems including learning assessment and
capacity development (estimated total cost: US$11.04 million)
10.    The objective of this component is to: (a) provide capacity building, operating costs, and
technical assistance to the Federal Ministry of Education, UBEC, the Nigeria Education Research
and Development Council (NERDC), State Ministry of Education, State Universal Basic Education
Board and LGEAs; (b) support robust monitoring and evaluation activities such as the States'
AESPR and the States' EMIS; and, (c) regularize annual measurement of student learning and
achievement by supporting the EGRA endline survey, the National Learning Assessment process,
and undertaking two impact evaluations of NIPEP interventions.
11.    This component will provide resources to each State and the Federal coordinating bodies to
fund key operational costs for managing, monitoring and supervising the NIPEP activities, including
enhanced activities at LGEA level through all the LGAs in each participating State. This includes: (i)
coordination activities and monitoring visits to the states from the federal level team; (ii)
implementation support and capacity building to ensure adequate q uality of implementation as well
as the sustainability of the interventions beyond the life of the project; (iii) grants to LGAs for
selected operational activities; and, (iv) provide support for independent third party monitoring to
validate and support analy sis of project performance and implementation.
12.    M&E. This sub-component will support the improvement of existing M&E systems at the
state level, namely (i) the states' Annual Education Performance Review (AESPR) and the (ii) states'
Education Management Information System (EMIS).
13.    Learning Assessments and Impact Evaluation. This sub-component will support existing
processes and provide technical assistance to build evidence on education outcomes and impact of
a        interventions, namely (i) the production of the EGRA endline in 2017 (baseline done in 2014); (ii)
the National Learning Assessments; and, (iii) Impact Evaluations (lEs).
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will focus on the states of - Kaduna, Kano, Katsina, Sokoto and Jigawa.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Alexandra C. Bezeredi (OPSOR)
Joseph Ese Akpokodje (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         While there is no construction involved in the project,
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               there is the need to prepare an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) which will provide
Page 3 of 5


﻿details on the processes and procedures for environmental
safeguards and proper review procedures for any minor
works or rehabilitation. This document will be disclosed
in the event that minor school repairs/maintenance will
need to be done through the proposed school grants under
the project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           The Project does not involve or have impacts on natural
a         4.04                                habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The project does not involve forests or forestry.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project does not involve pest management.
Physical Cultural       No           The Project will not affect physical cultural resources.
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           There are no indigenous people in the project area.
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No          The Project does not involve land acquisition leading to
OP/BP 4.12                           involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of access of
resources and livelihoods.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project does not involve dams.
4.37
Projects on International  No        N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No           N/A
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Page 4 of 5


﻿B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                03-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             06-Feb-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
a         "In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ ] No [ ] NA[ ]
report?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes[  ]  No[  ]  NA[  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Olatunde Adetoyese Adekola
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Meskerem Mulatu (PMGR)               Date: 23-Mar-2015
Manager:
Page 5 of 5


