                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA7287
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ukraine                           Project ID:    P132386
                            Project Name:      Second Urban Infrastructure Project (P132386)
                            Task Team          Sana Kh.H. Agha Al Nimer
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          29-Jan-2014                       Estimated   27-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSUW                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Water supply (35%), Sanitation (30%), Solid waste management (20%), Sub-
                                              national government administration (15%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (45%), Municipal governance and
                                              institution building (40%), Other public sector govern ance (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     350.00           Total Bank Financing:                 300.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     300.00
                              Clean Technology Fund                                                                      50.00
                              Total                                                                                     350.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to improve the quality, efficiency and sustainability of
                           water, wastewater, and solid waste services in selected cities in Ukraine. This will be achieved


                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         through rehabilitation and reconstruction of WSS infrastructure in at least eight cities. The project
                         will also support improvements in sustainable service delivery through the utilities performance
                         improvement program.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         To build on the on-going Urban Infrastructure Project (UIP) and the World Bank’s long-term
                         engagement in the municipal services sector, the Government of Ukraine has requested a follow up
                         project. The proposed Second Urban Infrastructure Project (UIP2) will support improvement in high-
                         priority municipal services, on a demand-driven basis, in selected cities. All participating cities have
                         prioritized investments aimed at improving water, wastewater and solid waste services. Using pre-
                         defined criteria, combined with demand for investment, the project will mostly focus on the water
                         supply and wastewater management. Given the Government’s request for support in developing new
                         approaches to solid waste, the project will also support a high-impact pilot investment in Kharkiv.

                         The project will be implemented in at least 8 cities of different sizes. The cities included under the
                         project are Kiev, Kharkov, Donetsk, Zhytomyr, Kirovograd, Ternopil, Kolomiya and Kramatorsk. A
                         further 2 cities (Cherkassy and Ivano-frankevsk) are currently under consideration and the scope may
                         be expanded to include these. The population of the 8 cities ranges from 60,000 to about three
                         million with the total population of the eight cities amounting to about six million.

                         The cities were selected competitively by the Ministry of Regional Development, Construction,
                         Housing and Communal Services (Minregion), the Ministry of Finance (MoF), the Ministry of
                         Economic Development and Trade (MoE), and the Utilities Regulator. The investment selection
                         followed a three stage approach. The first stage started in 2011-2012 with a nationwide call for
                         investment applications. In the second stage, the Minregion short-listed 16 cities. The selection
                         criteria included: (i) commitment to review and increase tariffs towards financial sustainability; (ii)
                         willingness to improve customer service and operational efficiency; (iii) high potential for
                         development impact; (iv) advanced readiness of subproject investment; and (v) the economic
                         viability of the proposed investment. In the final stage, nine applications (two from Kharkiv) were
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reviewed (with an additional two applications still under review) and approved by the MoF and the
                         Utilities Regulator. For the MoF, the main criteria for approval were the financial capacity of the
                         utilities, and ability to repay their loan commitments.

                         Component 1: Urban Infrastructure Improvement (estimated US$ 335 Million)
                         This component will finance the rehabilitation, reconstruction and upgrading of water, wastewater,
                         and solid waste facilities in at least eight cities. It is designed to increase the efficiency of
                         participating utilities, reduce their costs, enhance the reliability of services, and improve the quality
                         of water supply and wastewater services. The bulk of the investment program has been identified;
                         yet for some investments, technical and procurement details need to be finalized. The following
                         investments are envisaged:

                         • Rehabilitation and expansion of water systems;
                         • Rehabilitation and upgrading of the existing wastewater and sludge treatment facilities;
                         • Equipment for water quality testing laboratories;
                         • Equipment for operations and maintenance as well as spare parts;
                         • Preparation of detailed designs and tender documents and construction supervision; and
                         • Pilot projects in areas such as solid waste management.

                         CTF funding to complement WB loan. Ukraine is eligible for the Clean Technology Fund (CTF) and


                                                                        Page 2 of 9
                         has an approved Action Plan which refers to CTF co-financing of the UIP2 for $25-50 million. This
                         financing will address energy efficiency and reduce GHG emissions in landfills, water and
                         wastewater networks, and treatment plants. The combined funding will enable short-, medium, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         long-term investment planning by utilities and replace the current ad hoc emergency response. CTF
                         funding will include: (a) replacement of water and wastewater pumping equipment; (b) installation of
                         automated control systems; (c) sludge thickening equipment; and (d) landfill gas capture.

                         Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (estimated US$ 10 Million)
                         This component will support a range of institutional strengthening activities to be implemented at the
                         utility and central Government levels.

                         Sub-Component 2.1: Sub-national level agencies (utilities and municipalities). This subcomponent
                         will provide technical and financial assistance for strengthening the capacity and efficiency of
                         participating utilities to operate and manage their systems. A “Utilities Performance
                         Improvement” (UPI) study will be prepared that will examine the following: (i) the legal and
                         regulatory framework; (ii) the financial and operational constraints by utility; (iii) propose measures
                         to address these constraints; and (iv) provide support for implementation of these measures where
                         possible. In addition this sub-component will include enhancement of the utilities social
                         accountability mechanisms in the sector with a view to improving service standards and performance.
                         Sub-Component 2.2: National level agencies. This sub-component will include strategic support for
                         the water, wastewater, and solid waste sectors. It will strengthen policy dialogue and strategy
                         development for improved service delivery and regulation at the national level. The Minregion and
                         the Regulator have demonstrated a strong commitment to improving utility performance and service
                         delivery, and work has been initiated on topics such as tariff increases, alternative financing options,
                         sector governance, public awareness, benchmarking, and accountability mechanisms.

                         This sub-component will also include: (i) development of policies and inter-sectoral instruments for
                         water and wastewater management; (ii) development of policies for solid waste management to
                         improve municipal service delivery and strengthen governance. It will also finance detailed design
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and preparation of tender documents, as required. In addition, this sub-component will support the
                         Regulator in improving the quality and availability of utility performance data (jointly with the
                         Danube Water Program), improving tariff setting methodologies, and subsidy and other related
                         financial policies.

                         Component 3: Project Management and Supervision (estimated US$5 Million)
                         This component will support project management and implementation at the central and regional
                         levels in the targeted cities. Support will include: training, staffing, and monitoring and evaluation. It
                         will also cover feasibility studies for potential subprojects as well as the annual project financial and
                         technical audits of district vodokanals.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The activities defined under UIP2 will be implemented in Kiev, Kharkov, Donetsk, Zhytomyr,
                         Ternopil, Kirovograd, Kolomiya, and Kramatorsk. Physical impacts of interventions in water supply
                         and sanitation sector will include rehabilitation of water supply and waste water treatment networks/
                         systems and will be almost entirely rehabilitation of existing schemes, with only the possibility of
                         minor extensions in some locations, e.g. to reach a few recently constructed buildings. Pilot solid
                         waste management will be implemented in Kharkov oblast. Potential impacts under Solid Waste
                         Management component of the project were identified during project preparation.


                                                                        Page 3 of 9
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexei Slenzak (ECSEN)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Klavdiya Maksymenko (ECSSO)

                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes           Environmental assessment for sub-projects in
                         BP 4.01                                         specific municipalities will be done as part of
                                                                         preparation of design documentation.
                                                                         Environmental impacts of works in water supply
                                                                         and sanitation sector will be mitigated by good
                                                                         construction and housekeeping practices
                                                                         prescribed by ESMF. A designated site-specific
                                                                         ESMP was prepared for SWM sub-project to
                                                                         reflect the impacts which may be caused by
                                                                         interventions in SWM sector. Potential
                                                                         environmental impacts and proposed mitigation
                                                                         measures are outlined in these safeguard
                                                                         documents. The ESMF and ESMP have been
                                                                         disclosed and public consultations organized by
                                                                         the client.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The policy on Physical Cultural Resources is
                         BP 4.11                                         triggered. However, it is not known yet whether
                                                                         which of the sub-projects will affect physical
                                                                         cultural resources at specific locations. In case the
                                                                         sub-project may potentially affect physical
                                                                         cultural resources, the sub-project proponent/
                                                                         beneficiary jointly with the CPIU will prepare the
                                                                         Action Plan for Physical Cultural Resources
                                                                         (APPCR) and clear it with the local cultural
                                                                         authority. The plan should be based on the
                                                                         provisions of the Law of Ukraine “On Cultural
                                                                         Heritage” No. 1805-III from 08.06.2000. The
                                                                         APPCR should become an integral part of site-
                                                                         specific ESMPs for sub-projects where registered
                                                                         buildings or/and other historic and cultural sites
                                                                         were identified as potentially affected by the sub-
                                                                         projects.
                                                                         Standard chance finds procedures will be
                                                                         included in works contracts. The utilities will
                                                                         ensure that an appropriate clause is included in


                                                                 Page 4 of 9
                                                                        Sub-borrower loan agreement obligating the Sub-
                                                                        borrower to exercise due diligence in
                                                                        implementing the mitigation, monitoring and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        reporting measures specified in the ESMP and in
                                                                        the event of chance finds.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           Most of the project sites did not manifest land
                         4.12                                           acquisition during preparation. The technical
                                                                        design was not finalized for some cities during
                                                                        project preparation and exact footprint of the
                                                                        project was not finally defined by appraisal.
                                                                        Previous experience of the Bank suggests that
                                                                        these types of projects typically have minor issues
                                                                        with temporary economic displacement of
                                                                        unregistered land users, therefore an RPF was
                                                                        prepared as part of the Environmental and Social
                                                                        Management Framework (ESMF) and was duly
                                                                        disclosed as a separate document in every
                                                                        participating municipality on XX January 2014.
                                                                        The need for resettlement will be evident at later
                                                                        stages of project design upon finalization of the
                                                                        site specific technical designs. The Social
                                                                        screening will be done by safeguards specialist of
                                                                        the CPMU for each of the sites to figure out
                                                                        whether OP/BP4.12 is triggered. In case the
                                                                        policy is triggered the borrower will prepare
                                                                        abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs),
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        consultations with project affected persons
                                                                        (PAPs) will be held and mitigation measures
                                                                        implemented prior to start of project works.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No

                         Projects on International        Yes           The water supply and wastewater systems that
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                           will be rehabilitated under the project draw water
                                                                        from rivers that are international waterways
                                                                        shared by Ukraine with neighbouring Russia,
                                                                        Moldova and Romania. Potential changes in
                                                                        water flow or deterioration in waterquality during
                                                                        the construction works will be limited in scope
                                                                        and mitigated through implementation of the site-
                                                                        specific ESMPs. As there will be no increase in
                                                                        water abstraction by water supply utilities, project
                                                                        interventions are not expected to adversely affect
                                                                        the quality or quantity of water flows to upstream
                                                                        or downstream riparian states. The rehabilitation



                                                                Page 5 of 9
                                                                                 and modernization of infrastructure, optimization
                                                                                 of water supply and wastewater networks and
                                                                                 improvements in overall management of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 utilities should result in an increase in system
                                                                                 efficiency, thereby generating water savings and
                                                                                 providing reliable water supply to the customers.
                                                                                 Considering all this, the project falls under the
                                                                                 exception to the notification requirement
                                                                                 contained in the safeguard policy, approved by
                                                                                 the Vice President for Europe and Central Asia
                                                                                 Region for UIP-1. The task team will submit a
                                                                                 request for a waiver stating that this also applies
                                                                                 to the interventions under the proposed project.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is expected to generate environmental benefits associated with energy efficiency,
                              cleaner technologies of drinking water preparation and waste water treatment, and waste
                              management. At the same time there are potential environmental impacts which are typical for
                              small- and medium-scale construction: demolition of old and construction of new infrastructure/
                              buildings/facilities. Also, potential environmental impacts are associated with construction of new
                              municipal solid waste landfill and handling waste water sludge generated by waste water treatment
                              plants involved in the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              There are about 10 (in winter) to 20 (in warmer periods of the year) waste pickers that draw an
                              irregular income from the existing landfill. Most of them are coming from surrounding
                              settlements. They operate in an unsafe environment and are heavily dependent on weather
                              conditions to draw their income. The administration of the landfill is committed to offer each of
                              them a safe full time or part-time job once the waste sorting facility being built under UIP2
                              becomes operational. RPF and RAPs will be duly disclosed and public consultations with local
                              communities organized by the client.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The project will produce environmental benefits in the cities where investments in wastewater and
                              sludge treatment facilities are made through rehabilitation and upgrade of systems. These
                              environmental benefits will be generated by the reduction of water abstraction from aquifers,
                              decreased pollution loads, modern technologies of drinking water preparation and waste water
                              treatment, and improved municipal, solid waste management. Environmental benefits will be also
                              generated through increased energy efficiency of pumping stations.
                              Pilot solid waste management sub-project in Kharkiv will apply innovative technology to prepare
                              the landfill site and more effectively use landfill space, promote recycling, and generate electricity
                              from collected landfill gas, thereby improving environmental situation and enhancing quality and
                              efficiency of services.


                                                                         Page 6 of 9
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           In water supply and waste water treatment sub-projects alternatives (if applicable) will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           discussed during preparation of site-specific design documentation and ESMPs. For Solid Waste
                           Management sub-project in Kharkiv an analysis of both technological a alternatives was
                           undertaken during the design stage and preparation of the ESMP. The discussion of alternatives is
                           contained in the design documentation and ESMP.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Overall responsibility for project implementation lies with the Ministry of Regional Development
                           (Minregion) which houses a central project management unit (CPMU) to oversee the project. The
                           CPMU for UIP2 is staffed with personnel involved in the implementation of the first UIP and have
                           prior successful experience with the Bank supported projects. The designated safeguard specialist
                           in the CPMU will closely monitor the sub-projects in terms of overall compliance of the project
                           with environmental and social safeguard requirements, including any temporary economic
                           displacement caused by the sub-projects. Regional project management units (RPMU) will be
                           established in eight project cities and will be responsible for activities under Component 1. This
                           will include among others safeguards and monitoring and reporting. The RPMUs were trained in
                           Bank Safeguards policies and were also provided guidance on monitoring for compliance with
                           them. RPMUs will alert CPMU and the Bank in case of any displacement caused by project
                           works. The Safeguards specialist in CPMU will monitor the implementation of the ESMF, ESMP
                           (SWM), site-specific ESMPs (WS/WWT), and RPF as part of regular monitoring activities. The
                           Bank will monitor compliance with safeguards in the framework of its supervision missions.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           At all subproject sites, public consultations on ESMF, ESMP (SWM) and RPF will be held. Prior
                           advertisement of the meeting in the local press, and by posting information on the theme, time, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           place of the meeting, will be announced. ESMF, ESMP (SWM), and RPFas well as the
                           information on the subprojects will be placed on the websites of the utilities. In every place the
                           public consultation will start with a presentation by the RPMU on the current state of affairs and
                           the subproject’s main activities and expected results, environmental and social impacts and
                           mitigation measures as related to the specific sub-project locality. The minutes of the public
                           consultations for every locality will contain copies of announcements, presentations made,
                           summary of comments received, and list of participants. Proposals from interested stakeholders
                           will be taken into account in final versions of the ESMF, ESMP (SWM), and RPF and minutes of
                           the public consultations will be attached to the final versions of these documents and disclosed
                           publically. A training session was conducted to enhance the capacity of the RPMUs in holding
                           meaningful public consultations.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                        30-Dec-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                     24-Jan-2014
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ukraine                                                               15-Jan-2014
                           Comments: Kharkiv municipality and utility sites
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           30-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        24-Jan-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ukraine                                                               20-Jan-2014
                           Comments: Utilities and Minregion website
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         The policy on Physical Cultural Resources is triggered. The issue of Physical Cultural Resources
                         was addressed in the ESMF. However, it is not known yet whether which of the sub-projects will
                         affect physical cultural resources at specific locations. In case the sub-project may potentially affect
                         physical cultural resources, the sub-project proponent/beneficiary jointly with the CPIU will prepare
                         the Action Plan for Physical Cultural Resources (APPCR) and clear it with the local cultural
                         authority. The plan should be based on the provisions of the Law of Ukraine “On Cultural Heritage”
                         No. 1805-III from 08.06.2000. The APPCR should become an integral part of site-specific ESMPs
                         for sub-projects where registered buildings or/and other historic and cultural sites were identified as
                         potentially affected by the sub-projects.
                         Standard chance finds procedures will be included in works contracts. The utilities will ensure that
                         an appropriate clause is included in Sub-borrower loan agreement obligating the Sub-borrower to
                         exercise due diligence in implementing the mitigation, monitoring and reporting measures specified
                         in the ESMP and in the event of chance finds.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?



                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Sana Kh.H. Agha Al Nimer
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                               Date: 20-Jan-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Sumila Gulyani (SM)                               Date: 30-Jan-2014




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
