                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC6008

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Mexico                           Project ID:       P147212
                            Project Name:       MX Social Protection System (P147212)
                            Task Team           Francesca Lamanna
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           17-Jul-2014                      Estimated         18-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      LCSHS-DPT                        Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Nutrition and food security (20%), Other human development (20%), Social
                                                safety nets (60%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:   6300.00                      Total Bank Financing:         300.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      6000.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                          300.00
                              Total                                                                         6300.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project would support the Government of Mexico’s effort to strengthen its social
                           protection system to support the poor by improving the effectiveness and articulation of the flagship
                           social assistance program Oportunidades with other social and selected productive programs. Within
                           this broader goal the Project would have the following development objectives: (i) increase access to
                           health, nutrition and education of Oportunidades beneficiaries by promoting compliance with co-
                           responsibilities; (ii) increase access of Oportunidades beneficiaries to selected social and productive
                         programs to improve employability and productive opportunities for beneficiaries; and (iii) promote
                         greater harmonization of social protection programs through the establishment of a national unified
                         beneficiary registry and a social information system.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed Project would have three components.

                         Component 1, Support to the Financing of the Cash Grants in Oportunidades, will finance the bi-
                         monthly cash payments to Oportunidades beneficiaries for selected cash grants to be defined during
                         Project preparation (i.e. amongst those for early childhood development, nutrition, education
                         transition and completion, and enrollment in technical secondary schools). As was the case under the
                         previous operation in support of Oportunidades, in order to simplify the administration of external
                         financing from both the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB) and the World Bank, a
                         geographical division might be adopted. Therefore, under the Project, the Program would submit for
                         disbursement payments made to beneficiary families and individuals who comply with conditions
                         and live in selected states. The criteria for this selection will be decided during preparation.

                         Component 2, Improving Effectiveness of Oportunidades, aims at supporting the improvement of
                         program effectiveness and its articulation with the supply of other social and productive services.
                         The component would finance activities in three core areas:
                         (i)       Further strengthening and improving the operationalization of the Program,
                         (ii) Strengthening the coordination and articulation with other programs,
                         (iii) Supporting the monitoring and evaluation of the Program

                         Sub-component 2.1. Operational Improvements. The first sub-component will support further
                         improvements in the operations of Oportunidades, including in areas of human resources capacity at
                         all levels and the implementation of the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP). More specifically, this
                         component will finance consulting services to assess operations and provide recommendations for
                         revision and adaptation of Oportunidades staff curriculum and training for personnel. At the local
Public Disclosure Copy




                         level, TA will support activities to strengthen Oportunidades staff capacity to provide additional
                         support and guidance to beneficiaries regarding access to different programs and follow up to
                         families once referrals have been made, as part of the strengthening of Oportunidades’ articulation
                         with other programs, as described in sub-component 2.2. All of these activities aim to ensure higher
                         quality and more effective support for Oportunidades families. The sub-component will also finance
                         activities related to ensuring better inclusion of indigenous people in the program by financing
                         consultancy services required to support the implementation of the Indigenous Peoples Plan.

                         Sub-component 2.2. Strengthening of coordination and program articulation. The second sub-
                         component will support activities that will improve access to key complementary programs for
                         Oportunidades beneficiaries, including health, education, employment, and productive services.
                         More specifically, under this sub-component technical assistance would be provided to: (i) support
                         the establishment of a framework for collaboration between Oportunidades and selected
                         complementary social and productive programs that will be defined during preparation, (ii) improve
                         the pertinence of these other programs for the Oportunidades beneficiaries by making programs more
                         relevant (adjusting program rules as appropriate and improving information available to beneficiaries
                         to access these programs), and (iii) support the diagnosis of the requirements to facilitate better
                         coordination with other social programs (for example the development of clearly defined standards
                         for sharing data, need for changes in the operating rules of various programs, etc.), including the
                         piloting of these coordination/articulation mechanisms.
                           Sub-component 2.3. Monitoring and Evaluation. This sub-component will finance the strengthening
                           of the monitoring and evaluation of the Program, including impact and process evaluations as
Public Disclosure Copy




                           identified in the evaluation agenda of Oportunidades. In particular, it will also support the evaluation
                           of pilots identified under sub-component 2.2.

                           Component 3. Towards an Integrated Social Protection System. This component will strengthen the
                           capacity of the Ministry of Social Development (SEDESOL) and finance measures that will promote
                           the harmonization of social programs it manages, of which the largest is Oportunidades. More
                           specifically this component will finance the development of a beneficiary registry and a social
                           information system which will capture data on beneficiaries (and potential beneficiaries) and
                           programs received, including Oportunidades, as the cornerstone of an integrated social protection
                           system that will facilitate the harmonization of social protection programs. This component will also
                           finance studies on the systematization of best practices and experiences in implementing programs,
                           and ensuring effective integrated support for the poor and most vulnerable population.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Nationwide.

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Oportunidades has over 15 years of experience operating the conditional cash transfer program, with
                           good operational and impact results. The management information and monitoring systems are
                           strong and continue to be strengthened. The program has sufficient institutional capacity for the
                           indigenous safeguards policy. During the implementation of the World Bank financed Project
                           Support to Oportunidades the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) was successfully implemented and a
                           number of key actions were undertaken to benefit inclusion and better quality support for indigenous
                           people in the Program. Oportunidades has identified efforts to improve the functioning of the
                           program in indigenous communities as a priority area to be supported under the proposed Project. An
Public Disclosure Copy




                           institutional assessment of this capacity would be carried out during preparation to corroborate actual
                           capacity and propose an institutional strengthening program as necessary.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Martin Henry Lenihan (LCSSO)
                           Peter F. B. A. Lafere (LCSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No               This policy is not triggered as project activities
                           BP 4.01                                               are not expected to cause any environmental
                                                                                 impacts.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               This policy is not triggered as project activities
                                                                                 are not expected to cause any impact on natural
                                                                                 habits.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No               This policy is not triggered given that project
                                                                                 activities will not impact the welfare of forests
                                                                                 nor impact forest dependent communities.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    This policy is not triggered since the project will
                                                                 not finance the purchase or significant use of
                                                                 pesticides.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    This policy is not triggered given that project
                         BP 4.11                                 activities are not expected to impact physical
                                                                 cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   This policy is triggered given that Indigenous
                                                                 Peoples are present in the project’s area of
                                                                 influence and could benefit from targeted
                                                                 activities in the project. It is expected that the
                                                                 proposed Project will support the needed efforts
                                                                 to strengthen program performance in states
                                                                 where indigenous people are present. A number
                                                                 of key activities will be identified during
                                                                 preparation and implemented throughout the
                                                                 Project.
                                                                  As part of the Support to Oportunidades Project
                                                                 (2008) and its additional financing (2010) an
                                                                 Indigenous People’s Plan (IPP) to support
                                                                 implementation under the Project was prepared,
                                                                 and IPP implementation was supervised
                                                                 throughout the Project. Building on this
                                                                 experience, the World Bank team will assess the
                                                                 strengths and weaknesses of Oportunidades
                                                                 performance in states with indigenous
                                                                 population, and will support the Government in
                                                                 updating the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 guide implementation under the proposed new
                                                                 operation. During preparation, the World Bank
                                                                 team will agree with the Government on a work
                                                                 program for the development of the IPP. The
                                                                 consultation process for this plan, will involve
                                                                 free, prior and informed consultations with the
                                                                 Consultative Council of the National
                                                                 Commission for the Development of Indigenous
                                                                 People, which is constituted by representatives
                                                                 of different indigenous groups throughout
                                                                 Mexico. In addition to updating the IPP to
                                                                 reflect any lessons learned from its
                                                                 implementation thus far, the plan will also
                                                                 analyze the rules to access and benefit from
                                                                 other programs defined under Sub-Component
                                                                 2.2 of project, any barriers to access, as well as
                                                                 recommendations to overcome these barriers.
                                                                 The plan will include measures to ensure these
                                                                 programs are culturally appropriate and
                                                                                                                                 indigenous peoples can reap the benefits from
                                                                                                                                 these programs.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            This policy is not triggered as the project is not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 4.12                                                                                            expected to cause any impacts covered under
                                                                                                                                 the involuntary resettlement policy.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This policy is not triggered given that the
                                                                                                                                 Project will not finance the construction of dams
                                                                                                                                 nor will rely on the operations of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            This policy is not triggered since the project
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            does not affect international waterways as
                                                                                                                                 defined by the policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This policy is not triggered as the Project will
                                 7.60                                                                                            not finance activities in disputed areas as
                                                                                                                                 defined by the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 14-Mar-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      It is anticipated that the update of the indigenous peoples plan, and consultations with the
                                      consultative council for indigenous people, will be completed by the end of April 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Francesca Lamanna

                                 Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                                                Date: 19-Feb-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mansoora Rashid (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 04-Jun-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
