                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6497
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Lesotho                           Project ID:    P143197
                            Project Name:      LS-PFM Reform Support Project (P143197)
                            Task Team          Gert Johannes Alwyn Van D
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          03-Dec-2013                       Estimated   06-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTME                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Central government administration (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          6.09                Total Bank Financing:       5.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.59
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               5.50
                              Total                                                                                     6.09
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to improve the quality and timeliness of public financial
                           management information. This project will support the Government’s PFM Reform Action Plan
                           (PFMRAP) to improve budget execution.
                            3. Project Description
                           A: PROJECT COMPONENTS

                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         The Project will be implemented through 3 distinct components, related sub-components and core
                         activities as defined below:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Support for improving the stability and reliability of existing IFMIS platform (IDA
                         US$ 0.752m; GoL US$ 0.130m)

                         1. Objective: The objective of this component is to improve the stability, performance and reliability
                         of the existing IFMIS platform. Government plans to go-live with an upgrade of its existing software
                         on 1 April 2015, and the existing IFMIS platform will need to be operationally and technically sound
                         through to the closing of FY15 (which could be as late as December 2015).

                         2. Current situation: Most of the operational issues experienced today stem from the rapid
                         deployment of IFMIS in April 2009, coupled with a decision by the GoL to allow more than 700
                         untrained users access to the system whilst key staff to operate and maintain the system was not
                         ready and / or departed shortly after go-live. The IFMIS implementation was initiated in November
                         2007, through a turn-key contract (EUR 7.3 million, including a 3-year warranty period - funded by
                         the EU) with the authorized supplier of the selected software in Africa. The system implementation
                         was completed in a relatively short time (16 months), however, a number of contract management
                         and system support challenges emerged afterwards. For instance, despite training of 16 Application,
                         16 Technical and 16 Help Desk support personnel, the numerous problems and frustrations after go-
                         live and a weak retention strategy have resulted in almost all of these team members leaving within a
                         short time after system go-live.

                         3. A recent evaluation of the IFMIS and World Bank staff assessment during project preparation
                         confirm that several key problems with the configuration and operation of the IFMIS remain to be
                         addressed. These include amongst others: (i) severe Wide Area Network (WAN) downtime; (ii)
                         inadequate system performance; (iii) non-support of payment processing by an Electronic Funds
                         Transfer (EFT) system; (iv) revenue receipting by cashiers of MDAs not performed on the IFMIS;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (v) district spending units of MDAs are not connected to the IFMIS, but supported through Sub-
                         accountancies connected to the IFMIS with cumbersome payment processes through commercial
                         bank accounts; (vi) time-consuming bank reconciliation processes, which is the result of failure to
                         originate some transactions directly in the IFMIS and data capture errors by the Central Bank of
                         Lesotho (CBL); (vii) non-existent help desk function; (viii) lack of month-end closing procedures for
                         the IFMIS resulting in inconsistency of financial information in reports; (ix) bypass of commitment
                         controls in the IFMIS. The resolution of these problems have informed the design of the project
                         components and sequencing of activities as further described below.

                         4. In addition, there are several adaptive challenges and policy decisions which require high level
                         attention from the Government, to ensure the successful resolution of the current problems. For
                         example, IFMIS roles and responsibilities must be clearly defined; the Office of the Accountant-
                         General and the broader Ministry of Finance (MoF) management do not routinely rely on IFMIS to
                         support their core functions and decision making, and several others. In order to lay a proper
                         foundation for a stable and effective IFMIS going forward these shortcomings should be addressed
                         urgently and have been incorporated in the design of the project components and sequencing of
                         activities as described below.

                         5. Activities: The project will support the implementation of the following key activities in order to
                         address existing technical and operational challenges, and lay a solid foundation for the expansion

                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         and modernization of IFMIS platform through Component 2:

                         a) Activity 1.1 - Improvement of existing wide-area network connectivity: A joint effort by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IFMIS Information and Communication Technology (ICT) team at the MoF and that of Ministry of
                         Communications Science and Technology (MCST) has been initiated. However, further support is
                         needed for the rapid resolution of existing network issues affecting the IFMIS operations;
                         b) Activity 1.2 - Improvement of primary and backup IFMIS data centers: This will include
                         immediate server and UPS upgrades. The Ministry of Finance will contribute to this activity by
                         undertaking other urgent ICT infrastructure improvements, including the electrical works, upgrade of
                         generators and improvement of the cooling systems;
                         c)         Activity 1.3 - Activation of the EFT interface with the CBL: This activity is expected to
                         support activation of the IFMIS EFT interface with the CBL;
                         d) Activity 1.4 –Cleaning IFMIS databases and improving accounting controls: This activity will
                         support the correction/cleaning of database records in the current IFMIS system and transfer of
                         reliable opening balances to the upgraded version of the existing software. In addition, technical
                         assistance will be provided to the Office of the Accountant-general to strengthen accounting controls
                         such as reconciliations.

                         6. In addition and through component 3, the project will support actions to be undertaken by the
                         MoF to improve the reliability and ensure the effective use of IFMIS in daily operations. The
                         following priority actions are recommended to facilitate more effective use of IFMIS for daily
                         operations and reporting:

                         a)         Ensure daily recording of all revenue in IFMIS by connecting cashiers of line ministries to
                         the existing IFMIS.
                         b) Enforce monthly closing of IFMIS (for example, 15 days after month-end) for data capture,
                         monitor data quality, provide training support and enforce basic accounting disciplines.
                         c)        Enforce year-end closing of IFMS for data capture (for example, 30 days after year-end).
                         d) Re-affirm the directive to highlight the requirements for using IFMIS on a daily basis in all line
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ministries and sub-accountancies.
                         e)         Strengthen the MoF Application Support team with additional staff, training, equipment
                         and office space.
                         f)         Activate the issue tracking portal of the software supplier to record all IFMIS technical and
                         functional issues and record the solutions promptly.
                         g) Complete the reorganization of the MoF ICT Department and define the roles and responsibilities
                         of all technical specialists.

                         Component 2: Support for expansion and modernization of IFMIS platform (IDA US$ 3.913m; GoL
                         US$ 0.462m)

                         7. Objective: The objective of this component is to upgrade, configure and extend the use of the
                         existing IFMIS software to support a simplified business architecture from a stable and well
                         performing technology platform.

                         8. Current situation: The MoF is of the view that the existing IFMIS software is sound and relevant
                         to the perceived needs of Lesotho. An upgrade of its existing IFMIS software, including to a web-
                         based architecture, is required as the current version will no longer be maintained. This upgrade will
                         assist to resolve some of the configuration issues such as separate databases, budget preparation,
                         commitment control, cash management, and support for Treasury Single Account (TSA) operations.

                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                         In addition, the implementation of the current IFMIS is bedeviled by an overly complex architecture
                         and process design, capacity weakness in the management of the Treasury function, control
                         weaknesses and a general lack of clarity of and compliance with rules and regulations governing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         financial management practices (including timeliness of data collection and fiscal reporting).

                         9. Activities: In order to address these challenges, the project will finance the following activities:

                         a) Activity 2.1 - IT Audit of the IFMIS platform: A technical and operational assessment (IT Audit)
                         of existing IFMIS software and data centers will be completed through this activity, before any
                         system upgrade or modernization effort. The IT Audit is also expected to assist the GoL to update the
                         necessary system design documentation and provide the necessary justification for the hardware to
                         be procured.
                         b) Activity 2.2 - PFM business process re-engineering: Apart from the process and architecture
                         issues already identified and addressed in Component 1, a more detailed business process review
                         needs to be completed rapidly in order to clarify and implement possible further improvements and
                         simplifications before the IFMIS upgrade / modernization;
                         c)         Activity 2.3 - Expansion and modernization of the IFMIS platform: This activity is
                         expected to enhance the functional support by the IFMIS software (e.g., improved commitment
                         management and budget execution, TSA operations, better cash management, etc.), modernize the
                         technical architecture (transition to web-based application through an upgrade of the existing
                         software), enhance the relevant ICT infrastructure and extend the IFMIS to all Ministry offices in
                         Districts and District Councils (estimated at 122 offices) with the necessary capacity building. The
                         Ministry of Finance will contribute to this activity by procuring the necessary servers to support the
                         upgraded version of the existing software.

                         10. In addition, the project will support MoF to introduce the following policy and architecture
                         changes before or during the expansion and modernization of IFMIS to simplify processing and
                         prevent operational IFMIS problems. The key changes to the IFMIS and TSA architectures include
                         the following -
Public Disclosure Copy




                         a) Several key policy decisions should be made in consultation with relevant stakeholders on: (i)
                         transition to centralized TSA operation benefiting from an interface with the CBL systems for
                         electronic payments and reconciliation of accounts (which will require all staff, suppliers and
                         beneficiaries transacting with government to open bank accounts); (ii) supporting the operations of
                         District Councils (DCs) through IFMIS web portal extensions; (iii) supporting the operations of
                         district spending units of line ministries, and cashier’s functions through IFMIS web portal
                         extensions; and (iv) initiating the establishment of digital signature infrastructure (benefiting from
                         ongoing e-Government initiatives of the MCST).
                         b) One general ledger should be created for the Consolidated Fund and all line ministries operating
                         against the TSA. This will also require district spending units of line ministries to be connected to the
                         central IFMIS, operating against the TSA (using EFTs) and no longer through commercial bank
                         accounts managed by the sub-accountancies. This will also require a review of the Chart of
                         Accounts.
                         c)         Only one District Council (Maseru) currently uses a commercial accounting package for
                         financial control, accounting and reporting. The other nine run manual systems, and a recent
                         diagnostic assessment of decentralization in Lesotho found that “Only limited audits of local
                         Authorities have been undertaken since 2005. The Auditor General explained that only 3 district
                         councils namely Botha Bothe, Mafeteng and Mohale Hoek have had their accounts audited over the
                         period. In all cases, the accounts returned qualified opinions pointing to significant weaknesses in

                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                         their financial management systems”. A key challenge therefore is the absence of reliable and timely
                         financial statements. To support their obligations under the Public Financial Management and
                         Accountability Act, 2011, District Councils urgently require access to the IFMIS to bring this
Public Disclosure Copy




                         situation under control. From the dimensions of cash flow management, capacity, cost effectiveness
                         and maintaining data integrity, they are to be connected to the central IFMIS, preferably as cost
                         centers under the Ministry of Local Government and Chieftainship (MLGC) and also operating
                         against the TSA. It is also proposed that the current sub-accountancies in districts are utilized to
                         support the DCs, to support their financial management functions.
                         d) The Budget Department must be equipped to use the Active Planner module for the FY16 budget
                         preparation process. This will eliminate additional work and controls to ensure reliable transfer to
                         and maintenance of the budget in the IMFIS.

                         Component 3: Support for change management, training and project implementation (IDA US$
                         0.834m)

                         11. Objective: The objective of this component is to implement the project successfully with
                         sustainable capacity to run the IFMIS, facilitating full ownership by key project stakeholders, though
                         consultative communication, shared understanding and stakeholder involvement. Appropriate
                         technical assistance will be provided to facilitate change management and capacity building as
                         required for – the Office of the Accountant-general, the core IFMIS team, the PFM staff of line
                         ministries who depend on the IFMIS for the execution of their functions, Program Managers and
                         Chief Accounting Officers, the Auditor-general, Cabinet, the Public Accounts Committee, the
                         Central Bank, development partners and citizens and suppliers who transact with the Government.

                         12. Current situation: Given the poor IFMIS implementation record thus far, high levels of
                         frustration and distrust in the system exist. These challenges are largely driven by the several
                         adaptive problems that now require attention at the highest levels in Government to ensure their
                         resolution and in turn, the effective implementation of the PFMRAP and its associated components.
                         These specifically relate to such issues as the: (i) definition and clarification of IFMIS roles and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         responsibilities; (ii) development of capacity and retention strategy for sustainability of IFMIS
                         operations and maintenance; (iii) routine reliance on IFMIS as a management tool – both within the
                         Office of the Accountant-General and broader MoF – rather than just an accounting system; (iv)
                         broad consultations with stakeholders across and within MDAs on key PFM policy decisions;
                         amongst others.

                         13. Activities: This component will implement several adaptive initiatives to ensure sustainable
                         capacity to run the system, stakeholder backing /enforcement and sound project implementation. Key
                         activities include the following:

                         a)        Activity 3.1 - Support for change management and training. This will include –
                         (i)      Provision of IFMIS operations and maintenance training/capacity development to the core
                         IFMIS team (IFMIS custodian, super users, administrators, application support team, ICT support
                         team, training team, etc.).
                         (ii) Support to the MoF in the development of the requisite capacity and skills amongst the IFMIS
                         stakeholders; the assignment of IFMIS training function to the Lesotho Centre for Accounting
                         Studies (CAS); and strengthening the capacity and training capability of the Application Support
                         team to deliver the necessary accounting and systems training to end users on a sustainable basis,
                         with the support from CAS as needed.
                         (iii) User database clean-up to ensure that only valid users remain registered for access to the IFMIS

                                                                      Page 5 of 8
                         software. A training program will be structured to deliver the right training at the right time. A core
                         training team will be equipped in all respects to carry out training of end users and managers.
                         (iv) Full PFM and relevant IFMIS training for management of Ministries and DCs, Cabinet and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Public Accounts Committee will also be delivered - this should include the full PFM cycle and how
                         the IFMIS supports the objectives of fiscal discipline, strategic allocation of resources, efficient
                         service delivery and financial accountability.
                         (v) Technical Assistance to the Government for the development and implementation of a retention
                         and succession plan for the core IFMIS team. In particular, assistance will be provided to develop the
                         skill and competency profiles for all functions required to support the continued operation and
                         maintenance of the IFMIS, together with a training plan for staff in post. Assistance will also be
                         provided to explore options for GoL to appoint key IFMIS staff on performance contracts as a means
                         to support better retention of staff in such positions.

                         b) Activity 3.2 - Support for project implementation. This activity will support the project
                         implementation costs, including – (i) technical assistance to set-up and run the project in IFMIS, and
                         financial management and procurement assistance; (ii) basic office and IT equipment for the core
                         IFMIS team; (iii) technical assistance to supplement capacity gaps in the core IFMIS team; (iii)
                         monitoring and evaluation, and reporting progress on all components.

                         c) Activity 3.3 - Audit of project/financial activities. This activity will support the annual audit and
                         reporting of project activities.

                         d) Activity 3.4 – Unallocated provision. This is a provision for unforeseen costs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Melissa C. Landesz (AFTSG)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                          4.12




                                                                       Page 6 of 8
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project activities have no to minimal environmental and social impacts, and thus it is not
                              necessary to prepare safeguards instruments.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              None
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.

                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                             Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                             be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                             issue, been prepared
                             Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the OP?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information




                                                                        Page 7 of 8
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Gert Johannes Alwyn Van D
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 24-Dec-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Patricia Mc Kenzie (SM)                        Date: 25-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
