                                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                  CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC6026

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Africa                           Project ID:      P146830
                            Project Name:     OMVG Interconnection Project (P146830)
                            Task Team         Pedro E. Sanchez
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         01-Dec-2014                      Estimated        12-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEEDR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Regional integration (70%), Infrastructure services for private sector
                                              development (15%), Climate change (15%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    752.00                    Total Bank Financing:         200.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            4.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 200.00
                              African Development Bank                                                    145.00
                              EC European Investment Bank                                                 114.00
                              FRANCE Govt. of [MOFA and AFD (C2D)]                                         50.00
                              Islamic Development Bank                                                    125.00
                              GERMANY KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
                                                                                                            34.00
                              (KFW)
                              West African Development Bank                                                 80.00
                              Total                                                                        752.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?
                         B. Project Objectives
                         8. The project developmental objective is to increase electricity supply to Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-
                         Bissau and Senegal through developing the interconnection infrastructure.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed WAPP APL 4, Phase 2 (OMVG Energy project), would finance three out seven
                         transmission line lots of the OMVG Interconnection Loop, and technical assistance according to the
                         following components:

                         Component 1: 225 kV Interconnection between Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau and Senegal
                         (Project Cost US$ 153million)
                         This component involves the construction of a 225 kV transmission network capable of handling 800
                         MW. It includes construction of a 651km 225 kV transmission line (of a total 1700km in the
                         network), connecting the electrical networks of the four countries of the OMVG (Gambia, Guinea,
                         Guinea-Bissau and Senegal). The 651km of transmission lines includes construction of Lots 5, 6, and
                         7 according to the following distribution: Senegal: 163 km, US$ 41.4m; Gambia: 182.8 km, US$
                         45.5m; Guinea: 86 km, USD$19 m, Guinea Bissau: 217.6 km, US$ 47.2m.

                         Component 2: Project Management and Technical Assistance to OMVG Secretariat (Project $97m,
                         IDA Credit US$ 20 million)
                         IDA credit will focus on TA activities related to institutional and commercial activities including: (i)
                         the institutional and commercial arrangements to be put in place in order to ensure a sustainable
                         performance of the generation and transmission facilities through an effective O&M model; (ii)
                         Feasibility studies for at least three hydropower developments in the basin; (iii) structure to empower
                         OMVG to coordinate the use of resources (hydropower) and the development of future generation
                         facilities in such a way as to maximize the long term benefits for each member country
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project includes construction of a 651km 225 kV transmission line (of a total 1700km in the
                         network), connecting the electrical networks of the four countries of the OMVG (Gambia, Guinea,
                         Guinea-Bissau and Senegal). Though the provisional right-of-ways (COTECO, 2006) are identified
                         out-of sensitive areas, they may finally cross various landscapes including forests, degraded
                         savannas, wetlands, agricultural and pasture lands human settlements. In light of that, biodiversity
                         conservation and disturbance of water courses during the construction phase will be of important
                         concern. The expected impacts will be detailed in the existing environmental and social
                         documentation (ESIA, ESMP, and RAP prepared in 2004 and revised 2006) which are being
                         updated by the OMVG secretariat.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         OMVG is affected by weak capacity which will impede its ability to adhere to safeguard policies. A
                         comprehensive program to enhance OMVGs corporate governance and operational performance
                         needs to be developed, and a competent and well resourced PIU identified.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Salamata Bal (GSURR)
                         Maman-Sani Issa (GENDR)
                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          The project activities (cleaning the right-of-
                           BP 4.01                                     ways, construction of the lines, maintenance,
                                                                       etc.) will likely impact on biophysical and social
                                                                       environments. The physical characteristics of
                                                                       the receiving environments in the countries
                                                                       suggest potential negative average to significant
                                                                       impacts through fragmentation of vegetation
                                                                       cover, loss agricultural land and cultural
                                                                       properties along with other social challenges
                                                                       like gender and communicable diseases. An
                                                                       environmental and social impact assessment
                                                                       (ESIA) of the bigger OMVG project, including
                                                                       these transmission lines, has been carried out in
                                                                       2004 and 2006 and captured the essential of
                                                                       these impacts. It found that a large part of the
                                                                       potential impacts is linked to the construction
                                                                       activities and can be managed by good
                                                                       construction practices. In the
                                                                       operation phase, the impacts are, in general,
                                                                       minor or negligible. The overall environmental
                                                                       impact of the transmission line, therefore,
                                                                       appears to be moderate. The original ESIA will
                                                                       be updated in compliance with the Bank
                                                                       requirements, consulted upon, and disclosed
                                                                       prior to appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    TBD          The project sites in the countries host some
                                                                       vegetation areas which may present
                                                                       characteristics of natural habitat as defined
                                                                       under this policy. The ESIA which is being
                                                                       updated by the OMVG secretariat will provide
                                                                       clarification. Of the 69 sq km total area affected
                                                                       by the transmission line, the original ESIA and
                                                                       ESMP anticipated that the only impact that
                                                                       justifies an environmental follow-up is the
                                                                       deforestation in minimal areas with classified
                                                                       forests, and recommended to compensate this
                                                                       impact by reforestations inside these same
                                                                       classified forests. Therefore the impacts do not
                                                                       seem to be irreversible.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36             Yes          The right-of-ways will probably pass through
                                                                       natural vegetation though the identification
                                                                       criteria comprised the avoidance of natural
                                                                       habitat, gazetted forests, park and reserves as
                                                                       well as wetlands. The exploitation of borrow
                                                                                                                                 pits and/or quarries may also induce even minor
                                                                                                                                 negative on vegetation cover.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            The project will not finance acquisition, storage,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 distribution or use of pesticides.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   Yes                           The project influence area does not stretch over
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         any known archaeological site or sacred forest/
                                                                                                                                 area. Notwithstanding, the policy is triggered to
                                                                                                                                 manage chance found artifacts whenever it
                                                                                                                                 happens especially during the construction/
                                                                                                                                 exploitation of borrow pits.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            There are no indigenous people living in the
                                                                                                                                 project areas.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The construction and maintenance of the
                                 4.12                                                                                            transmission lines may necessitate resettlement
                                                                                                                                 of people through acquisition of agricultural
                                                                                                                                 lands. The original ESIA and ESMP stated that
                                                                                                                                 the choice of the layout allowed to reduce to the
                                                                                                                                 minimum the impacts of the project on the
                                                                                                                                 populations and that no relocation of persons or
                                                                                                                                 buildings would be necessary within the
                                                                                                                                 required surface area of the corridor. The
                                                                                                                                 residual social impacts will be minor to
                                                                                                                                 negligible. The original ESIA and ESMP will be
                                                                                                                                 reviewed, updated, consulted upon, disclosed
                                                                                                                                 in-country and at the bank infoshop prior
                                                                                                                                 appraisal. In addition, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                                 Framework will be prepared, consulted upon
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 and disclosed before appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not finance dam construction.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project does not include activities on any
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project do not finance activities in disputed
                                 7.60                                                                                            areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 11-Jul-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Project documents were developed between 2002-2007, including ESIA, ESMP and RPF. OMVG
                                      has started the procurement process for a consulting firm to update these documents, with support
                                      of ADB funding.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Pedro E. Sanchez




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Approved By:
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 08-Nov-2014
                         Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Meike van Ginneken (SM)       Date: 11-Nov-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
