                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA260
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Egypt, Arab Republic of             Project ID:    P116230
                            Project Name:     Egypt: Sustainable POPs Management Project (P116230)
                            Task Team         Alaa Ahmed Sarhan
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         10-Mar-2014                         Estimated   25-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    MNSEE                               Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              Persistent Organic Pollutants
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Central government administration (50%), Sub-national government
                                              administration (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Pollution management and environmental health (67%), Environmental policies
                                              and institutions (33%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      23.60           Total Bank Financing:                 0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                15.50
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                        8.10
                              Total                                                                                   23.60
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)



                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                         The project development objective is to demonstrate the improved management and disposal of
                         targeted POPs stockpiles and PCBs in an environmentally sound and cost-effective manner.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Destruction of High Risk Stocks of Obsolete Pesticide (US$ 3.83 million)

                         Activities under this Component are focused on the environmentally sound disposal of high risk
                         stocks known and inventoried at time of project appraisal.
                         These activities directly support the PDO in the safe packaging, removal, transportation and
                         destruction of high-risk stocks of pesticides, in state-of-the-art facilities overseas, and will provide
                         hands-on experience and expertise for sustainable management of POPs wastes. MALR will have the
                         lead in executing this component.
                         Of the total 2,250 to 4,600 tons of obsolete pesticides that are stockpiled, it is estimated that 10 to
                         30% could be POPs pesticides. This component will support the disposal of at least 1000 tons of
                         identified stocks of POPs and other high-risk obsolete pesticides, following a risk-based
                         prioritization approach.
                         It was determined during project preparation that disposal of the stockpiles at Al-Adabeya port and
                         El-Saff would be financed as priority under this component. The former is adjacent to international
                         waters; the latter is in the middle of a densely populated neighborhood. The component will finance
                         re-packaging and export to an international disposal facility and site clean-up. Details of these two
                         sites are provided below:

                         a.       The Al-Adabeya port storage facility was built in 1975 and dedicated for the storage of dry
                         bulk. It is estimated that about 220 tons of Lindane, a POPs pesticide, has been stored at the port
                         since 1998. The Lindane is packed in 25 kg plastic bags supported by a heavy paper outer wrapping
                         and stored in 10 standard containers. The activity for disposal of the stockpiles at Al-Adabeya Port
                         will commence immediately upon Board approval of the project.
                         b.       The El Saff storage facility has about 444 tons of pesticides, which comprises of 6.5 tons of
                         POPs (including 3.9 tons of DDT (Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane), 1.9 tons of Lindane). The site
Public Disclosure Copy




                         has been in use for many years and shows clear signs of spillage of chemicals and leakage, from
                         corroded or otherwise damaged and/or overturned containers. Over the years, the neighborhood has
                         become more populated and the site is surrounded by dense residential areas at a distance less than
                         100 m. Additionally, the storage site also contains a granary of food stocks next to the these obsolete
                         stockpiles.
                         c.       In addition, the project will support the identification of all high risk stockpiles, and dispose
                         of another approx. 350 tonnes of high risk stocks currently scattered across a number of sites.
                         The MALR’s Central Agricultural Pesticides Laboratory will have an important role under the
                         project, mainly to identify unlabeled products uncovered, as necessary, and to analyze pesticide
                         samples. The laboratory is reasonably well equipped as it does routine testing for the registration of
                         agricultural chemicals; however the component will finance minor technical upgrading, as needed.
                         The MSEA / EEAA will enhance its environmental management system to promote the
                         identification, packaging, removal, transportation and destruction of high risk stocks of obsolete
                         pesticides, consistent with Egypt’s international obligations under the Stockholm and Basel
                         Conventions. It will do so through a learning-by-doing approach to immediately address the high
                         risk stockpiles of obsolete chemicals which require immediate attention. Staff in EEAA and the
                         cooperating ministries will be trained to track and monitor obsolete stockpiles and ensure the
                         ultimate destruction of high risk stockpiles. This component will also support Project Monitoring
                         and Evaluation and will support EEAA in enhancing the existing system of tracking obsolete
                         pesticides to ensure sustainable project outcomes and monitoring of project performance indicators

                                                                        Page 2 of 9
                         (including needs for field monitoring and data processing). Dissemination of results, including
                         awareness of the general population will also be supported.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Decontamination of PCB-containing transformer oils (US$ 4.27 million)

                         Activities under this Component will focus on the procurement of equipment for dechlorination and
                         purification of PCB contaminated oils, which will produ ce an oil suitable for reuse in transformers.
                         These activities directly support the PDO in the management of PCBs and PCB related equipment,
                         and will provide hands-on experience and expertise of EEAA and MOEE/EEHC staff to address the
                         decommissioning of PCB transformers. MOEE/EEHC will have the lead in executing this
                         component.
                         It is estimated that the total number of transformers in Egypt is over 100,000, of which 10 to 40%
                         can be expected, based on the situation in similar countries, to be contaminated by PCBs at a level
                         above 50 parts per million (ppm). This is the threshold above which is the Stockholm Convention
                         mandates environmentally sound management, based on the potential for harmful effects on human
                         health and the environment. Egypt has received funds under a parallel UNEP managed GEF project,
                         MEDPOL, which will target and dispose of high-concentration PCBs which are expected to be
                         present in relatively small amount in the country. The focus of this component is therefore on
                         decontaminating/dechlorination of low to medium-concentration stocks of PCB-contaminated
                         transformer oils, which when decontaminated, can be reused. In view of the importance for PCB
                         management and size of the sector, the project is moreover focused on PCBs in the public electricity
                         generation and distribution sector.
                         Dechlorination of PCB contaminated oil for re-use as a fuel or for insulation is often a cost-effective
                         local solution where there is sufficient volume of medium-level PCB contaminated oil, as is the case
                         in Egypt. The project will support the procurement of appropriate technology that is cost-effective
                         for EEHC - which will include a dechlorination unit and a Fuller’s Earth facility of suitable size to
                         purify the oil for re-use. During the course of the project, EEHC would operate its decontamination
                         equipment to process as many of the PCB transformers as possible, and to recycle oils and other
                         materials for further reuse. During the course of the project, 1,000 tons of PCB-contaminated oil will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         be targeted at a minimum. Remaining decontamination needs after project closing would be
                         continued with GOE funding and the staff trained under the project.
                         Instruments for sampling to measure the level of PCBs, chemicals, and electronic equipment will be
                         financed from this component. Laboratory support might be needed to confirm levels of PCB
                         contamination in the transformers. Small allowance has been made under the project for any
                         upgrading needs for this project. For such cases, the EEAA’s laboratory, which has gas
                         chromatography capacity, could handle such analyses, or another laboratory with existing capacity
                         for testing trace contaminants could be upgraded as appropriate.
                         The MSEA/EEAA will enhance its environmental management system to promote the identification
                         and decontamination consistent with Egypt’s international obligations under the Stockholm. This
                         component will also support Project Monitoring and Evaluation and will support EEAA in enhancing
                         the existing system of tracking PCBs to a comprehensive one based on international best practice
                         examples. Attention will be given to making available the necessary monitoring and data processing
                         equipment, software, staffing and training and also addressing the needs for sustaining the system
                         after project closure. The PMU will develop a system for monitoring project performance indicators
                         (including needs for field monitoring and data processing). Staff in EEAA and the Cooperating
                         Ministries will be trained to produce data needed for quarterly project reporting. Dissemination of
                         results, including awareness of the general population will also be supported.




                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The National Implementation Plan (NIP) for Egypt included a national inventory of POPs which is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         being used to design theproject. The inventory identified the location, quantity, and in some cases,
                         the composition obsolete pesticides throughout Egypt.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Sherif Kamel F. Arif (MNSSU)
                         Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)
                         Africa Eshogba Olojoba (MNSEE)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             In lieu of preparing an environmental and social
                          BP 4.01                                             impact assessment (ESIA) report for the project
                                                                              as a whole, in accordance with OP 4.01, the Bank
                                                                              and the GOE have assessed the Use of Country
                                                                              Systems (UCS), as set forth in OP 4.00. In fact,
                                                                              the Bank has accepted the UCS in Egypt for the
                                                                              Egypt-Pollution Abatement Project II (EPAP II)
                                                                              and gaps between the World Bank OP 4.01
                                                                              policies and the Egyptian EIA system were
                                                                              mostly removed, Bank staff have extended the
                                                                              EPAP II Safeguards Diagnostic Review (SDR) to
                                                                              include hazardous waste and emissions, and has
                                                                              assessed the equivalence of the new EIA
                                                                              legislation of 2009 with the Bank policies for
                                                                              EA, and the application of the new Egyptian
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              legislation on hazardous wastes and emissions.
                                                                              Gaps and measures to remove these gaps were
                                                                              identified in the SDR and agreed upon.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             Yes             Given that the existence of POPs stockpiles is
                                                                              partly the result of past mismanagement of
                                                                              pesticides, the UCS work was also extended to
                                                                              assess the capacity of the country’s regulatory
                                                                              framework and institutions to promote and
                                                                              support safe, effective, and environmentally
                                                                              sound pest management. Gaps and measures to
                                                                              remove these gaps were identified in the SDR
                                                                              and agreed upon.
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                          BP 4.11




                                                                      Page 4 of 9
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               Storage facilities to be used are already existing
                            4.12                                                 on public lands. No new construction that might
                                                                                 entail land acquisition or resettlement is included
                                                                                 in the project.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is essentially a POPs and PCB management project which will bring substantial
                              environmental health benefits, both locally and globally.The project will safely dispose of obsolete
                              pesticide stocks, establish preventive measures to avoid future accumulation, remove and dispose
                              of PCB-contaminated equipment and prepare plans for remediation of contaminated sites. The
                              project components include the mitigation, monitoring and institutional measures to reduce/
                              eliminate the adverse project impacts.

                             The proposed project will not have significant adverse environmental impacts on human
                             populations or environmentally important areas (e.g. natural habitats) that are sensitive, diverse, or
Public Disclosure Copy




                             unprecedented, and may take place in areas broader than individual sites or facilities subject to
                             physical works.

                             The project’s potentially adverse socio-environmental and health impacts are anticipated to be
                             negligible to medium in magnitude and potential significance. All impacts are primarily site
                             specific, can be contained within the existing POPs pesticides and PCBs site boundaries, and none
                             of them is irreversible.

                              The main potential adverse direct, cumulative and indirect socio-environmental impacts are related
                              to: possible POPs pesticides and PCBs leakages and contamination at and nearest area around
                              storages and burial sites during repackaging of old POPs sites and centralization in the selected
                              temporary storage facilities due to the presence of workers; possible air pollution, soil and water
                              contamination during POPs burial openings, accidents during national and international
                              transportation, temporary storage prior to export shipment.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              No potential negative indirect impacts of the proposed project activities can be discerned at this
                              stage. However, improved public awareness of the dangers of hazardous chemicals and the
                              stringent measures needed for their safe handling may well put pressure on the authorities to
                              exercise greater diligence in the handling of other hazardous substance – a positive indirect impact.

                                                                         Page 5 of 9
                           Long-Term Impacts: The international concern about POPs and the rationale for the Stockholm
                           Convention and the present project owes much to the persistence of these particular toxic
Public Disclosure Copy




                           chemicals; they do not break down in the environment and accumulate in the food chain and
                           human tissue over time. Thus the project is aimed directly at mitigating these long-term potential
                           impacts.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Two possible alternatives for the elimination of PCB equipment and obsolete pesticides exist: (1)
                           export or (2) treatment within the country and export of carcasses in case of PCB equipment. The
                           latter is not possible in practice (except in low concentrations) due to the lack of skills, equipment
                           and disposal site necessary for treatment within the country; thus the Government is more
                           favorable of the export alternative, as the most viable one. GEF would finance only part of the cost
                           associated with the elimination of the PCB equipment and obsolete pesticides.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           In accordance with OP 4.00, the World Bank conducted a Safeguard Diagnostic Review (SDR) to
                           determine the equivalence and adequacy of the national system for environmental impact
                           assessment and pest management and subsequently identify any existing gaps. The results of the
                           equivalence assessment showed that the World Bank's Operational Policies and the Egyptian
                           safeguards systems on Environmental Assessment, as amended in 2009, are nearly fully
                           equivalent. The SPMP sets out to improve pesticide and pest management issues including
                           prevention, and cleanup as well as measures directed towards the strengthening of pesticide
                           management and promotion of Integrated Pest Management (IPM). The SDR concluded that the
                           national pest management system meets all the Pest Management Plan requirements.

                           The major gaps are related to weak coordination among EEAA departments involved in POPs,
                           insufficient compliance with the requirements of the Stockholm Convention, lack of procedures
Public Disclosure Copy




                           guidelines of POP projects, insufficient knowledge on PCBs and POPs contract management,
                           weak enforcement for PCBs and lack of assessment of the quality of the ESIAreports. Remedial
                           measures which were identified these gaps with a proposed schedule, include the preparation of
                           an operational manual which delineate functions and responsibilities during the ESIA process,
                           completion of legal and regulatory framework pertaining to the Stockholm Convention,
                           development of ESIA procedural guidelines for POPs, provision of training to EEAA staff and
                           sector ministries and NGO development of an environmental register of POPs sites, and
                           assessment of quality of the ESIA reports every two years.

                           During project preparation, a preliminary hazardous waste and risk assessment was conducted for
                           two potential Intermediate Collection Centers (ICCs) -Nassriya Hazardous Waste Center and El
                           Saff Storage Site. A feasibility study, preliminary site and risk assessment was also undertaken for
                           the Al-Adabeya port.

                           In accordance with the national EIA system all subprojects will be reviewed and approved by the
                           EEAA/ EIA department (which is independent from the PMU) including consultation and
                           disclosure at the EEAA website (www.eeaa.gov.eg) before construction starts. Also grievance
                           redressal mechanisms and consultations prior to sub-project specific ESIAs/ESMPs and physical
                           interventions will be undertaken, documented, monitored and included in project activity reports.
                           Up to 15comprehensive ESIAs/ESMPs, including in-depth risk assessments, will be conducted for

                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                         all sites which have been identified to be supported under the project for either disposal and clean-
                         up or creation of safe storage sites. Comprehensive safeguard standards and mitigation measures
                         to be incorporated in all contracts under the project involving hazardous materials or sites, based
Public Disclosure Copy




                         on best international practice for POPs chemicals. The yearly project implementation schedule to
                         be prepared by the PMU will reflect the time line and number of ESIA/ESMP to be prepared by
                         independent consultants and formally approved by EEAA/ EIA department which is totally
                         independent from the PMU.The Bank will also responsible to review during the first 18 months,
                         all the subprojects- specific ESIA and ESMPs.

                         The expansion/reorganization of the EEAA Departments is one of the indications that the Ministry
                         of State of the Environment is committed to the improvement of the environment. The Central
                         Inspection Department has been reorganized into a Sector Department with specific functions and
                         responsibilities whereas it consists of two General Directorates. The EEAA has also established a
                         new Sector Department for the Protection and Improvement of Industrial Environmental and
                         Energy to support the industry in improving their environmental performance on a voluntary basis.
                         These two departments were understaffed. Now they are functional and working. Furthermore,
                         there has been a constructive coordination between the three sector departments namely
                         environment management, industrial environment and environmental inspection and
                         environmental compliance on agreeing of projects that would be eligible for EPAP II or PPSI
                         financing. Such coordination is expected to be replicated in the POPs projects as the three
                         departments will be involved in project implementation.

                         There are also still some weaknesses in the EIA system and in EEAA’s monitoring and
                         enforcement. These are:
                         a)       Lack of knowledge related to POPs and PCBs and technologies for their management and
                         disposal, Component 1 of the project will include a program to raise awareness and strengthen its
                         position in political decision making in Egypt in order to convince stakeholders that there is an
                         urgent need to solve POPs problems and implement the Stockholm Convention.
                         b)      Limited staff resources in the department of hazardous waste management. A
Public Disclosure Copy




                         comprehensive training program both technical and managerial in is included in Component 1 of
                         the Project. It includes sound management of PCB and pesticides, secure storage of pesticides,
                         best environment practice and best available technology for treatment and disposal of POPs and
                         PCBs.
                         c)           Limited inter-ministerial cooperation on hazardous waste management. In order to
                         strengthen such collaboration, the overall project coordination would be the responsibility of the
                         POPs Project Steering Committee (PPSC), which would be formed. It would be chaired by the
                         CEO of EEAA and would have senior representatives of the Cooperating Ministries, the Project
                         Director and Project Manager. The PPSC would meet monthly to oversee project implementation
                         matters and, approve the selection of the sub-projects and oversee the implementation of the
                         different project components
                         d)      Insufficient public communication and awareness raising on hazardous waste and in
                         particular with POPs The Project will also finance a dedicated sub-component 1,2, on Public
                         Awareness and Participation with the objective to develop and maintain a system for informing
                         stakeholders of the nature and dangers of POPs (and other hazardous substances), and for inviting
                         public participation in decision-making related to such substances; and
                         e)          Shortcomings of monitoring and enforcement for obsolete pesticides and PCBs.project.
                         The POPs Project will replicate the system of coordination successfully implemented in EPAP II
                         whereby the PMU of EPAP II meet regularly with the cooperation between GDEIEC, the EIA
                         Department to plan ahead the preparation and review of the EIA as well as the inspection and

                                                                    Page 7 of 9
                           compliance activities. Furthermore, the hazardous waste management strategy that will be
                           developed during the project will include specific actions for reinforcing the application of the law
                           regarding hazardous waste and in particular the OPs and PCBs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           A public consultation meeting was held on June 13, 2012 and attended by 64 representatives from
                           ministries (Environment, Electricity and Energy, Industry, Planning and International
                           Cooperation), research institutes and universities, 3 media representatives as well 16 NGOs. The
                           workshop was conducted in Arabic. The meeting was chaired by the acting Chief Executive
                           Officer of the Egyptian Environment Affairs Agency (EEAA); a list of the issues raised and
                           comments made by the attendees and reviewers, and remarks/responses to these comments in
                           included as in Section XI to the SDR report.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   13-May-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      13-Nov-2011
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Egypt, Arab Republic of                                          13-Jun-2012
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   NA
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Egypt, Arab Republic of                                          //
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]




                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
Public Disclosure Copy




                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Alaa Ahmed Sarhan
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                       Date: 18-Mar-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (SM)                     Date: 20-Mar-2014




                                                                       Page 9 of 9
