                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC6250

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Macedonia, former Yugoslav                    P148023
                                                                             Project ID:
                                                Republic of
                            Project Name:       Macedonia National and Regional Roads Rehabilitation (P148023)
                            Task Team       Liljana Sekerinska
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       21-Apr-2014                          Estimated        27-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: ECSTR                                 Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (90%), General public
                                                administration sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):           Regional integration (50%), Trade facilitation and market access (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     70.00                      Total Bank Financing:         70.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         70.00
                              Total                                                                         70.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the proposed project is to enhance the connectivity of national and regional roads,
                           primarily to Corridors X and VIII, and to improve their safety and climate resilience.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project will finance the rehabilitation of key state road sections to improve road
                         connectivity, safety and climate resilience. As transport costs and travel time decrease, more direct
                         travel between origins and destinations will be generated, therefore creating a more accessible and
                         reliable transport system. It will also allow cost savings for road users and traveling will become
Public Disclosure Copy




                         safer than it is today. The proposed project will also address the mobility and accessibility needs of
                         the poor in lagged regions, and by doing that, the project will maximize the poverty impact and
                         promote shared prosperity in the Macedonia. Well-managed and adequate transportation systems,
                         particularly inter- urban and regional corridors, are a key part of a country’s economic structure,
                         providing efficient and low cost access of goods and people. Two of the regions where the project
                         will be implemented rank low in terms of accessibility and are amongst the poorest in the country,
                         with poverty rates higher than the national average. Financing road improvements and improving
                         connectivity in these lagged regions could directly benefit low-income populations by improving
                         access to markets and social services on one hand, and securing short term and long-term
                         employment opportunities on the other.

                         In addition, the project will contribute to the ongoing efforts by the Government and the current
                         World Bank road project (Regional and Local Road Program Support Project or RLRSP) to improve
                         road condition in an efficient manner through better road asset management practices (introduced
                         and currently under implementation of RLRSP ). The project is envisaged to have three components.

                         Component 1: Rehabilitation Works of Key Road Sections (Estimated Cost: US$60 million). The
                         rehabilitation of some road sections would include pavement rehabilitation, drainage rehabilitation,
                         small repairs of bridges and structures, and installation of road safety equipment/signs. This
                         component will also support the incorporation of road safety measures and climate resilience
                         measures in the design of the Project’s road sections. The three sections that have been identified
                         with PESR for the first year program are:
                         •        Rehabilitation of national road M5 from Bitola to Makazi (23km) – about US$5.2 million
                         •        Rehabilitation of national road M5 from Resen to Bukovo (11km) – about U$4.3 million
                         •        Rehabilitation of regional road P409 from Boskov Bridge to Debar (8 km) – about US$ 2.6
                         million
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In addition, another road section was identified with PESR for the second year:
                         •        Rehabilitation of regional road R2233 from Tetovo to Gostivar (16 km) – about US$2.6
                         million.
                         More road sections for rehabilitation (about US$45.3 million) will be further identified through the
                         road asset management system being developed under the ongoing Bank-financed Project, and
                         further supported as described in Component 2 below.

                         Component 2: Technical Assistance in Road Safety and Continued Improvement of Road Asset
                         Management (Estimated Cost: US$5 million). This component consists of two sub-components:
                         •        Technical assistance to support Macedonia’s objective of improving road safety. This sub-
                         component will include the preparation of road safety audit guidelines, the preparation of a safer road
                         investment plan for state roads, and to help start the implementation of the plan.
                         •        Technical assistance for the PESR to develop its capacity to monitor the road network, and
                         plan and program road investments, and support the ongoing PESR efforts to establish a sustainable
                         road asset management system. This sub-component will include (i) financing of the road network
                         condition data collection surveys for four years covering all state roads, and (ii) identification of
                         rehabilitation and periodic maintenance priorities for state roads through the preparation of a five
                         year rolling program of preservation works for state roads.
                           Component 3: Technical Assistance to Support Implementation Support (Estimated Cost: US$5
                           million).This component will include project design for later year road works, supervision and is
                           expected to finance the provision of goods, consultants’ services, and training, including a financial
Public Disclosure Copy




                           audit to support project coordination, implementation, and management.

                           The road sections that will be part of the second to fourth year program of the Project will be selected
                           during the first year of project implementation following defined eligibility criteria that ensure
                           economically viable, satisfy social and environmental safeguards and are in line with the objectiv
                           e of the Project. The definition of the second to fourth year program will benefit from PESR’s
                           implementation of a Road Asset Management System currently introduced with support from the
                           ongoing Regional and Local Roads Program Support Project.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The location of the project is determined by the location and configuration of the roads proposed for
                           the rehabilitation, as well as by the location of affiliated facilities such as construction materials
                           borrow areas, material processing plants, and construction plants.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Public Enterprise for State Roads (PESR) will be responsible for the implementation of the
                           project. The PESR (earlier ASR) has been involved in the implementation in similar projects for
                           several years. Since 2010, the ASR employed a full time Environmental Specialist who has been
                           responsible for the project environmental management and has been trained at the World Bank
                           organized safeguard training. After the institutional restructuring and establishing the PESR, a
                           specialized Environmental and Social Unit has been set up within PESR. The Unit was reinforced by
                           the second Environmental Specialist and a Social Specialist. The staff of the Unit is knowledgeable
                           in the environmental management practices and the requirements under the World Bank policies, and
                           is able to carry out proper supervision of the implementation of environmental mitigation measures.
                           The staff of PESR is as well familiar with the Bank Social Safeguard requirements given that the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           agency implemented projects financed by the Bank in the past. The newly formed unit,
                           Environmental and Social Unit, will be also responsible for addressing social issues including cases
                           that will trigger Involuntary Resettlement safeguards.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSEN)
                           Bekim Imeri (ECSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              This policy is triggered because civil works to
                           BP 4.01                                               be implemented under the project represent
                                                                                 environmental risks which are mainly temporary
                                                                                 and limited by the period of construction, and
                                                                                 manageable and mitigatable. The potential
                                                                                 impacts may include destabilization of slopes in
                                                                                 sensitive areas, loss of tree plantations in
                                                                                 various sections alongside the existing road,
                                                                                 disturbance of drainage systems, extraction of
                                                                road construction materials, increased dust
                                                                production and air and noise pollution,
                                                                disturbance to wildlife in the project area, etc.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                Because of the programmatic approach of this
                                                                project, an Environmental Assessment and
                                                                Management Framework will have to be
                                                                prepared by the client, which will underline the
                                                                main environmental risks associated with the
                                                                implementation of the road rehabilitation
                                                                projects, and define the procedures, institutional
                                                                responsibilities and implementation
                                                                arrangements for the preparation of road-
                                                                specific Environmental Assessments and
                                                                Management Plans (EAMP) for the roads to be
                                                                identified later in the course of program
                                                                preparation and implementation. The EAMF
                                                                will also provide for an assessment of client's
                                                                capacity to manage environmental risks and
                                                                ensure implementation of mitigation measures.
                                                                In addition, the client will prepare separate and
                                                                specific Environmental Assessment Reports and
                                                                Management Plans for each of the road sections
                                                                already identified for the first year of the
                                                                program of Project 1. Those EAMPs will
                                                                determine site-specific impacts which are likely
                                                                to occur due to the program implementation,
                                                                propose adequate mitigation measures, define
                                                                responsibilities and arrangements for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                implementation of those measures, and outline
                                                                the monitoring mechanism.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No   The policy is not triggered because
                                                                rehabilitation of roads is not expected to casue
                                                                any considerable impacts on natural habitats. In
                                                                addition, the road specific Environmental
                                                                Assessments and Management Plans will
                                                                provide for the consideration of anticipated
                                                                impacts and for the identification of adequate
                                                                mitigation measures.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No   The policy is not triggered, however, the
                         BP 4.11                                respective EAMP will include provision to be
                                                                followed by the client and contractor in case of
                                                                any chance finds.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The policy is triggered because of programmatic
                                 4.12                                                                                            nature of the road rehabilitation program. The
                                                                                                                                 program, beyond the first year, will invest in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 national roads that will be rehabilitation only
                                                                                                                                 and thus there will be unlikely need for
                                                                                                                                 Involuntary Resettlement, or perhaps impacts on
                                                                                                                                 livelihood. However, there might be need for
                                                                                                                                 small scale of temporary land acquisition or
                                                                                                                                 right of way agreements. Because of unknown
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation works to be financed beyond the
                                                                                                                                 first year, in order to avoid need for
                                                                                                                                 restructuring if small scale temporary or
                                                                                                                                 permanent land acquisition is needed, we would
                                                                                                                                 propose that the implementing agency prepares
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework whereby
                                                                                                                                 impacts such as: temporary or permanent land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition, right of way impacts will be
                                                                                                                                 addressed. The framework would define the
                                                                                                                                 sequencing, implementation arrangements and
                                                                                                                                 entitlements for each potential impact separately
                                                                                                                                 and will also specify a template for specific
                                                                                                                                 Land Action Plan. For the first year program
                                                                                                                                 which most likely there will be no impact on
                                                                                                                                 private assets or any other asserts that are of any
                                                                                                                                 use. Potentially there might be need for a right
                                                                                                                                 of way agreements or temporary land use, but
                                                                                                                                 most likely without impacts on livelihood. Once
                                                                                                                                 the works are defined for the first year, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 implementing agency will prepare abbreviated
                                                                                                                                 R/LAPs for each road sections in the first year,
                                                                                                                                 in case there is a need. Thus the implementing
                                                                                                                                 agency will prepare abbreviated RAPs if needed
                                                                                                                                 for the first year program once the works for the
                                                                                                                                 first year are specified and proposal is to prepare
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework for all over
                                                                                                                                 project span (from the impacts such as
                                                                                                                                 temporary land acquisition, right of way
                                                                                                                                 agreements and potentially permanent land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition).
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-Mar-2014
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The PESR is preparing the Terms of Reference to employ the consultancy services for the
                             preparation of safeguard (same consultant should prepare both Environment and Social safeguards
                             studies) documentation. It is expected that the studies will start by mid-November 2013 and
                             should be finished by end February 2014, prior to the project appraisal tentatively planned for
                             March 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Liljana Sekerinska

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                             Date: 14-Nov-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Juan Gaviria (SM)                               Date: 14-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
