                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA7676

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Apr-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Apr-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Tanzania                          Project ID:    P148974
                                                       Parent         P111153
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     Tanzania Strategic Cities Project AF (P148974)
   Parent Project    Tanzania Strategic Cities Project (P111153)
   Name:
   Task Team         Mehmet Onur Ozlu
   Leader:
   Estimated         02-Apr-2014                       Estimated   29-May-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    AFTU1                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Urban Transport (30%), Sub-national government administration (20%), Solid
                     waste management (40%), Flood protection (10%)
   Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (60%), Municipal governance and
                     institution building (20%), Administrative and civil s ervice reform (10%),
                     Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (10%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      50.60           Total Bank Financing:               50.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                     Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                      0.60
     International Development Association (IDA)                                            50.00
     Total                                                                                  50.60
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?


                                             Page 1 of 6
 2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   To improve the quality of and access to basic urban services in Participating LGAs.

   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


 3. Project Description
The Project has three components:

Component 1 – Core Urban Infrastructure and Services (Original US$ 150.6 million, AF US$ 45.17
million; 100% financed by IDA): This component supports improvements in core infrastructure and
services in Participating LGAs. It comprises two sub-components that support: (a) investment in core
urban infrastructure and services for subprojects prioritized by participating LGAs; and (b) technical
assistance for construction supervision and support for the implementation and monitoring of
safeguards instruments, and payment of associated compensation costs.

Component 2 – Institutional strengthening (Original US$12.7 million; no IDA AF; 98% financed by
the Kingdom of Denmark and 2% financed by IDA; AF US$ 6 million all Kingdom of Denmark):
This component supports the strengthening of the fiscal and management capacity of LGAs and
CDA in Dodoma for improved operations and maintenance (O&M) and infrastructure development;
and also supports capacity improvements for PMO-RALG.

Component 3 – Implementation support and preparation of future urban projects (Original US$12.2
million; AF US$ 5.29 million; 100% financed by IDA): This component (a) provides capacity
building to LGAs and PMO-RALG and support for project implementation; and (b) finances
preparation activities for future urban projects and technical assistance to the urban sector.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will target the following nine local governments: Mwanza, Ilemela, Arusha, Mbeya,
Mtwara, Kigoma, Tanga, CDA and Dodoma.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS)
Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTN3)

 6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              Road rehabilitation and landfill construction
 BP 4.01                                             works may cause temporary impacts including
                                                     dust and noise pollution, contamination of soils
                                                     and water sources, generation of solid waste and
                                                     injuries, accidents. The project has preparing an
                                                     Environmental and Social Management



                                             Page 2 of 6
                                                       Framework (ESMF) to guide assessment and
                                                       mitigation of potential impacts. Based on the
                                                       ESMF Environmental and Social Management
                                                       Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and associated
                                                       Environmental and Social Management Plans
                                                       (ESMPs) for two roads in Tanga and Arusha have
                                                       been prepared, consulted upon and disclosed
                                                       together with the ESMF in the InfoShop and in-
                                                       country on April 2, 2014.
   Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

   Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

   Pest Management OP 4.09             No

   Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes             Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) may be
   BP 4.11                                             encountered during the construction stage. The
                                                       ESIAs address impacts on PCR and incorporate
                                                       mitigation measures in the ESMPs. Guidance on
                                                       addressing chance finds for individual investment
                                                       during project will be included in the construction
                                                       contracts.
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes             The project activities may involve acquisition,
   4.12                                                involuntary resettlement or restriction of access
                                                       linked to the roads rehabilitation. A Resettlement
                                                       Policy Framework (RPF) and specific
                                                       Resettlement Actions Plans have been prepared
                                                       for two roads (Tanga and Arusha), consulted
                                                       upon and disclosed in the InfoShop and in-
                                                       country on April 2, 2014.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The additional financing (AF) will involve similar activities as the current project which, include
     upgrading /rehabilitation of a number of artery urban roads and drainage and associated structures


                                               Page 3 of 6
  such as drainage ditches, culverts/bridges, footpaths and streetlighting and local infrastructure such
  as bus and lorry stands aimed to improve movement of people, goods and services in the urban
  areas. The project also supports development of infrastructure to improve solid waste management
  including solid waste collection centers, equipment for transportation and disposal, and the
  improvement of disposal sites. There are no known safeguards compliance issues that are
  unresolved in the original project. Overall safeguard compliance (Environmental Assessment OP/
  BP 4.01 and Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12) is rated ‘Satisfactory.’ (the required ESIAs
  and ESMPs) and RAPs has been prepared, cleared and disclosed accordingly in the InfoShop and
  in-country on April 2, 2014. The additional financing will support the same category and typology
  of sub-projects as those supported under the original project. The sub-projects to be financed by
  the AF do not include any new landfills, but only additional cells in the five landfills supported by
  the original project. As such, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has
  been prepared to guide the Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs)/Environmental
  and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) for each investment prepared under the AF.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  There are no known potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area. In view of the above, activities proposed under the AF do not pose additional
  safeguards risks or impacts, or require a change in category, or trigger new policies. Neither is
  there a need for any exceptions from, or waivers of, Bank policies.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  Not relevant as there are no known potential indirect and/or long term impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The implementing agency, the Prime Minister’s Office for Regional Administration and Local
  Government (PMO-RALG), has been executing the project, including safeguards management, in
  a satisfactory manner since FY2010/11. In particular, Environmental and Social Management
  Plans (ESMPs) implementation and monitoring are carried out adequately. PMO-RALG and the
  project LGAs participated in the safeguards training conducted in Tanzania in February, 2012 by
  the World Bank Africa Region Safeguard Policy Enhancement Unit (ASPEN).

  Substantive improvement in compliance with Occupational Safety and Health Rules has been
  noted during project implementation. Following the completion of most of the construction works,
  the focus of staff training has shifted towards enhancing LGAs safeguards monitoring skills as part
  of operations and maintenance plan. Therefore, the capacity of the borrower to plan and implement
  safeguards measures is assessed to be satisfactory.

  Specific measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues include the following:
  The original project does not have and/or use an Environmental and Social Management
  Framework (ESMF) or Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). Instead, 11 ESIAs and 8 RAPs
  have been prepared, consulted upon and disclosed since the original project was approved. Since
  under the proposed AF, there are some minor additions to the existing sub-projects and new sub-
  projects (most of which do not have complete technical designs ready and safeguards impacts fully
  known), the following approach has been adopted for the proposed AF activities:

  • The government has prepared an ESMF and a RPF for the project as a whole, which were


                                             Page 4 of 6
  disclosed in the InfoShop and in-country on April 2, 2014 ;
  • Two ESIAs and RAPs for the following two sub-projects that have full technical designs ready:
  (i) Upgrading of Duga - Airport Road in Tanga and (ii) Upgrading of Unga Ltd - Muriet Road
  (including Burka Bridge) in Arusha. These documents were disclosed in the InfoShop and in-
  country on April 2, 2014 .
  • LGAs will budget for all resettlement and associated compensation costs.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  In accordance to the requirements of ESMF and RPF, a comprehensive stakeholder analysis,
  including areas of influence and description of stakeholders, were undertaken. The RPF describes
  the consultation processes each sub project specific RAP should follow. During the preparation of
  the two RAPs mentioned above the main stakeholders, including LGAs and the PAPs were
  consulted and their views considered in the preparation of those RAPs. Consultation with the
  PAPs took place from 20 to 22 February, 2014 in the Duga-Airport Subproject area in Tanga and
  from 19 to 25 February, 2014 in the Unga Ltd-Muriet Road (with Burka Bridge) subproject area in
  Arusha.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      31-Mar-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   02-Apr-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Tanzania                                                         02-Apr-2014
  Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      31-Mar-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   02-Apr-2014
"In country" Disclosure
  Tanzania                                                         02-Apr-2014
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 report?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources




                                           Page 5 of 6
    Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    property?
    Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
   OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
    Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Sector Manager review the plan?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Mehmet Onur Ozlu
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                       Date: 02-Apr-2014
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Rosemary Mukami Kariuki (SM)                      Date: 02-Apr-2014




                                               Page 6 of 6
