                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA6513

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Jan-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Jan-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Benin                             Project ID:    P146597
                                                       Parent         P117764
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     Benin Decentralized Community Driven Services Project - Addl Financing
                     (P146597)
   Parent Project    Decentralized Community Driven Services Project (P117764)
   Name:
   Task Team       John Van Dyck
   Leader:
   Estimated       11-Dec-2013                         Estimated   26-Feb-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit: AFTSW                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Public administration- Other social services (30%), Primary education (30%),
                     Other social services (20%), Water supply (10%), Sub-na tional government
                     administration (10%)
   Theme(s):         Decentralization (25%), Other human development (25%), Participation and
                     civic engagement (25%), Social safety nets (25%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      30.00           Total Bank Financing:                30.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                       Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                              30.00
     Total                                                                                    30.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:




                                             Page 1 of 7
Is this a           No
Repeater
project?

2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   To improve access to decentralized basic social services and to mainstream the CDD approach for
   such services.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
The proposed additional financing of US$30 million for the Benin Decentralized Community Driven
Services Project (PSDCC) would allow the scaling-up of the project to enhance access to
decentralized basic social services in Benin. The resources would scale-up the existing support
under PSDCC for the “Service Delivery Grants to the Communes” component, which supports basic
infrastructure sub-projects in education, health, water, and commerce (public markets) at community
and commune levels. The additional financing would also supplement the “Technical Assistance and
Capacity Building” component to support training, capacity building, and project management
activities associated with the scaling-up. The project would be restructured in order to revise
outcome indicator targets, extend the closing date to accommodate the scale up, and create a fourth
component for project management in order to separate these costs from project activities in the area
of training and capacity building.

Project background. The $46 million IDA credit for PSDCC was approved on May 3, 2012, became
effective on January 24, 2013, and is expected to close on June 30, 2016. To date, the credit is 44%
disbursed. The original project has three components:

1. Service Delivery Grants to Communes (US$36 million).
•       Subcomponent 1.1 : Communal Grants
•       Subcomponent 1.2 : Community Grants

2. Pilot Social Safety Nets Program (US$5 million).

3. Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (US$5 million).
•       Subcomponent 3.1: Technical assistance and capacity building for the Ministry of
Decentralization and other key Ministries
•       Subcomponent 3.2: Technical assistance and capacity building for the Communes
•       Subcomponent 3.3: Grassroots management training (GMT) for Communities
•       Subcomponent 3.4: Social accountability, monitoring and evaluation.

Current project performance. Project performance is currently rated Satisfactory for likelihood of
meeting development objectives and Satisfactory for implementation progress. The project is 44%
disbursed.


                                            Page 2 of 7
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The physical project activities supported by the additional financing would be carried out in all
communes of Benin and hundreds of local communities in Benin. Sub-projects would include
construction of schools, health clinics, wells and the extension of existing small water supply
systems, latrines, rural roads, and boutiques/market stalls/hangars. Other expected activities such as
technical assistance and capacity building are not expected to have adverse social or environmental
impacts.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Africa Eshogba Olojoba (MNSEE)
Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (AFTCS)

 6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The ESMF in the parent project will also be
 BP 4.01                                              applicable here, in particular the environmental
                                                      and social screening checklist used in screening
                                                      the subprojects. Subprojects to be supported
                                                      under the additional financing in Component One
                                                      will include construction of schools, health
                                                      clinics, wells and the extension of existing small
                                                      water supply systems, latrines, rural roads, and
                                                      boutiques/market stalls/hangars. The subprojects
                                                      could trigger small-scale and site specific
                                                      environmental impacts typical of category B
                                                      projects.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

 Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

 Pest Management OP 4.09             No

 Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
 BP 4.11
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes              The community and commune sub-projects will
 4.12                                                 facilitate the construction of schools, health
                                                      clinics, wells and the extension of existing small
                                                      water supply systems, latrines, rural roads, and
                                                      boutiques/market stalls/hangars, and similar
                                                      activities. These activities could lead to restriction
                                                      of access to assets or sources of livelihood and
                                                      they could also entail some acquisition of land.
                                                      The RPF of the parent project has been re-
                                                      disclosed for the additional financing. During


                                              Page 3 of 7
                                                        project implementation, the framework could be
                                                        translated into RAPs as necessary.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

   Projects on International            Yes             The water-related investments supported under
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 the Project will consist of the construction of
                                                        village wells and the extension of existing water
                                                        supply systems to underserved villages. Since the
                                                        project will be implemented on a community-
                                                        driven basis, the number and location of water
                                                        investments cannot be measured in advance at
                                                        this time. As the water-related investments will
                                                        be small-scale in nature, the impact on surface
                                                        waters or groundwater reserves should not be
                                                        significant and no appreciable harm is anticipated
                                                        to the water resources of any neighboring
                                                        countries. Still, the Project triggers the World
                                                        Bank Operational Policy for Projects on
                                                        International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) because
                                                        some of the Project-supported water investments
                                                        may be implemented in the basin of certain
                                                        tributaries of the Niger River or transboundary
                                                        aquifers. In accordance with OP/BP 7.50, the
                                                        Bank notified the Niger Basin Authority (NBA)
                                                        about the project and received the no objection of
                                                        the NBA to proceed with the project.
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The original project, and this additional financing, are classified as environmental category B in
     recognition of the fact that the potential negative environmental impacts are expected to be limited
     and reversible. The AF triggers the same safeguards policies, OP4.01 on Environmental
     Assessment, OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement and OP 7.50 on Projects on International
     Waterways. Eligible expenditures will include investment projects in the areas of education,
     health, water, and commerce (public markets). Safeguard issues in relation to dust, soil and water
     pollution, soil erosion, loss of vegetation and land acquisition have been identified as possible
     impacts that could arise from implementation of sub-projects. The new construction or the
     extension of the existing infrastructures could imply acquiring of land which may be already used
     by other activities (including habitation, agricultural production, pasture, etc), which could involve
     displacement of small numbers of people or loss of activities.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:


                                                Page 4 of 7
  Potential indirect and/or long-term impacts are not anticipated as a result of project activities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  No other project alternatives were considered given that the impacts were considered small and
  reversible.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  To mitigate any adverse impacts in the parent project, the Borrower prepared (i) an Environmental
  and Social Management Framework (ESMF) which includes guidance for dealing with safeguards
  issues arising from project activities; and (ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to address
  potential issues that might arise due to the need for land acquisition, losses of assets and/or
  restrictions of access to resources and livelihoods. Implementation of the environmental and social
  safeguards to date has been satisfactory. For this additional financing, the PSDCC ESMF and RPF
  have been re-disclosed in-country and in the World Bank Infoshop for this Additional Financing
  on October 24th and November 6th, 2013.

 As per the ESMF and RPF, Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) as well as
 Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) are to be prepared, as needed, for the civil works. For works
 with negligible impacts, environmental measures based on national laws and regulations will
 apply.

 To date, the civil works have not started. While local governments have received project funds,
 civil works have not yet begun since communities need first to finish grassroots management
 training before sub-project proposals are developed, and communes have required time to identify
 investments and fulfill conditions related to procurement capacity and participatory planning. For
 investments at the community level, where infrastructure will be small-scale and standardized, the
 project is developing model ESMPs for each type of eligible infrastructure (three-classroom
 primary school, well, health post, etc.). Such ESMPs would be expected to cover all potential
 impacts typically involved in each sub-project type, and any additional or sub-project specific
 impacts would be identified at the screening stage and taken into account in an annex to the
 ESMP.

 The project will encourage to the extent possible rehabilitation/reconstruction of infrastructure
 within the existing footprint, which would not require land acquisition or cause losses of assets or
 restriction of access to livelihoods.

  The safeguards policies have been integrated in the project Operational Manual and other relevant
  documents. Safeguards training will be provided under the project to relevant implementing
  bodies.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Key stakeholders include the communes, communities, the Ministry of Decentralization, technical
  ministries, international donor partners, and NGOs. The Government held consultations during the
  preparation of the ESMF and RPF, and these documents reflect the inputs gathered during the
  consultations. Since the Project triggered the World Bank Operational Policy for Projects on
  International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50), the Bank notified the Niger Basin Authority (NBA) about
  the project and received the no objection of the NBA to proceed with the project.


                                            Page 5 of 7
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Jan-2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-Nov-2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Benin                                                            24-Oct-2013
  Comments: Quotidien FRATERNITE No 3469 du 24 octobre 2013
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Jan-2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-Nov-2013
"In country" Disclosure
  Benin                                                            24-Oct-2013
  Comments: Quotidien FRATERNITE No 3469 du 24 octobre 2013
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Sector Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
 Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
 Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information



                                            Page 6 of 7
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: John Van Dyck
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                      Date: 30-Jan-2014
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Stefano Paternostro (SM)                       Date: 31-Jan-2014




                                             Page 7 of 7
