                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA7981
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Dec-2013, 06-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Lao People's Democratic                          P145544
                                                                              Project ID:
                                               Republic
                            Project Name:      Early Childhood Education Project (P145544)
                            Task Team       Omporn Regel
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       11-Nov-2013                           Estimated   02-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASHE                                  Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Pre-primary education (90%), Primary education (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:         28.00               Total Bank Financing:  28.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 14.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                   14.00
                              Total                                                                                       28.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the project is to increase coverage and improve the quality of early childhood
                           education services for 3 to 5-year-olds in target districts
                            3. Project Description

                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         Component 1: Increasing Coverage to Early Childhood Education in Target Districts (US$6.0
                         million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component aims to expand coverage of early childhood education services by: (i) transferring
                         grants-in-aid for CBC to communities in target districts to construct pre-primary classrooms; and (ii)
                         piloting CCDGs for 3 and 4-year-olds within target districts.

                         Component 2: Improving Quality of Early Childhood Education Services (US$13.3 million)

                         Given that quality is critical to the success of early childhood education, the objective of this
                         component is to improve the quality of ECE services through a holistic approach. This component
                         consists of two sub-components: (i) supporting services package, which is composed of the
                         community awareness campaign, childhood disability screening, and the NSMP, and (ii) teacher and
                         education officer training, which includes training and development of training materials for
                         teachers, school principals, ECE officers and VEDCs, as well as the development of teaching and
                         learning materials for multi-age teaching for 3 to 5-year-olds.

                         Component 3: Project Management, Capacity Development, and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$8.7
                         million)

                         This component will support project management, capacity development, and monitoring and
                         evaluation of early childhood education. The component’s main activities will include: (i) capacity
                         development and support for financial management, procurement, and internal audit; (ii) capacity
                         development and support for local institutions to undertake evidence-based research on holistic child
                         development and strengthen the capacity of MoES staff through fellowships, short-term training and
                         study tours. The M&E activities will develop the foundations for a child development monitoring
                         system, including the development of a simplified child monitoring tool that teachers can administer
                         and training for central, provincial, and district education officials as well as VEDC members and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         teachers on the implementation of the tool and the consolidation of information at the school level to
                         facilitate reporting through the M&E network and, eventually, the Education Management
                         Information System (EMIS). In addition, the project will support the development and testing of a
                         classroom observation tool, which the district ECE officers will use to monitor classroom activities
                         during their visits to schools.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The nature, type, scale and scope of impacts under this project will be similar to those under Second
                         Education Development Project (EDP II) and the ongoing Global Partnership for Education (GPE)
                         project. Similar to EDP II and GPE projects, this project’s target districts are located in
                         disadvantaged and remote areas with a high density of ethnic populations. There were no major
                         safeguard issues experienced during the course of EDP II and the ongoing GPE projects. All civil
                         works were carried out within existing school premises which are located in communal land areas
                         reserved for school construction.

                         The Ethnic Group Development Plan (EGDP) developed for EDP II and GPE has contributed to the
                         Government’s overall strategy for achieving primary education for all, focusing on children from
                         ethnic groups other than Lao who, like girls, children with disabilities and very poor children, are
                         currently under-represented in primary school access and completion.



                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (EASPS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)
                         Boun Oum Inthaxoum (EASHE)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes           The project will involve minor civil works,
                         BP 4.01                                           specifically the construction of pre-primary
                                                                           education facilities within targeted areas. There
                                                                           are likely to be some concerns relating to
                                                                           inconveniences or nuisances (e.g., dust, noise,
                                                                           construction waste) to surrounding areas during
                                                                           construction. However, these potential impacts
                                                                           on the environment are deemed to be minor, site-
                                                                           specific, and reversible in nature, and for which
                                                                           mitigation measures can be readily designed.
                                                                           Based on the past experience with the EDP II and
                                                                           GPE projects, and to ensure compliance with
                                                                           Bank Safeguards policies, an Environmental
                                                                           Code of Practice (ECoP) for the construction of
                                                                           classrooms (which includes the environmental
                                                                           planning guidelines and environmentally sound
                                                                           construction aspects, environmental monitoring
                                                                           and audit and capacity building, an
                                                                           Environmental Screening checklist and an
                                                                           Environment and Social Management Plan and
                                                                           "Chance Find" procedures) was developed as part
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           of Project Implementation Manual.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No            The project will not cause any degradation of
                                                                           natural habitats as defined under the safeguard
                                                                           policy.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No            The project will not degrade critical forest areas
                                                                           as defined under the safeguard policy.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09             No            The project will not involve any procurement of
                                                                           pesticides nor cause any increased use of
                                                                           pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No            The project will not adversely affect sites with
                         BP 4.11                                           archeological, paleontological, historical,
                                                                           religious, or unique natural values.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes           OP 4.10 is triggered, because the educationally
                                                                           disadvantaged poor districts where the project
                                                                           components 1 and 2 would be implemented
                                                                           would likely include those districts resided by
                                                                           poor ethnic groups (as Indigenous Peoples are
                                                                           called in Lao). Moreover, the component to



                                                                   Page 3 of 8
                                                                       support future pre-primary education teachers and
                                                                       caregivers is specifically targeted at ethnic
                                                                       groups. This component has been implemented
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       under previous Bank projects in the sector.
                                                                       Throughout its implementation, it has been
                                                                       objectively guided by transparent selection, clear
                                                                       implementation criteria and has benefited from
                                                                       community-validated selection.

                                                                       The client (MoES) has undertaken a social
                                                                       assessment, including in areas where ethnic
                                                                       groups are present, in order to assess the project's
                                                                       potential positive and adverse effects on ethnic
                                                                       groups, and examine project alternatives where
                                                                       adverse effects may be significant. In particular,
                                                                       the social assessment has reviewed existing
                                                                       barriers for ethnic children to receive early
                                                                       childhood education, including those related to
                                                                       language, traditions, customs, values, etc. This
                                                                       assessment identified, in participatory manner,
                                                                       measures to address these barriers. Free, prior
                                                                       and informed consultation have been conducted
                                                                       with a representative sample of ethnic groups who
                                                                       are likely to participate in and affected by the
                                                                       project. This process has allowed their
                                                                       perspectives to be collected and reflected in the
                                                                       project design and that their broad support to the
                                                                       project was strongly ascertained.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       Given that this project is similar in nature, types,
                                                                       scale and scope of impact to EDP II and GPE
                                                                       projects, the existing Ethnic Group Development
                                                                       Plan (EGDP) for the EDP II and the GPE have
                                                                       been updated based on the social assessment and
                                                                       consultations, prior to having been disclosed both
                                                                       through Infoshop and in-country at convenient
                                                                       locations.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No           The project will construct new pre-primary
                         4.12                                          classrooms within existing primary school with
                                                                       land boundaries which belong to the state. No
                                                                       acquisition of private land, or loss of private
                                                                       assets including trees and structures, is
                                                                       anticipated. It is not anticipated that physical
                                                                       relocation will be necessary.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No           The project does not involve any dams.

                                                          No


                                                               Page 4 of 8
                            Projects on International                           The project does not involve international
                            Waterways
                            Projects    OP/BP 7.50
                                     in Disputed  Areas OP/BP No                waterways.
                                                                                The project will not be located in any known
                            7.60                                                disputed areas as defined in the policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project will involve minor civil works, specifically the construction of pre-primary education
                              facilities within targeted areas. All new construction will be on existing school premises. There
                              are likely to be some concerns relating to inconveniences or nuisances (e.g., dust, noise,
                              construction waste) to surrounding areas during construction. However, these potential impacts on
                              the environment are deemed to be minor, site-specific, and reversible in nature, and for which
                              mitigation measures can be readily designed. Based on the past experience with the EDP II and
                              GPE projects, and to ensure compliance with Bank Safeguards policies, an Environmental Codes
                              of Practice (ECoP) for the construction of classrooms (which includes the environmental planning
                              guidelines and environmentally sound construction aspects, environmental monitoring and audit
                              and capacity building, an Environmental and Social Management Plan, and an Environmental
                              Screening checklist) has been developed as part of the Community-Based Contracting for the
                              School Construction Operation Manual (CBCOM).

                              Due to the project’s focus on educational disadvantage and ethnic minority groups, the Bank's
                              safeguard policy on indigenous peoples (OP 4.10) is triggered. The project's aim is to improve
                              school readiness for poor ethnic children and it supports government interventions which are
                              sensitive to the needs of these children. The majority of project beneficiaries are expected to be
                              from ethnic background. No involuntary taking of private land or loss of asset is anticipated under
                              the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Not applicable
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Not applicable
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The Government of Lao PDR has developed under EDP II and GPE projects the CBCOM with
                              environmental safeguards measures and the Ethnic Group Development Plan (EGDP) to ensure
                              compliance with the Bank’s Operational Policy 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples, who are referred to as
                              ethnic groups in the Lao context. The EGDP was updated and used under this project given the
                              similarity in nature, types, scale and scope of impacts that may occur as was found under Social
                              Assessment (SA) carried out during the preparation of this project. Free, prior and informed
                              consultations were conducted with ethnic groups as part of SA which found broad community
                              support among ethnic group beneficiaries. No significant negative impact would occur. The EGDP
                              provides principles and procedures to ensure that ethnic groups are identified through ethnic
                              screening, benefit from development projects, and that adverse impacts are either avoided, or if
                              unavoidable, are mitigated. Where ethnic groups are present, it requires special actions to

                                                                        Page 5 of 8
                           safeguard their social and economic status and avoid restriction of their capacity to assert their
                           interests and rights in land and other productive resources. The EGDP is to ensure that ethnic
                           group issues and concerns are addressed in the project planning and implementation process and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           that they benefit from the project in a culturally appropriate manner.

                           To insure compliance with the Bank’s Operational Policy 4.01 on Environmental Assessment, an
                           Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP), which includes an Environmental Screening Checklist
                           and an Environmental and Social Management Plan, has been prepared for the project. The ECoP
                           is provided in the Safeguards chapter of the CBCOM. The MoES has successfully used a CBCOM
                           with a safeguards section under EDPII and GPE. MoES will undertake capacity building activities
                           to ensure the rigorous implementation of the CBCOM and an enhanced institutional arrangement
                           with the VEDC for community-based monitoring and the Ministry of Public Works for technical
                           guidance. Approved projects with environmental and/or social impacts are supervised and
                           monitored by District Engineers, and the Provincial Program Managers. Findings and any
                           recommendations are recorded in quarterly reports which are sent to the Program Manager,
                           through the Provincial Education Service, and shared with Bank supervision missions.

                           Assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: Based on the past
                           experience with the EDP II and GPE projects, the Government of Lao PDR has a good track
                           record of ensuring compliance with Bank Safeguards policies from the planning to
                           implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           In partnership with the Ministry of Education and Sports, District Education Bureaus, and Village
                           Education Development Committees, consultation with potential project beneficiaries/
                           communities was carried out through a participatory Social Assessment, using the mechanism of
                           “free, prior and informed consultation (FPIC)” (in accordance with the Bank’s Indigenous Peoples
                           Policy (OP 4.10) to assess whether the potential target villages and their communities support the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation of the project. The Ethnic Group Development Plan (EGDP) was prepared based
                           on key findings of Social Assessment and this is part of the process by which the MoES informs
                           the ethnic group communities and local authorities at village, district and provincial levels about
                           the project and the construction of pre-primary education classrooms. The consultation and
                           assessment ensures social engagement and inclusiveness and ethnic groups issues are incorporated
                           in the project’s planning, design, implementation and monitoring. Village-level consultation was
                           carried out in three provinces, one in each region of north, central and south, covering 30 schools
                           in 30 different villages, to identify possible issues and concerns that may be raised by potential
                           target beneficiaries, of whom the majority are ethnic groups.


                           Disclosure of both environmental (ECoP) and social safeguards instrument (EGDP) will target
                           directly affected communities. MoES and DEBs, with the assistance of the VEDCs, have made the
                           information publicly available. Public disclosure of documentation has already been carried out in
                           accordance with the disclosure policies of the Bank and MoES through public meetings,
                           newspaper, the Internet sites of MoES and the World Bank’s Infoshop. Further information
                           sharing will be provided through additional community meetings and workshops.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other


                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   01-Oct-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lao People's Democratic Republic                                 19-Dec-2013
                           Comments: The environmental safeguards document was disclosed in-country both in Lao and
                                         English on December 19, 2013 to meet appraisal conditions while the approved
                                         English version was disclosed on October 1, 2013.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lao People's Democratic Republic                                 19-Dec-2013
                           Comments: The social safeguards document was disclosed in-country in Lao and English and at
                                         the InfoShop in English on December 19, 2013 to meet appraisal conditions.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies



                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Omporn Regel
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Luis Benveniste (SM)                        Date: 06-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
