                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC1031

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Armenia                         Project ID:      P149913
                            Project Name:      Public Sector Modernization Project III (P149913)
                            Task Team          K. Migara O. De Silva
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          16-Dec-2014                     Estimated        16-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GGODR                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Central government administration (55%), Public administration- Information
                                               and communications (45%)
                            Theme(s):          Administrative and civil service reform (15%), Other public sector governance
                                               (10%), Other accountability/anti-corruption (35%), Man aging for development
                                               results (10%), Public expenditure, financial management and procurement
                                               (30%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     26.00                    Total Bank Financing:         20.50
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     5.50
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       20.50
                              Total                                                                       26.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective (PDO) of the operation is to enhance, deepen, and sustain the
                           performance of public sector management (PSM) for better public service delivery through
                         (a) institutionalizing and advancing e-government in the country, and
                         (b) modernizing public financial management.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Third Public Sector Modernization Project (PSMP III) for Armenia will be financed by a
                         Specific Investment Loan (SIL) in the amount of US$ 20.5 million IBRD with implementation over a
                         five year period. This third project benefits from the building blocks of PSMP I and PSMP IIPSMP
                         III continues the emphasis of the PSMP with the following seven components:

                         Component 1: Institutionalizing e-Government in Armenia (US$ 5.0 million)

                         Sub-component 1.1: Unified management and service center for e-government systems in the
                         Republic of Armenia

                         An E-Government Center will be created to improve governance by ensuring the application of
                         unified standards/requirements toward the operation of both state and community electronic
                         management systems (EMS) currently operating in Armenia and those to be designed in the future.
                         The Center will ensure the implementation of the policy developed on behalf of a corresponding
                         body in electronic management field. The center will be housed in premises provided and refurbished
                         under state budget funding.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Data exchange tool ensuring interoperability and integration of electronic
                         management systems (Data exchange Layer, X-Road, Enterprise Service Bus)

                         To enhance efficiency of data exchange between electronic management systems, a proper technical
                         and organizational environment/layer of data exchange will be developed, which enables secure
                         Internet-based data exchange between the information systems. This tool will facilitate the exchange
                         of data with the databases belonging to state information system and between the databases
                         belonging to the state information system through data exchange layer of the state information
Public Disclosure Copy




                         system.

                         Component 2: Government Finance Management Information System (US$ 7.0 million)

                         The Government Finance Management Information System (GFMIS) will be developed and
                         introduced to cover areas which include budget formulation, management of spending units,
                         commitment controls, payables and receivables, general ledger and accounting, cash recording, cash
                         management, reports and other modules. The system will be integrated with electronic procurement
                         and other interlinked systems.

                         Component 3: Service Delivery by the Government to Citizens (G2C) (US$5,66 million)

                         Sub-component 3.1: Е-transport

                         A website/portal related to transport in Armenia (Interstate, inter-district, municipal, metro, railroad),
                         which be created to provide a complete information about passenger transportation means, stops,
                         routes, hours, tariffs and other data. Information about parking lots (including free parking lots),
                         traffic jams, schedules of street cleaning and reconstruction will also be placed on the site, which will
                         comprise an interactive map, route planning tool, FAQ and other sections. It is expected that the
                         system will provide opportunities for online booking, purchase of tickets, payments, etc.
                         Sub-component 3.2: E-consulate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In 2012, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) launched an e-consular system which merged all
                         consular offices of Armenia in a single unified system. However establishment of an e-consular
                         system addressed only some of the issues and there is still a need for a large-scale development in
                         this area. On June 21, 2014 the National Assembly adopted “Legislative package on Consular
                         Registration” This package envisages creation of a new consular registration system that would allow
                         consular registration by visiting the related diplomatic representative office or through a special
                         online system. This sub-component will help to enhance the e-consular system in order to cover all
                         activities and rendered services on behalf of the consuls, and also to ensure its interoperability with
                         other e-government systems and/or databases.

                         Sub-component 3.3: Phone ID

                         After introduction of Electronic ID cards, the governments need to move ahead and provide full
                         flexibility on using electronic identification means. While ID plastic cards are restricting the usage
                         of on line identification only to computers with ID card readers, the use of phone ID (one of the best
                         experience is in Estonia) enables transfer of ID card information to SIM card of the mobile phone
                         and enables application of digital signatures and digital authentication right from mobile devices,
                         which significantly will extend the uptake of ID cards in Armenia. This approach is especially
                         important in rural areas of Armenia where computer penetration is still low but the internet and
                         mobile penetration is almost 100 percent. In such case identification of individuals will be done via
                         mobile phones instead of the ID cards and card readers in computers.

                         The introduction, availability, areas of application of the Phone ID will provide broad possibilities
                         for the private sector to both increase the scope of business and of the services rendered and to gain
                         new markets for their businesses. In addition, other mobile options for person identification will be
                         considered (by means of standard computers, without special technical devices/means) and given the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation feasibility; corresponding activities will be initiated in this direction.

                         Sub-component 3.4: “Public services” unified portal and operation of 24/7 hotline (Services.am)

                         A unified “Public Services” portal will be created to provide complete online information and
                         consultation on public services to the citizens.
                         The website of the Government of Armenia will comprise full-fledged information on all public
                         services, including healthcare, education, justice (including registration of civil status acts), benefits
                         and other social services, business services (company registration, licenses), land possession
                         registration and construction permits, on local self-government bodies, etc. Also, the website will
                         provide answers to different possible questions and other required consultations.

                         A 24/7 hotline will be functioning within the portal. The objective is to quickly respond to questions,
                         complaints, issues of the citizens in a twenty-four-hour format, at that the operator will be able to
                         provide an online solution making simultaneous calls and online assignments at the same time. The
                         concept of Knowledge Base will be applied in the activities of the Center and hotline.

                         Sub-comp onent 3.5: Upgrade of the state business registry system

                         In 2012 the Doing Business study of the World Bank rated the business register of Armenia as 10th
                         fastest business registration in the world. Significant developments have taken place since April 2011
                         when electronic business register was deployed. This sub-component will support further upgrade of
                         the State business registry system that would further simplify procedures, decrease risk of corruption,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and remove administrative barriers for the business development.

                         Sub-component 3.6: Upgrade the electronic system for issuing licenses

                         This sub-component is to upgrade the electronic system for issuing licenses, including automation of
                         the simplified procedure of license issue on behalf of the Ministry of Finance, electronic data
                         processing and issue of licenses, management of electronic license registry, receipt of reports,
                         notifications, etc.
                         Sub-component 3.7: “Intranet” system for public servants

                         Under PSMP I and PSMP II the electronic document management system (EDMS) was introduced in
                         some 23 governmental institutions of Armenia over 2008-2009. Later the system has been extended
                         to over 60 government institutions. PSMP III will help to create an ‘’Intranet’’ system for public
                         servants, which will include the following modules:

                         •        “Mulberry” electronic document management system (normative acts, applications,
                         instructions, etc.)
                         •        Service center /Help Desk/ (for providing solutions to computer/software issues)
                         •        HR system (staff related issues, vacations, appraisal system, notifications, trainings)
                         •        Announcements/news system (briefdaily newsreel, various announcements)
                         •        Knowledge center (library, research, presentations, FAQ)
                         •        Department for legal acts (legal acts related to an agency, legal acts of general nature and
                         acts often used)
                         •        Suggestions for reforms (any employee can submit his/her suggestion, idea in this section)
                         •        Organization structure section
                         •        Issues related to property/affair management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Information center (inquiries/survey)
                         •        Other

                         Sub-component 3.8: Digitization of normative legal acts, including electronic state registration of
                         normative legal acts

                         This component will finance moving to electronic registration of normative legal. Gradually, a shift
                         will be made from storing normative legal acts in paper versions towards electronic versions, by
                         simultaneously carrying out corresponding activities aimed at electronic backup of the normative
                         legal acts.
                         As a result, the management, storage and backup of normative legal acts will be done electronically,
                         and also the “RA Official Bulletin” will be published electronically.

                         Sub-component 3.9: Upgrading the e-police system

                         Under this sub-component, projects ongoing and envisaged for implementation generally in police,
                         and especially in the traffic police, will be studied and projects will be implemented that contain
                         explicit elements of fight against corruption by application of portable computers, GPRS and other
                         required technical means/computers. The idea of introducing and implementing international
                         standards for creation of a data exchange platform between traffic police and insurance companies,
                         for registration of road traffic accidents and standards for collecting source data on accident
                         circumstances (including minimal requirements for photographing the scene of the accident,
                         standards of registering conditions defining the accident) and defining and allocating the fault in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         insured vehicle accidents will be explored. The standards will be unified for all structures using the
                         said data.

                         Sub-component 3.10: Enhancing feedback mechanism between government and citizens for more
                         effective public service delivery

                         This sub-component will build on the services provided by the current and planned electronic
                         management systems to introduce a citizens’ feedback mechanism which will help to gather
                         information on the quality of services provided. The feedback mechanism to be supported under this
                         sub-component will be integrated into all other sub-components of the Component 3.

                         Component 4: Electronic Management System for Pre-Court Proceedings (US$ 1.5 million)

                         This component will finance creation of an electronic management system for criminal cases to
                         enable electronic handling of criminal cases where investigators, defense lawyers, judges, forensic
                         experts, etc. working for various agencies. The component will ensure at least the same level of
                         automation related to pre-court investigative stage of judicial cases that are available to clients once
                         the trials begin.

                         Component 5: Building Capacity of the Training of Public Servants (US$490,000)

                         PSMP III will support training of public servants in cooperation with the Armenian Academy of
                         Public Administration (AAPA) and RA Civil Service Council. This component will also finance on-
                         the-job training of public servants through their temporary placement in related institutions of foreign
                         countries.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 6: Ad hoc Activities (US$ 750,000)

                         This component will support funding new or ad hoc activities proposed by Public Sector Reform
                         Commission. Some of such activities may be planned and endorsed shortly after effectiveness of
                         PSMP and may include, inter alia, development of virtual maps for electronic construction permitting
                         system and provision of technical assistance to the Ethics Commission for the High Level Officials.
                         Additional activities will be identified at the Mid-Term Review of the project.

                         Component 7: Project Management (US$ 600,000)

                         Sub-component 7. 1: Project management and administration arrangements.

                         This sub-component will support the Foreign Financial Project Management Center (FFPMC-PIU)
                         of the Ministry of Finance in performing the financial management and procurement under PSMP
                         III. Administrative costs of the Project Management Group and of the Public Sector Reform
                         Commission (PSRC) that will operate as a Steering Committee for the project will also be supported.

                         Sub-component 7.2: Technical assistance and operational expenses

                         This sub-component will finance monitoring and evaluation of the project progress, impact and
                           fiduciary controls. It will also support the mid-term review and continuously engage internal and
                           external stakeholders. Funds will also be provided for periodic user surveys, organization of focus
                           groups and other arrangements to further enhance periodic feedback, public dissemination of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           survey results, as well as a communication campaign to provide a comprehensive description of
                           project objectives and activities to managers, staff, and all key stakeholders at the center and regions.
                           These include, among others, NGOs, other relevant public organizations, think-tanks, and
                           universities.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will be implemented in the public institutions of Armenia, predominantly in the capital
                           city of Yerevan with possible interventions in some provincial administrative centers.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Borrower will not need to apply safeguard policies during project implementation.

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Darejan Kapanadze (GENDR)
                           Sarah G. Michael (GURDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          No              The project is to provide technical assistance to
                           BP 4.01                                               the Government of Armenia. The technical
                                                                                 assistance provided under the project does not
                                                                                 include support for design or preparation of any
                                                                                 physical investment that will trigger safeguard
                                                                                 policies. The only type of physical activity that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 may be performed under the project is the
                                                                                 installation of IT equipment, which carries no
                                                                                 environmental risks. Workers' safety shall be
                                                                                 ensured through the deployment of personnel
                                                                                 qualified for working with electric devices.
                                                                                 Installation and operation instructions for IT
                                                                                 equipment should also be strictly observed.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09               No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/       No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No

                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP        No              No civil works or land use/acquisition will be
                           4.12                                                  undertaken under the project.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Nov-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      No safeguard-related studies are needed for the project preparation.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: K. Migara O. De Silva

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 12-Sep-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Adrian Fozzard (PMGR)                                                                                                Date: 12-Sep-2014
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
