                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA9060
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Croatia                            Project ID:    P145171
                            Project Name:      Social Protection System Modernization Project (P145171)
                            Task Team          Ivan Drabek
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          18-Jun-2014                        Estimated   30-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSPDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Social safety nets (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          95.00             Total Bank Financing: 95.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       95.00
                              Total                                                                                       95.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project aims to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of Croatia’s social protection system.
                            3. Project Description
                           1. Description

                           The Government of Croatia (GoC) is undertaking an ambitious, wide-ranging reform agenda in

                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                         social protection. The goal of the proposed reforms is to “achieve the financial and procedural
                         rationality and efficiency of the social assistance system.” It aims to do this through consolidation of
                         benefits using the support allowance program as a base for a new Guaranteed Minimum Benefit
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (GMB) program; harmonization of the eligibility criteria for remaining benefits under the Ministry of
                         Social Policy and Youth’s purview; improved information systems to promote better decision
                         making and to reduce the scope for error and fraud. The proposed project aims at supporting the
                         government’s reforms of the social protection system, with a special focus on four areas: i)
                         consolidation of programs and simplification of procedures; ii) reducing error fraud and corruption,
                         iii) activation of social assistance beneficiaries; and iv) de-institutionalization.

                         i)      Consolidation of programs and simplification of Procedures: One stop shop and Central
                         Disability Certification Institute (CDCI)
                         A key element of the Government’s reform is the consolidation of cash administration for social
                         welfare programs, family policy programs and unemployment benefits through a single delivery
                         network. Four social assistance benefits have been consolidated into a single GMB in the Ministry of
                         Social Policy and Youth from January 2014. At the same time, a one-stop-shop (OSS) for
                         administration and payment of cash benefits will be implemented. The OSS will gradually include a
                         larger number of cash benefits, starting with the new GMB from December 2014, and later
                         incorporating child allowances, maternity benefits, and unemployment benefits. The OSS, one of the
                         highest priorities of the current government, will transform the experience of social assistance
                         beneficiaries by providing a single service point to apply for and receive a range of cash benefits.
                         Having a OSS will reduce the time and cost of application for beneficiaries and will create the
                         opportunity of introducing a cap to the total amount of social assistance benefits paid to one
                         household, generating potential for savings and reducing work disincentives associated with the
                         provision of multiple need-based social assistance benefits.

                         Another major reform supported by the project is the creation of a Central Disability Certification
                         Institute (CDCI). The reform, led by the MLSY and coordinated with the MLPS, will introduce a
                         single certification procedure for persons with disability along the medical, social inclusion and work
Public Disclosure Copy




                         capacity domains. This reform will simplify administrative processes and harmonize standards, and
                         ensure horizontal equity for all persons with disability in Croatia. It is a revolutionary initiative, that
                         it would encompass disability assessment procedures currently administered by several agencies
                         including Croatian Pension Insurance Institute, Ministry of War Veterans, and Croatian Health
                         Insurance Institute. Spending on disability benefits in Croatia is among the highest in EU, next to
                         Denmark, Sweden and Finland. With 3.6% spent on disability programs in 2010, Croatia exceeded
                         the EU27 average by 64%. Assuming that disability spending numbers would converge to 20%
                         above the EU27 by 2035 (factoring in the objective disability factors in Croatia, such as Homeland
                         war veterans’ disability) could lead to cumulative fiscal saving between 10 and 11% of GDP over the
                         next two decades.

                         ii)      Reducing Error, Fraud and Corruption
                         The Government is committed to tapping significant fiscal savings by developing the mechanisms
                         and institutions needed to reduce the level of error and fraud in the social protection system.
                         International evidence shows that any mass payment system is prone to error, fraud and corruption
                         (EFC). In Croatia, benefits with high a-priory risk of EFC include income and means-tested
                         programs (e.g., the child allowance and GMB programs), income-replacement programs, as well as
                         disability pensions and allowances. The current delivery system of these benefits relies only on
                         preventive measures to stamp out EFC, but fall short of a comprehensive system. Complementing
                         these measures with an efficient detection and deterrence system will help safeguard the social

                                                                        Page 2 of 9
                         protection system against EFC. The MSPY, MLP, Croatian Health Insurance Institute, Croatian
                         Pension Insurance Institute and the Ministry of Public Administration agreed to work with the World
                         Bank on identifying cutting edge EFC strategies and activities that could be applied to their benefits
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in the context of this project. It was also agreed that the project would support the application of EFC
                         to the disability pension and allowances, where an important proportion of savings are expected to be
                         generated. Support to the EFC agenda is expected to generate cumulative savings of at least 0.5% of
                         GDP over the lifetime of the project.

                         iii)      Activation of Social Assistance Beneficiaries
                         The Government is keen in reforming social assistance programs and employment services to
                         stimulate the labor market participation of social assistance beneficiaries. Croatia has a relatively
                         large number of social assistance recipients that are able to work but do not work. About 35 percent
                         of the beneficiary adults in the poorest quintile are not in employment, education, training, disabled
                         or retired, and the share increases to 45 percent for beneficiaries of social assistance in cash. Partly,
                         this is a reflection of the fact that poor households are often better off on assistance than on low-wage
                         employment. Moving from assistance to employment would make them ineligible for means- and
                         income-tested benefits, a feature of these programs that acts as an implicit tax on earnings. The
                         Government could stimulate a higher employment rate by ensuring that the GMB and Child
                         allowance programs reward work, and by offering tailored work support services to work-able
                         beneficiaries from the poorest quintile. The project would support these efforts through specific
                         technical assistance and by supporting the development of operational plans for using ESF for
                         incentivizing and supporting the transition from assistance to employment for work-able adults from
                         the poorest quintile. Activities would be defined during preparation and after an initial assessment of
                         the working-age individuals who experience persistent labor market detachment, with a focus on
                         those inactive who are beneficiaries of social assistance.

                         iv)       De-institutionalization
                         The MSPY’s reform plans also encompass a process of deinstitutionalization in the provision of
                         social services currently implemented by State-run institutions. The goal of the proposed reforms is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to shift the balance of service provision for key vulnerable groups from institutional, residential care
                         to a range of services provided by a variety of service providers in family-type environments outside
                         of the institutions. De-institutionalization can be a life-changing event for each individual, allowing
                         independent, supported living through foster care, small housing units and other family-type
                         environments. The Plan for Deinstitutionalization and Transformation of Social Welfare Homes
                         (2011-18) has been be translated into a draft Operational Plan, describing the precise steps and
                         sequencing of the deinstitutionalization process, including the number and rate of people to be
                         deinstitutionalized (approximately 1,000 adults and children with mild disabilities and children
                         without parental care). The project would support this reform; specifically, the Bank will assist the
                         authorities with the design and focus of its proposals for European financing and reward the
                         achievement of specific milestones. The funds disbursed from the project could then be channeled
                         back into contributing to the Government’s co-financing share for further European fund proposals.

                         The Project will take a results-based financing approach to the implementation of agreed activities
                         under a first component of the project [E50m]. Thus, under this component, project disbursements
                         would off-set Government expenditures on the new consolidated Guaranteed Minimum Benefit
                         program (defined as the project’s eligible expenditures); and would be triggered by the achievement
                         of specific results (“Disbursement-Linked Indicators” or DLIs), agreed with the Government of
                         Croatia, that track step increases towards key results, which will then trigger disbursements:



                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         Achievement of the DLIs would gradually lead to the achievement of the PDO over the project
                         period. The main characteristics of the disbursement mechanism are: (a) each DLI would be
                         associated with a specific value that would be disbursed upon achievement of the indicator; (b) the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Government would provide evidence of achievement of each DLI, to be verified by the World
                         Bank’s technical team; (c) the World Bank will disburse the amount triggered by the DLIs that have
                         been met. Disbursed funds would flow to the Croatian Treasury against expenditures made under the
                         GMB program.

                         A second component [E20m] would support investments and technical assistance that are necessary,
                         but not sufficient, to support achievement of the DLIs. Examples include: renovation of OSS
                         premises; upgrades to the MIS to integrate systems currently used by other cash transfer programs
                         and the IT system supporting CDCI operations; technical assistance on cutting-edge error fraud and
                         corruption techniques and investments in the prevention and detection infrastructure; training and
                         technical assistance on disability certification methodology; and communications campaigns to raise
                         public awareness of the reforms to social assistance and disability benefits and to attract foster
                         families.

                         A Project Preparation Advance to support investments needed to make headway on project activities
                         during the preparation period has been approved.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Environment
                         The part of the project likely to involve rehabilitation of infrastructure is the One-Stop Shop
                         component. In addition to OSS, some smaller interior rehabilitations are expected with Central
                         Disability Certification Institute (CDCI). A detailed assessment study of the buildings is currently
                         ongoing, which might identify rehabilitation works to be covered by the project. The study includes
                         assessment of buildings under: Centers for Social Welfare (118 nationwide); the Health Insurance
                         Fund branches nationwide; the Pension Insurance Fund branches also nationwide; the Public
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Employment Centers; and Public Administration Offices nationwide. The proposed one-stop-shop
                         will transform the experience of social assistance beneficiaries by providing a single service point for
                         them to apply for and receive a range of cash benefits. Having OSS will reduce the time and cost of
                         application for beneficiaries.

                         The intra-governmental working group leading the OSS preparations has determined that the Public
                         Administration Offices will be the primary hosts of the new OSS. However, a detailed assessment of
                         the current facilities (space, renovations, IT etc.) of the PAOs has not yet been conducted. It is likely
                         that significant investment and technical assistance would be needed to allow such transfers to
                         happen effectively through the OSS housed in Public Administration Offices. Investments required
                         would include: re-organization and upgrade and rehabilitation of space, training of personnel and
                         integration of a Management Information System. It is unlikely that any new build will be required,
                         since there are so many public offices in every region that if one Public Administration Office is
                         entirely unsuitable, the OSS could be housed in another government building (for example, in the
                         Center for Social Welfare, Health Insurance Fund, Pension Insurance Fund or Public Employment
                         Center).

                         The scope of environmental impacts is considered site specific, predictable and easily mitigated as
                         the project might support only smaller buildings rehabilitation for OSS purposes.



                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                         Social
                         The Program is expected to have positive social implications, with cash benefits more readily and
                         easily accessible by beneficiaries; more means-testing to ensure cash benefits go to the needy and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         vulnerable groups; and greater de-institutionalization of vulnerable children and adults.

                         It is expected that the proposed program will stimulate greater social integration and assist in the
                         development and implementation of more inclusive social policies to target better the vulnerable
                         social groups. The implementation of the ‘one-stop shop’ concept for social benefits could also
                         contribute to social accountability by increasing the effectiveness of controls of social service
                         delivery outcomes that are currently shared by many different institutions.

                         Also, it could contribute to increase the ability to monitor and evaluate provisions of social welfare
                         delivery system; increase the voice of beneficiaries and civil society groups in delivery of social
                         welfare policies and programs; and improve their feedback on the program and state responsiveness.

                         Potential social risk associated with proposed de-institutionalization (approximately 1,000 adults and
                         children with mild disabilities and children without parental care) to be supported by the Project is
                         not a safeguards issue. However, it will be further elaborated in the PAD.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Vera Dugandzic (GURDR)
                         Natasa Vetma (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Project triggers OP/ BP 4.01 due to expected
                         BP 4.01                                               rehabilitation works in buildings, mainly inside of
                                                                               the buildings. The works will not include any
                                                                               changes in blueprint. The impacts will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               temporarily, site specific and typical for small
                                                                               scale construction/ rehabilitation works. The
                                                                               impacts will be mitigates through preparation of
                                                                               site specific EMP checklists.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/      Yes              Some of the building envisaged for OSS might be
                         BP 4.11                                               located in historical urban areas or protected. For
                                                                               these reason the site specific checklist includes
                                                                               predefined mitigation measures for rehabilitation
                                                                               works on protected buildings. It also includes
                                                                               measures for chance finds.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No




                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               Though a detailed assessment of the investments
                            4.12                                                 required for re-organization and upgrade of space
                                                                                 has not yet been conducted, no land acquisition,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 displacement of occupants (legal or illegal), or
                                                                                 restriction of access to resources or income
                                                                                 streams is expected under the proposed Project.
                                                                                 As currently stated, the Project will not finance
                                                                                 any new construction but instead will support
                                                                                 only small rehabilitation works within the
                                                                                 existing buildings. Any sites presenting situations
                                                                                 that would trigger OP 4.12, will be excluded from
                                                                                 project consideration.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Project has been classified as an environmental category B and triggers the safeguard policy
                              OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment and OP 4.11 on Cultural Heritage, as the project is
                              likely to involve rehabilitation of buildings in predominately urban and therefore possibly historic
Public Disclosure Copy




                              areas. The scope of environmental impacts is considered site specific, predictable and easily
                              mitigated as the project will support only smaller buildings rehabilitation. Rehabilitation works do
                              not envisage changes in blueprint, but solely interior and exterior improvements, implementation
                              of the energy efficiency performance of buildings, adjustments of entrances, etc. Project will not
                              have potentially large scale, significant or irreversible impacts.
                              A template Environmental Management Plan Checklist, that serves as the Environmental
                              Management Framework for the project, was prepared prior to appraisal as sample for other sites
                              to be rehabilitated and was already completed for Velika Gorica Local Office of Zagreb County.
                              The EMP Checklist is applied for minor rehabilitation or small-scale building construction,
                              especially in education, health and public service reconstruction sector. It provides a “pragmatic
                              good practice” and it is designed to be user friendly and compatible with WB safeguard
                              requirements. The EMP Checklist was prepared to guide mitigation and monitoring of potential
                              noise, dust, waste, or other impacts on landscape and urban areas as well as to ensure that the civil
                              works implementation are carried-out in accordance with the good construction practices, existing
                              Croatian construction and environmental legislation as well as with the Bank operational policies
                              applicable to the project.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The environmental impacts of the project are expected to be manageable, temporary and of local
                              impact as they are related to the general reconstruction activities on already known and previously


                                                                         Page 6 of 9
                           used location. These impacts most commonly include: a) dust and noise due demolition and
                           reconstruction; b) management of demolition construction wastes and accidental spillage of
                           machine oil, lubricants, paints etc., c) damage to historical or cultural property or unknown
Public Disclosure Copy




                           archaeological sites; and d) traffic disturbance. No significant indirect or long-term environmental
                           impacts are expected.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The Ministry of Social Policy and Youth has agreed that the Public Administration Offices will be
                           the primary hosts of the new OSS. However, a detailed assessment of the current facilities (space,
                           renovations, IT etc.) of the PAOs has not yet been finalized. A detailed assessment study of the
                           buildings currently ongoing will identify buildings to be included in the project as well as
                           associated rehabilitation works to be covered by the project. Project will not support new buildings
                           construction.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           For each identified building rehabilitation that would go beyond simple interior rehabilitation, a
                           site specific EMP checklist would be prepared based on EMP checklist prepared for Velika
                           Gorica. Each site specific EMP checklist would be publically disclosed in Croatian language on
                           the website of the Ministry as well in hard copy in the building being rehabilitated. All comments
                           from the public will be addressed and if needed reflected in the checklist. EMP checklist will be
                           part of the tendering documentation for rehabilitation works and therefore part of the work
                           contractors and supervisor contracts.

                          As part of project preparation, the PIU prepared a template Environmental Management Plan
                          Checklist, that serves as the Environmental Management Framework for the project. It was
                          prepared prior to appraisal as sample for other sites to be rehabilitated and was already completed
                          for Velika Gorica Local Office of Zagreb County.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Ministry does not have a separate environmental unit, therefore training will be provided to
                           MSPY, PIU and PAO staff prior to project implementation. MSPY will be responsible for the
                           coordination and monitoring of activities at the technical level, including environmental planning
                           and management. The MSPY’s responsibility would include the following activities related to
                           environmental safeguards: ensure that the EMP are contractual obligations of the contractor and
                           supervising engineer; supervise the work performed by engineering / design companies to ensure
                           that they are applying adequate standards, as well as the agreed EMP checklist; assign a person
                           within PIU responsible for environmental issues prior to negotiations.
                           The PIU will coordinate environmental training during project implementation for staff, designers
                           and local contractors; and conduct periodic site visits. PAO will be responsible for supervising
                           construction to ensure, full compliance with the EMP checklist; and for procuring and supervising
                           all related works.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders of the project include the: Ministry of Public Administration, Ministry of Social
                           Policy and Youth, Public Administration Offices, Center for Social Welfare, Health Insurance
                           Fund, Pension Insurance Fund or Public Employment Center, etc.

                          General EMP checklist was disclosed on May 30, 2014 on the webpage of the Ministry of Social


                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                           Policy and Youth (MSPY) (www.mspm.hr) in both English and Croatian, and a hardcopy was
                           available in Velika Gorica. EMP checklist was publicly discussed in form of a public meeting on
                           June 16, 2014. All comments from the public were addressed and in form of minutes attached to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the checklist. There were no negative comments from the public.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      22-May-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Jun-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Croatia                                                          30-May-2014
                           Comments: The EMP checklist was publically discussed in form of a meeting on June 16, 2014
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?



                                                                    Page 8 of 9
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:     Name: Ivan Drabek
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:       Name: Andrew D. Mason (SM)                       Date: 18-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 9 of 9
