                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC4628

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Congo, Democratic Republic                   P145747
                                                                           Project ID:
                                               of
                            Project Name:      DRC: Strengthening PFM and Accountability (P145747)
                            Task Team       Saidou Diop
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       07-Oct-2013                        Estimated        30-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTMW                               Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General public administration sector (60%), Sub-national government
                                               administration (40%)
                            Theme(s):          Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (60%), Other
                                               accountability/anti-corruption (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      5.00                    Total Bank Financing:          5.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  5.00
                              Total                                                                        5.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           33.      Considering the complementarities with other donor-funded programs, the proposed MDTF
                           operation will focus on downstream PFM reforms of the central government (i.e. decentralization of
                           commitment authority to line ministries, accounting, reporting and cash management, external audits,
                           legislative oversight, and demand side of governance) and public financial management in the
                         provinces previously supported by DFID through UNDP (Equateur, Kasaï-Oriental, and North Kivu).
                         In addition, the Bank executed component of the proposed operation should serve as a platform for
                         better donor coordination of PFM reform by using a common basket-funding mechanism and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         increasing financial information about donor-funded operations such as aid on budget and on
                         accounting).
                         C. Project Description
                         I. Project Development Objective(s)

                         The proposed project development objective is to enhance the credibility, transparency, and
                         accountability in the management and use of central government and selected sub-national
                         governments’ finances.

                         II. Project Description

                         Component 1- Improving budget execution processes

                         This component aims to empower line ministries in the budget execution process and improve cash
                         management and internal audits. It includes three sub-components: (a) supporting decentralization of
                         commitment authority to line ministries; (b) enhancing cash management and (c) strengthening ex-
                         ante controls and internal audits. This component will be used to link the program with other Bank
                         projects in health, education, agriculture, infrastructure and rural development sectors. This will be
                         done through regular meetings and sharing of information. This component will be implemented with
                         due consideration of ongoing partners’ capacity building and public administration strengthening
                         efforts (creation of national administration institute, development of curricula and training
                         modules…).

                         Component 2 - Strengthening budget oversight
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component aims to enhance the external oversight in the management of public finances. It
                         includes three sub-components: (a) strengthening external audit processes; (b) strengthening the
                         legislative oversight; and (c) increasing public access to key fiscal information and strengthening
                         demand side of governance.

                         Component 3 - Building public sector and financial management systems at provincial level

                         This component aims at improving PFM systems and improving public services in Equateur, Kasai-
                         Oriental, and North Kivu (when the security situation will permit) provinces. The entry point of all
                         capacity-building activities funded under this component will be the Plateforme minimale agreed
                         with all donors. The component includes 3 sub-components: achieving the same objective which is to
                         build public sector and financial management systems in each province abovementioned. Any
                         support to North Kivu province will be done in close coordination with conflict prevention and
                         stabilization initiatives, in order to contribute to peace and stabilization in the province through
                         enhanced governance, state-citizen trust and local level accountability. The below activities
                         described into the sub components will learned from PRCG experience. Joint mission will be
                         envisaged with PRCG yet the provinces covered are not the same.

                         Component 4- Project management
                               This component will provide support to the COREF for the coordination, administration,
                               communication, financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation, audit, and
                               dissemination of the project’s activities at both central and local levels. At the provincial level,
Public Disclosure Copy




                               COREF will set up local teams comprising a provincial coordinator, procurement and financial
                               management officers, and an administrative staff to oversee the provincial-level implementation of
                               the program. The component will also support the activities related to the memorandum of
                               understanding to monitor the implementation of the PFM reform program and harmonize
                               international development partners’ PFM interventions. The component will include change
                               management activities to create broad consensus and identify key incentives around reform activities.
                               D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                               analysis (if known)
                               The project will be carried out with DRC counterpart institutions in the Capital Kinshasa and three
                               selected provinces Equateur, Quasai Oriental and North Kivu. The only physical activities that are
                               foreseen are the procurement of electronic hardware (computer terminals, serves).
                               E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTN1)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Oct-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             N/a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:     Name: Saidou Diop

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 19-Dec-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Renaud Seligmann (SM)                        Date: 19-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
