                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC5106

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Africa                           Project ID:     P132821
                            Project Name:      Central Africa Backbone SOP5 (P132821)
                            Task Team          Jerome Bezzina
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          30-Apr-2014                      Estimated       15-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     TWICT                            Lending         Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General information and communications sector (20%), Information technology
                                               (30%), Telecommunications (50%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (40%), Regulation and
                                               competition policy (40%), State-owned enterprise restru cturing and
                                               privatization (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    138.00                    Total Bank Financing:        91.50
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 91.50
                              Foreign Private Commercial Sources (identified)                             46.50
                              Total                                                                      138.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the proposed project is consistent with the PDO for the CAB Program:
                           to contribute to increase geographical reach and usage of regional broadband infrastructure and to
                           reduce the price of services to enable more people in the DRC to access ICT services.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed project would become the fifth phase of the Central African Backbone (CAB) Series of
                         Projects (SOP) Program. The Bank has been actively supporting the connectivity agenda in Africa
Public Disclosure Copy




                         under regional projects such as the Regional Communications Infrastructure Program (RCIP) in
                         Eastern and Southern Africa (started in 2007), the West Africa Regional Communications
                         Infrastructure Program (WARCIP) (started in 2010), and the CAB program (started in 2009). These
                         programs have addressed connectivity challenges, such as increasing access to submarine
                         connectivity, managing cross-border links to promote seamless and redundant regional connectivity,
                         and expanding national networks to deliver broadband Internet to first and second tier urban centers.

                         The proposed CAB5 project builds on the overall regional program, and would have potential
                         benefits within the DRC and across the borders it shares with nine other countries. The World Bank
                         report, “Reviving the Great Lakes: A World Bank Group Regional Initiative for Peace, Stability and
                         Economic Development ,” which was submitted to the Board of Directors in June 2013 and which
                         lays out a strategy for regional development looking at linkages between peace security and long
                         term development in the great lakes region, mentions the CAB Program and the proposed CAB5
                         project as examples of the World Bank Group’s regional approach to development : “The CAB5
                         project brings the prospect of linking the east of the DRC to Kinshasa and to east African countries
                         and the world. All countries in the region have an interest in exploiting ICT for development and for
                         pursuing regional connectivity and regional ICT solutions.” The strategy was developed in support of
                         the February 24, 2013 Peace, Security and Cooperation framework for the DRC and the region.

                         More specifically, the second pillar of the Great Lakes’ Regional Development Initiative, which is
                         centered on Economic Cooperation and Regional Integration, stresses that all countries in the Great
                         Lakes region have a common interest in developing infrastructure to increase regional connectivity.
                         It also mentions that the proposed CAB5 Project would not only establish communications links
                         connecting the east of the DRC to Kinshasa, but also increase DRC’s connectivity to the region and
                         globally, allowing for opportunities in trade and improve coordination of security efforts. The second
Public Disclosure Copy




                         pillar further promotes the “important opportunities for close coordination of the CAB5 project and
                         the RCIP project which is being implemented in Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda and other countries in
                         east Africa”.

                         IDA financing would be an important catalyst for continued and efficient infrastructure development
                         in the DRC and surrounding countries. DRC’s telecommunications networks are severely
                         fragmented, with many operators having a presence in just a portion of the country. Without any
                         coordination national connectivity will likely be hindered which would in turn diminish the role that
                         DRC could potentially have in furthering connectivity in the region. The role of IDA financing
                         would therefore be two-fold: (i) a World Bank project would support the establishment of a
                         nationwide —as opposed to fragmented— connectivity network that would lead to greater provision
                         of broadband Internet; and (ii) IDA financing would not only fill the funding gap that is required to
                         fully leverage the various connectivity investments within the country, across borders, and to the
                         submarine cables, but also would provide assurance to private companies to overcome their
                         reluctance to invest in the sector because of the security situation in the region.
                         Countries participating in the regional connectivity programs are required to endorse a set of key
                         principles –. The key principles include, committing to an Open Access Policy and promoting Public
                         Private Partnerships (PPP). An Open Access Policy would ensure that rules are put in place so that
                         all market players have fair access to the necessary infrastructure including backbone infrastructure
                         which tends towards a natural monopoly due to its high upfront investment requirement.
                         Furthermore, in order to avoid a natural monopoly, a PPP vehicle could ensure communal ownership
                         and/or management of the high-investment backbone infrastructure, facilitating continued national
                         and regional infrastructure development, especially in countries where individual operators have
Public Disclosure Copy




                         limited investment capacity and opportunities.

                         Network deployment under the proposed project would be conducted through a PPP (to be
                         established) and defined Open Access arrangements between the relevant operators. The project
                         would use a cooperative PPP model (i.e. infrastructure sharing consortium) between operators in the
                         DRC to share costs through a common vehicle. The settlement of a cooperative PPP structure in the
                         DRC has been extensively discussed since September 2012 with the industry stakeholders under a
                         Bank-supported technical assistance project, DRC ICT Regulatory Advisory Services (P132812).
                         This intense policy dialogue led to the finalization of a MoU between GoDRC (COPIREP and
                         MINPTT) and the private operators in the country. All participating that would develop, operate and
                         commercialize on a wholesale basis the network it builds. In light of these developments, a Project
                         Preparation Advance (PPA) has been requested to help establish the PPP as a legal entity prior to
                         Board approval of the CAB5 project.

                         Project Components. Four components have been identified: Component 1 – Enabling environment
                         at the regional and national levels; Component 2 – Connectivity and purchase of bandwidth;
                         Component 3 – Promotion of ICT sector and digitalization; Component 4 – Project management and
                         monitoring & evaluation.

                         Bank funds would be provided through Investment Project Financing, Series of Projects (SOP) . The
                         Project would be executed over a five-year period with total financing of around US$138 million,
                         including US$46.5 million contribution from the private operators.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed CAB5 Project would aim to contribute to the deployment of about 3,700 km of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         7,000 km target fiber optic network to be built in a modular way. The proposed network design
                         would connect the three key economic clusters, Kinshasa, Lubumbashi, Goma, including appropriate
                         cross border connections. These three key economic clusters will then be connected together utilizing
                         existing links from Mbuji-Mayi to form a comprehensive national broadband infrastructure. The
                         proposed project would finance $103 million in infrastructure (of which $46.5 million would come
                         from private stakeholders).
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Government of the DRC has experience with the Bank’s Safeguard Policies due to Bank-funded
                         projects across different sectors. In addition, the country also has a national agency, the GEEC
                         (Groupe d’études environnementales du Congo), in charge of technical approval of the
                         environmental and social safeguard instruments for all projects and activities which must be
                         implemented in the country. This agency is also familiar with the safeguard instruments such as the
                         Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement PolicyFramework
                         (RPF).

                         Nevertheless capacity levels of the ministry in charge of telecommunication and of the GEEC remain
                         low and need continued strengthening to address properly safeguard issues during the project’s
                         implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Paula F. Lytle (AFTCS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Abdoulaye Gadiere (AFTN1)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes          The project under component 2 foresees three
                           BP 4.01                                        interregional links to neighboring countries
                                                                          including fiber optic cables, terminal equipment
                                                                          and switches. Furthermore, the construction of
                                                                          the e-waste center and the network is also
                                                                          foreseen under component 3. All these activities
                                                                          are expected to have potential adverse impacts
                                                                          even if on limited scale.
                                                                          Although the components and activities of the
                                                                          project are relatively well known the exact areas
                                                                          where the activities will be implemented has not
                                                                          yet been determined. An Environmental and
                                                                          Social Management Framework (ESMF) is
                                                                          being prepared, and will be reviewed, consulted
                                                                          upon and disclosed within the DRC and at the
                                                                          InfoShop prior the appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes          The project is not expected to be implemented
                                                                          in natural habitats. But as the Democratic
                                                                          Republic of Congo is known as being a forested
                                                                          country the probability to meet natural habitats
                                                                          is not negligible. So, this policy is triggered in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          order to pay attention to these particular
                                                                          ecosystems during the implementation of the
                                                                          project. However, no specific safeguard
                                                                          instrument is required. The ESMF which will be
                                                                          prepared in accordance with OP/PB4.01 will
                                                                          take into consideration this issue.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                No           The project is not expected to have significant
                                                                          adverse impacts on the forest resources due to
                                                                          the weak space influence of the fiber optic
                                                                          cables and other equipment
                           Pest Management OP 4.09           No           The project does not require pest management.

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD          This policy may be triggered because of the
                           BP 4.11                                        length of the fiber optic cables which will cross
                                                                          many provinces in DRC. The ESMF may
                                                                          include measures to address these issues; or, a
                                                                          Physical Cultural Resources Management
                                                                          Framework may be prepared to ensure that this
                                                                          issue has been taken into consideration. If it is
                                                                                                                                 prepared, this instrument will be reviewed,
                                                                                                                                 consulted upon and disclosed within the country
                                                                                                                                 and at the InfoShop.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     TBD                           The project will determine if Indigenous
                                                                                                                                 Peoples may be in the project area. If so, an
                                                                                                                                 Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework will be
                                                                                                                                 prepared, consulted upon and disclosed before
                                                                                                                                 appraisal.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The routing of the fiber optic network and
                                 4.12                                                                                            interregional links has not yet been determined
                                                                                                                                 at this time, though it is likely to follow existing
                                                                                                                                 road infrastructure. Construction activities could
                                                                                                                                 therefore require land acquisition or could affect
                                                                                                                                 roadside vendors with temporary disruption of
                                                                                                                                 livelihood activities. A Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                                 Framework will be prepared, consulted upon
                                                                                                                                 and disclosed before appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            N/A

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-May-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy
                                      Framework (RPF) and possibly a Physical Cultural Resources Management Framework (CRMF)
                                      and Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework will be prepared. These safeguard documents will
                                      be, consulted and disclosed by the Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo in the
                                      country, and by the World Bank’s InfoShop prior to appraisal of the Project.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Jerome Bezzina

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 21-Apr-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Randeep Sudan (SM)                                                                                                   Date: 06-May-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
