                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC5295

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kenya                            Project ID:       P145559
                            Project Name:      Coastal Region Water Security and Climate Resilience Project (P145559)
                            Task Team          Gustavo Saltiel
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          05-May-2014                      Estimated         29-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTN2                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Water supply (50%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector
                                               (25%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (15%),
                                               Irrigation and drainage (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Water resource management (40%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service
                                               Delivery (30%), Climate change (20%), Rural services and infra structure (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    360.00                      Total Bank Financing:        200.00
                            Financing Gap:         160.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   200.00
                              Total                                                                         200.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           TThe project development objective of the KWSCRP-2 is to improve water security and build
                           climate resilience in the Coastal Region by (i) increasing the supply of bulk water to Kenya’s Coastal
                           region, including Mombasa; and (ii) increasing access to water, (iii) developing a demonstration
                           irrigation project and (iv) supporting sustainable livelihood development in Kwale County.
                         C. Project Description
                         The KWSCR program adopts a long-term programmatic approach, whereby a series of investment
                         operations linked to the same overarching objective are undertaken. The first operation in the series,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the Kenya Water Security and Climate Resilience Project 1 (KWSCRP-1) supports laying a strong
                         institutional and legal foundation for sector growth and sustainability and the roll-out of Kenya’s vast
                         water sector investment program. This approach provides the necessary flexibility for the phasing of
                         investment operations to address opportunities and challenges as they emerge. It is expected that the
                         KWSCRP will be implemented over a period of ten to twelve years, which demonstrates the Bank's
                         long term commitment to Kenya’s water sector.

                         The lending instrument is Investment Project Financing (IPF) that supports a series of projects
                         (SOPs). The approach proposed allows the preparation of a series of independent projects under a
                         common program framework. Participants in the series may be national and sub-national entities that
                         address water security and climate resilience issues through their involvement in the program. In this
                         SOP approach, interested parties may opt for participation in the program, but there is no
                         interdependency required among specific projects in the series.

                         The Coastal Region Water Security and Climate Resilience Project (KWSCRP-2) is the second
                         operation in the series, focusing on water security and climate resilience in the coastal region and
                         complements the first project that focuses on national capacity-building, investment pipeline
                         development, and a targeted irrigation investment in western Kenya.

                         The proposed Project would have four components, subject to the availability of financing, focusing
                         on: Mwache Dam and Related Infrastructure (C1); Irrigation and Livestock Development (C2); Rural
                         Area Development and Water Resources Management; (C3) and Project Management (C4). Each
                         component is briefly discussed below.

                         Component 1: Mwache Dam and Related Infrastructure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will finance the construction of the main dam (Mwache), three check dams, raw
                         water transmission lines (gravity-fed) to the treatment plant, transport infrastructure (approach road
                         to dam site and bridges), electromechanical equipment and buildings related to the dam site i.e. all of
                         the infrastructure needed to supply water (raw water, before treatment works) to the Mombasa water
                         supply system. The component would also include implementation of the environmental
                         management plan.

                         The proposed dam is a concrete gravity dam with height of 77.9m, crest length of 425 m and with a
                         reservoir capacity of 118 million m3. The dam is expected to supply 186,000 m3/day (67.9 MCM/
                         year) for urban water supply (all of which will go to Mombasa County), as well as water for
                         irrigation to a nearby command area of about 2,500 ha. The hydrological assessment, including
                         climate change impacts and the sediment management plan preparation are being finalized. Whilst
                         the sensitivity of the water supply reliability of the dam reservoir to climate change was considered
                         using an increased coefficient of variation in discharge flow pattern, a comprehensive sedimentation
                         management plan, involving catchment management, reservoir operation, etc. is under preparation to
                         minimize sediment deposit impacts on water supply reliability in the long run. The dam design and
                         safety plans are being reviewed by a dam safety Panel of Experts and subject to further
                         modifications. The dam site is located across the Mwache River at the Fulugani village (Kwale
                         County), about 22 km west of the city of Mombasa in the Coastal region of Kenya and near the
                         coastline.

                         It is expected that the final design of Mwache dam will consider uncertainties related to future
Public Disclosure Copy




                         climate scenarios, as well as other uncertainties such as those related to population growth and
                         changing patterns of urbanization and the expansion of informal, small-holder irrigation.

                         Component 2: Irrigation and Livestock Development

                         Component 2 would support the development of an irrigation scheme of 2,500 ha in Kwale county,
                         as well as intensive training of farmers through participatory approaches, introduction of new high
                         value crops, a marketing study and development of market linkages, strengthening of the existing
                         irrigation service, and formation of, and capacity building for, an irrigation Water Users’ Association
                         (s). The direct target beneficiaries of the proposed irrigation scheme at full development would be
                         approximately 25,830 people – i.e. about 2,200 households including that are currently farming land
                         in the proposed irrigable area, and some 1,500 other households who would gain incremental wage
                         employment opportunities on the new irrigated farms and through related economic activities. The
                         component will increase the value of food production in the area from about Ksh 240 million to
                         about Ksh 2 billion per year contributing to enhanced food security in the coastal region and the
                         development of food exports to other regions of Kenya.

                         Key activities under this component would include: (i) infrastructure for 2,500 ha of irrigation
                         producing food crops and livestock products for home consumption and the local market as well as
                         horticultural crops for the local and export markets; (ii) training of and capacity building for
                         irrigation farmers’ organizations, including technical support for the formation of Irrigation Water
                         Users Associations (IWUAs) and other farmers’ organizations to empower them to operate and
                         maintain the irrigation system and contract with the market for improved access to agricultural inputs
                         and marketing of their products; (iii) a study of the potential local and export markets to absorb
                         horticultural produce from the project, promotion of market linkages between irrigation farmers and
                         agribusinesses, including exporters (such as VEGPRO), to support sustainable and inclusive
Public Disclosure Copy




                         agricultural production and development of value chains; (iv) strengthening public extension service
                         through the Farmer Field School (FFS) approach to ensure that work is relevant to the needs of
                         resource-poor farmers; and (v) establishment of a fund to provide seed capital to ‘kick-start’ irrigated
                         and livestock production.

                         As climate change will increasingly impact rain-fed agriculture, the development of irrigation in the
                         area will improve climate resilience, particularly through the avoided damage from increasingly
                         frequent climate events and changes in rainfall patterns. Indeed, a recent World Bank paper (Climate
                         Change, Agriculture and Food Security in Tanzania, September 2012) noted that food security in 110
                         districts in neighboring Tanzania appears likely to deteriorate as a consequence of climate change,
                         with this decline coming through reductions in agricultural production, principally food production,
                         due to increases in temperature and changes in rainfall patterns. In the dry scenario, average
                         agricultural production levels are more than 10 percent below the levels of a hypothetical no climate
                         change scenario by mid-century. In light of this, it is clear that a move away from raid-fed agriculture
                         will help to buffer the region’s economy to climate change impacts, and contribute to climate
                         resilience.

                         Component 3: Rural Area Development and Water Resources Management

                         This component is aimed at developing and uplifting the livelihoods (economic and social) of
                         communities in the immediate Mwache area as well as other areas in Kwale County and would be
                         geared to improving the livelihoods of the PAPs (i.e. approximately 5,300 households –
                         approximately 37,000 people) in Mazeras, Mnyenzeni, Chigato and Mwatate sub-locations of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Kinango District. It will also include targeted Water Resources Management activities, both in the
                         catchment area as well as more broadly in the Coastal Region.

                         The rural area development will include potential development initiatives that the communities in the
                         area consider vital and which can be off shoots of the Mwache dam including for instance; fisheries,
                         Small and Micro-Enterprises (SMEs), water supply and sanitation, health, ecotourism, watershed
                         management and other social infrastructure.

                         These activities will be conducted in accordance with a Rural Area Development Plan (RADP) that
                         will (i) define effective strategies to meet the needs of communities beyond the immediate area of
                         influence to improve or at least restore their livelihoods, incomes and living conditions, in a manner
                         that (ii) coordinate and synchronize these strategies with ongoing programs and projects that have
                         been endorsed by governments and donors and (iii) create opportunities for rural development
                         targeting the larger communities in the Project area, through direct funding by the Project and/or
                         benefit sharing of revenues from the Project.

                         This component will also include support for improved climate-resilient water resources
                         management. This will be done through support for WRMA and the associated basin/local offices in
                         the Coastal region, in terms of support for institutional infrastructure, information infrastructure,
                         improved decentralized and multi-sectoral planning, and climate risk assessments for upcoming
                         investments and associated water systems. The component could also include activities targeted at
                         understanding and addressing key issues in the greater catchment área, such as soil and water
                         conservation, and erosion control in key hot spots to reduce sediment production and mitigate
                         siltation. A key focus will be to improve climate resilience in this critical area of Kenya.

                         Promoting pro-poor, climate-resilient growth in the overall catchment area for Mwache is crucial to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         achieve the expected benefits from the multipurpose Mwache dam (i.e. water supply for Mombasa,
                         increased agricultural production, and subsequent economic growth). Watershed management
                         including environment, agriculture, irrigation, forestry, livestock, water supply and energy, among
                         others should be tackled on a participative, multi-sectoral and cooperative manner, focusing at the
                         local community levels for service delivery and support to sustainable co-management of natural
                         resources.

                         Component 4: Project Management

                         This component will establish and finance a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within the Coastal
                         Development Authority (CDA). It is currently envisioned that the PIU will take the lead on execution
                         of project activities (including preparation of tender and design documents, technical supervision of
                         works, and contract management as well as planning, coordination and reporting for all project
                         activities. The PIU will be supported by an Implementation Support Consultant (ISC), which could
                         be a consortium of firms with relevant national and international experience. The ISC will be
                         embedded in the PIU and will be responsible for delivering key activities, including project planning
                         and reporting, civil works supervision, implementation of social and environmental safeguards
                         instruments, etc. The ISCs will also provide capacity building, including in technical areas and for
                         general fiduciary and safeguards functions (in coordination with PMU).
                         The central Project Management Unit (PMU), established under Phase 1 of the program, will
                         maintain overall fiduciary responsibility and supervise execution, including the delivery of contracts.
                         While the PIU will be responsible for coordinating the implementation of environmental and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                         safeguards instruments (including the ESMP, RAP and VMGP), the PMU will be responsible for
                         supervising timely and appropriate implementation of safeguards instruments. The specific mandate
                         and role of the PIU and PMU relative to other key stakeholders (including CWSB, MOWASCO,
                         Mombasa County, and Kwale County) will be clarified in a Memorandum of Agreement that is
                         currently under preparation.

                         Note: At present, the financing envelope for the activities above (Mwache Dam and related
                         infrastructure, full development of the irrigation scheme and livestock activities, rural area
                         development and water resources management, and project management), as well as the Water
                         Treatment Plant and transmission lines associated with the Mwache Dam, are estimated at US$ 360
                         million.

                         The Bank and MEWNR are assessing different options for financing activities that exceed the US$
                         200 million IDA envelope. It is likely that the final scope of activities would focus largely on
                         Mwache Dam and key infrastructure (Component 1) and rural area development and water resources
                         management activities (Component 3). The final scope of these activities will be finalized by project
                         appraisal.

                         For financing the Water Treatment Plant and transmission lines associated with the Mwache Dam,
                         MEWNR is assessing financing options including investments from Mombasa County and private
                         sector participation. A potential Public-Private Partnership (PPP) structure is currently being
                         explored by the PPP unit in The National Treasury. Under the PPP structure, a private company
                         could build, operate and/or finance these investments on the basis of a long term Water Purchase
                         Agreement (WPA) signed with a government off-taker. It is also likely that additional IDA funds
                         would be available in subsequent years to contribute to the overall financing needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project is located in Coast Province in Kenya, Kwale district and spans between
                         Kasemeni and Mwavumbo locations, approximately 22 km west of Mombasa Island by road. The
                         dam is proposed to be constructed on Mwache River, which lies in undulating terrain, between sea
                         level and 300 metres above sea level and drains into the Indian Ocean through Mwache Creek at Port
                         Reitz south of Mombasa Island.

                         Mwache river basin covers an area of 2,250 km2 and lies between 14m to 300m above sea level and
                         exhibits gentle slopes in the upper regions and flat in the lower regions. The proposed dam site in the
                         sub-catchment is located near Fulugani village of Kasemeni Division in Kinango District and falls in
                         a straight stretch of the river Mwache located inside a gorge. The Mwache dam site and surrounding
                         area comprises of sand rock formation, considered to be sound and suitable for construction of any
                         type of dam

                         In general the project area has a bi-modal rainfall pattern with well drained loamy sand soils. The
                         long rainy season (long rain) starts in March and extends up to July. The short rainy season which
                         starts in October and extends up to December have less rain than long rain season. The annual rain is
                         about 1074 mm. The area experiences significant heavy flows during the wet season with notable silt
                         deposition and riverbed scouring from strong storm flows. The riverbed is characterized with pools
                           of stagnant water that are beneficial to the farmers, watering livestock as well as limited fishing.
                           Further downstream is the Mwache River estuary that begins from the Bonje Bridge into the dense
                           mangrove forest of Mwache Creek that gives way into the sea at Port Reitz.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project area is homogeneous with respect to the social setting, vegetation cover and economic
                           characteristics. The physiography, however, varies over short distances from ragged and undulating
                           landscape to steep valleys towards the sea and flat zones to the north and west. Land gradient is one
                           of major land characteristic which plays an important role in determination of its suitability for
                           farming activities and type of irrigation in view of high erosion risk and low workability.

                           The site is characterized by a mixture of environmental features including forests, deep valleys, open
                           lands, cultivated lands, variety of reptiles and rodents, etc. There are also social and economic
                           features such as settlements, institutions, cultural sites, watering points, grazing areas and sand
                           harvesting locations on Mwache river.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The GoK has established the Environmental Management and Coordination Act (EMCA) of 1999,
                           which empowers the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) with an oversight role
                           on environmental compliance. In accordance with the EMCA, NEMA is responsible for conducting
                           annual environmental audits and carrying out due diligence on the projects that have already
                           undertaken EIAs, as well as those in the process of undertaking EIAs. However, overall capacity for
                           implementation of environmental and social safeguards policies is still low. Inadequate capacity to
                           execute the required social and environmental risk mitigation measures could lead to high negative
                           social and environmental impacts and undermine project results.

                           To mitigate this, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement
                           Policy Framework (RPF), and a Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups Framework (VMGF) have
                           been prepared under the Phase 1 of KWSCRP to guide project implementation and preparation of
                           site-specific environmental and social impact assessments and resettlement action plans for specific
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project investments. The Project Management Unit, established under Phase 1 of the program
                           (KWSCRP-1) will support the implementing agency (CDA) to prepare and supervise the
                           implementation of environmental and social instruments. The PMU includes social and
                           environmental safeguards specialists, and will be responsible for ensuring the application of social
                           and environmental frameworks (ESMF, VMGF and RPF) and supervising the implementation of
                           safeguards instruments.

                           In order to enhance capacity of the CDA, training programs related to preparation and the
                           implementation of the Social and Environmental Management Plan, the Resettlement Action Plan,
                           and Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups Plan will be provided. The World Bank team will carry out
                           close, field-based implementation support and supervision.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Zarafshan H. Khawaja (AFTCS)
                           Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS)
                           Hocine Chalal (AFTN1)
                           Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTN3)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                         Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          Construction of the dam related infrastructure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                     on river Mwache is likely to reduce
                                                                     environmental flow downstream of the dam
                                                                     with possible negative consequences on the
                                                                     productivity and ecological integrity of the
                                                                     Mwache creek and its dependent biophysical
                                                                     and socio- economic environment. Based on the
                                                                     Environmental and Social Management
                                                                     Framework (ESMF) for the KWSCRP -1 an
                                                                     Environmental and Social Management Impact
                                                                     Assessment (ESIA) will be prepared, consulted
                                                                     upon and disclosed before appraisal. The ESIA
                                                                     will establish potential positive and negative
                                                                     impacts. An Environmental and Social
                                                                     Management Plan (ESMP) will also be prepared
                                                                     detailing measures to mitigate the identified
                                                                     impacts.

                                                                     Since the Mwache dam is envisaged to bring
                                                                     65.7 million cubic meter of water per year to
                                                                     Mombasa, disposal of additional wastewater
                                                                     generated may have environmental impacts. As
                                                                     a result, an ESIA analysis, based on the ESMF
                                                                     for KWSCRP-1, will be conducted for this
                                                                     additional wastewater in the future, as needed.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes          Project activities related to dam construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     may lead to alterations in flow regimes of
                                                                     freshwater into Mwache Creek, such as
                                                                     reduction in silt discharge, which could cause
                                                                     changes in nutrient cycling in the creek
                                                                     ecosystem effectively disrupting the marine life
                                                                     trends and the associated productivity including
                                                                     the mangrove development. Inundation of the
                                                                     area can also change the ecological settings –
                                                                     biological diversity, indigenous species of flora
                                                                     and fauna, potential transformation of the
                                                                     ecological characteristics due to invasive
                                                                     species including vectors.

                                                                     For this reason, the Natural Habitats policy is
                                                                     triggered. The project will strive to retain the
                                                                     ecological functions of the wetlands, which
                                                                     include water purification, flood protection,
                                                                     habitat for aquatic animal and plant species. The
                                                                     ESIA will include mitigation measures for the
                                                                     natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                TBD

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   Although the project will not be financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 pesticide, support to development of an
                                                                 irrigation scheme under Component 2 is likely
                                                                 to involve use of different types of
                                                                 agrochemicals to control diseases pests, and
                                                                 vectors. The project will promote the use of
                                                                 integrated pest management approaches and
                                                                 seek to reduce reliance on synthetic chemical
                                                                 pesticides. An Integrated Pest Management Plan
                                                                 (IPMP) will be prepared, consulted upon and
                                                                 disclosed before appraisal in accordance with
                                                                 the IPM Framework for KWSCRP -1 to provide
                                                                 guidance on the pest and pesticide. The IPMP
                                                                 will provide guidance on assessment of
                                                                 environmental and health risks associated with
                                                                 the envisaged pesticide use and integration of
                                                                 specific measures to these risks in the project
                                                                 design.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The project is likely to inundate cultural
                         BP 4.11                                 heritage sites/graves and /or encounter cultural
                                                                 resources during the construction of the dam.
                                                                 The ESIA will address impacts on physical
                                                                 cultural resources and provide a cultural
                                                                 resources management plan, including “Chance
                                                                 Finds”. Guidance on addressing chance finds for
                                                                 individual investment during project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 implementation has been prepared as part of the
                                                                 ESMF for KWSCRP-1.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The project area is inhabited by the Durumas a
                                                                 sub tribe of the Mijikenda and categorized as
                                                                 vulnerable and marginalized by the Constitution
                                                                 of Kenya. Thus, a Vulnerable and Marginalized
                                                                 Groups Plan (VMGP) will be prepared,
                                                                 consulted upon and disclosed, based on the
                                                                 Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups
                                                                 Framework (VMGF) which was prepared and
                                                                 disclosed under KWSCRP-1. As part of a wider
                                                                 social assessment for the project, socio-cultural
                                                                 and other relevant social and economic issues
                                                                 related to Durumas will be studied, which, in
                                                                 addition to the existing VMGF, will be the basis
                                                                 for the preparation of the VMGP.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The project main component is the construction
                         4.12                                    of a dam across River Mwache in Kasemeni
                                                                 Division of Kinango District in Kwale County
                         and its related structures such as storage, check
                         dams, transmission lines, access, roads,
                         eventually water treatment. etc. These activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will require the acquisition of the land and
                         properties, impacting on assets and physical
                         resettlement of some of the households. In
                         addition, component 2, The Irrigation and
                         Livestock Development and component 3, Rural
                         Development and Water Resource Management
                         all involves land. As part of the feasibility
                         study for the dam itself and the reservoir, a
                         preliminary Resettlement Plan (RAP) was
                         prepared by the design consultant. This RAP
                         will be updated by an independent consultant to
                         ensure it is in accordance to the RPF which was
                         prepared for the KWSCRP-1 and covers all the
                         components being financed by the IDA in this
                         phase of the project. Initial estimates for the
                         dam and reservoir are that about 167 families
                         (1,310 people) would be displaced by the dam,
                         requiring resettlement. This figure is subject to
                         confirmation of the final design of the project.
                         Component 2, the Irrigation and Livestock
                         Development, which requires land. is likely not
                         to be included in this phase of the project and
                         only 150 ha pilot area will be included for
                         irrigation. The updated RAP will include this
                         150 ha of irrigation as well as well as the rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         area development and water resources
                         management activities (Component 3). The
                         RAP will be disclosed in the country and the
                         Infoshop before appraisal.

                         Safeguards documents for the facilities
                         associated with the dam (but not financed under
                         the IDA loan) -- including the Water Treatment
                         Plant, Transmission Lines, and 2,000+ha of
                         irrigation -- would not be included in the scope
                         of the main ESIA and RAP. The related
                         infrastructure such as the access roads,
                         transmission line, and the treatment facilities
                         which are not financed under this phase of the
                         project will also not be included in the RAP.
                         However, the preparation of ESIA and RAP for
                         the associated facilities would start before
                         appraisal. The scope of the activities covered
                                                                                                                                 under this phase will be finalized by project
                                                                                                                                 appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         Yes                           A huge mass of water anticipated in Mwache
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 dam could lead to potential risks including: dam
                                                                                                                                 breaking, spillways giving in, collapsing of
                                                                                                                                 related storage tanks, and overflow onto
                                                                                                                                 upstream bridges roads, accidental drowning of
                                                                                                                                 residents and animals, etc.

                                                                                                                                 The objective of the policy is to ensure that due
                                                                                                                                 consideration is given to the safety of: new
                                                                                                                                 dams to be constructed under the project,
                                                                                                                                 existing dams under construction, or dams under
                                                                                                                                 construction that are not included in the project
                                                                                                                                 but that may affect safety or performance of the
                                                                                                                                 project downstream. For large new dams, the
                                                                                                                                 policy requires review by an independent panel
                                                                                                                                 of experts of the design, construction and start
                                                                                                                                 of operations and the preparation of four plans:
                                                                                                                                 plan for construction supervision and quality
                                                                                                                                 assurance, instrumentation plan, operation and
                                                                                                                                 maintenance plan, and emergency preparedness
                                                                                                                                 plan. The World Bank does not require
                                                                                                                                 disclosure of dam safety-related documents.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            OP/BP 7.50 will not be triggered by the
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            proposed investment. The Mwache Dam is
                                                                                                                                 located on the Mwache river, whose basin lies
                                                                                                                                 fully within Kenya's borders.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             OP/BP 7.60 will not be triggered by the
                                 7.60                                                                                            proposed investment.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 19-Mar-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Safeguards-related studies are expected to conclude by mid-February 2014.

                                      For Mwache Dam, these studies include an updated Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), an updated
                                      Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), a Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups
                                      Plan (VMGP), and an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP).

                                      As noted previously, the final scope of activities to be included in this IDA project will be
                                      finalized by project appraisal. An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and
                                      Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for any associated facilities that would not be financed under this
                                      IDA loan (e.g. the water treatment plant, transmission lines and irrigation scheme) are expected to
                                      be completed by board approval.



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:   Name: Gustavo Saltiel
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 25-Mar-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (SM)   Date: 25-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
