INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCI 129
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Mar-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Lao People's Democratic    Project ID:   P151425
Republic
Project Name:    Lao PDR Health Governance and Nutrition Development Project (P151425)
Task Team        Laura L. Rose,Phetdara Chanthala
Leader(s):
Estimated        24-Mar-2015                Estimated     23-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GHNDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Health (70%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (15%),
Public administration- Health (10%), General energy secto r (5%)
Theme(s):        Child health (10%), Nutrition and food security (40%), Health system
performance (10%), Population and reproductive health (40%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      52.00             Total Bank Financing:    25.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
O
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                5.00
International Development Association (IDA)                      25.00
Asian Development Bank                                           22.00
Total                                                            52.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The objective of the proposed operation is increase coverage of reproductive, maternal and child and
nutrition services in target areas.


﻿C. Project Description
To progress toward attaining of the health-related MDGs by 2015 and achievement of universal
health coverage by 2025, Lao PDR would need a program of support that delivers: (a) enhanced
services for reproductive, maternal, and child health with special focus on better nutrition outcomes
through multi-sectoral actions; (b) sustainable and equitable health financing for the protection of
poor and most vulnerable; and (c) sustained capacity strengthening to deliver these services. The
proposed Program, with support from the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the International
o      Development Association (IDA) will attempt to address constraints on both the supply and demand
side. These include both the direct determinants of health and nutrition that are typically addressed
through health service delivery systems (e.g. antenatal and post-natal care services, provision of
commodities, etc.) and the non-health determinants of health and nutrition (such as behavior change
communication). The Program will be national in coverage, with aspects of the support to be phased
in; the initial coverage will include Provinces identified by the Government as priority areas for
focus on nutrition interventions. The following description presents the components of the Program,
including activities proposed for support by ADB, and provides IDA's expected financial
contribution. It does not include other possible sources of funding such as the intention to apply for
funding from the Global Financing Facility to Advance Women's and Children's Health (GFF)
where Lao PDR is currently waitlisted for the front runner group. The proposed Program components
are:
COMPONENT 1: HEALTH SECTOR GOVERNANCE REFORMS (US$0.5 million), which
supports the Government's Health Sector Reform Framework (HSRF) and will develop missing
systems and institutional arrangements to deliver national health programs; reforms to be supported
include the financial system, human resources, and health (including nutrition) information system.
The component primarily comprises technical assistance and be financed by the ADB project
investment loan. IDA's support will be the contracting of technical assistance to update the health
management information system (DHIS2) for expansion purposes, and operating costs associated
with operating the DHIS2.
0
COMPONENT 2: SERVICE DELIVERY (US$18 million). Financing for this component will cover
existing national programs to increase the utilization of maternal and child health services and family
planning (Free Maternal, Neonatal, and Child Health-FMNCH), nutrition specific interventions, and
provide financial protection for the vulnerable (Health Equity Funds-HEFs). ADB will parallel
finance this through a Policy-Based Loan that will be used to finance grants to the provinces. IDA
support will be based on the performance based lending modality utilizing disbursement linked
indicators (DLIs) to implement results based management and to pay for performance at Provincial
and central levels.
COMPONENT 3: MULTISECTOR RESPONSE TO IMPROVE NUTRITION (US$4 million). This
component will not having any support from ADB, and be wholly financed by IDA. It will support
the design of a social and behavior change campaign (SBCC) to support attainment of Millennium
Development Goal #4, Reduce Child Mortality. Activities to be supported include technical
assistance to help design the campaign, and operating costs related to designing the SBBC. The
second activity to be supported under this component will be support to village level sanitation
through Grants provided to the Districts; it is expected to finance pour flush latrines (estimated at US
$1,300 per village) as well as the consultation and supervision costs of the District associated with
the activity.


﻿COMPONENT 4: MANAGEMENT, MONITORING AND EVALUATION (US$2.5 million). The
component will support routine Program management, including fiduciary tasks and monitoring and
evaluation of the Program. Incremental operating costs, including translation, interpretation,
equipment, supervision costs (transportation and per diem), technical assistance for the National
O
U       Program Coordination Unit of the MOH's Department of Planning and International Cooperation.
All of the foregoing will be financed by the ADB. Financing from IDA will cover technical
assistance for Provinces to achieve the DLIs, contracting of a firm to carry out independent
verification of the DLIs, technical assistance to design a supervision form, and technical assistance to
carry out selected studies such as service delivery survey; availability and readiness assessment;
public expenditure review, and rapid household surveys.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Program will cover the whole country. Support from IDA for the service delivery (Component
2) through DLIs, and the support under Component 4 will exclude Provinces supported by Lao-Lux,
and therefore only cover 14 of the 17 Provinces. Financing from IDA under Component 1 and the
SBCC design under Component 3, will be national. Support provided for village level activities
using District grants would take into consideration supporting Provinces with Districts identified as
priorities under the Multisectoral Nutrition and Food Security Action Plan.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The proposed support is a follow-on operation of the previous ADB and World Bank support to the
health sector. The previous IDA support includes the Health Services Improvement Project (HSIP)
and the Community Nutrition Project (CNP), in which the recipient demonstrated the capacity to
comply with World Bank safeguard policies during implementation. People from ethnic minorities
were trained by the HSIP and CNP Projects giving them preference and posting them back in their
original communities. These mitigation measures are in line with the Ethnic Group Development
Plan (EGDP) applied by the Projects to help health workers from remote areas overcome their
language difficulty. The ADB projects supporting the northern Provinces were implemented in
accordance with their safeguard requirements. In the Provinces supported by HSIP, the district and
provincial health officers are familiar with the Operational Manual, which includes environmental
safeguard requirements, and the safeguard documents prepared for the Project.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (GENDR)
Satoshi Ishihara (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The Program may involve renovation to facilities on
OP/BP 4.01                              their existing footprint, which would be financed
solely by the ADB. IDA financing may support
village level sanitation activities This may lead to
some concerns relating to inconveniences or
nuisances (e.g. dust, noise, construction waste) to
surrounding areas during the renovation. However,
these potential impacts on the environment are
deemed to be minor, site specific and reversible in


﻿nature, and for which mitigation measures can be
readily designed. Based on the past experiences with
HSIP, CNP and the Avian and Human Influenza
Control and Preparedness Project, and to ensure
compliance with World Bank safeguards policies, an
Environmental Code of Practices (ECOP) will be
updated as part of the Operational Manual, which
will be implemented by the Program team. The
technical assistance envisaged under the IDA support
will be contracted to carry out improvements to the
existing management information system, supporting
the design of a social and behavior change campaign
to address nutrition issues, verifying results under the
Service Delivery (DLI financed) component,
designing a supervision checklist, and carrying out
studies to inform that component. The support of
these, as checked against the Interim Guidelines on
the Application of Safeguards for TA activities by
the Bank indicate that there would be no
environmental impact as a result of the work
performed by the consultants.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No          The Program will not cause any degradation of
natural habitats as defined under the safeguard
policy.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          The Program will not degrade critical forest areas as
defined under the safeguard policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          The Program will not involve any procurement of
pesticides nor cause any increased use of pesticide.
Physical Cultural Resources  No         The Program will not adversely affect sites with
OP/BP 4.11                              archaeological, paleontological, historical, religious,
O
or unique natural values.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    Yes         OP4. 10 is triggered, because the districts where the
4.10                                    Program components 2 and 3 would be implemented
will include those districts where poor ethnic groups
reside. Moreover, the component to support behavior
change communication will cover areas that include
ethnic groups. Activities supported under the
Program have been implemented under previous
Bank projects in the health, and other sectors.
The Department of Planning and International
Cooperation together with the Department of
Hygiene and Health Promotion will undertake a
Social Assessment (SA), including in areas where
ethnic groups are present, in order to assess the
Program's potential positive and adverse effects on
local communities including but not limited to ethnic


﻿groups, and examine alternatives where adverse
effects may be significant. In particular, the SA will
review existing barriers for ethnic women and
children to receive proper health services, including
those related to language, traditions, customs, values,
etc. This assessment will identify, in a participatory
manner, measures to address these barriers. Free,
prior and informed consultation will be conducted
with a representative sample of ethnic groups who
are likely to participate in and affected by the
Program. This process will allow their perspectives
to be collected and reflected in the Program design
and that their broad support to the Program is
ascertained. To carry out the SA, the client will hire a
social consultant whose qualification, experience and
Terms of Reference are acceptable to the Bank.
The existing EGDP of the HSIP and CNP will be
updated based on the SA and consultations, and
disclosed both through Infoshop and in-country at
convenient locations prior to Program appraisal.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  TBD          Potential impacts under 4.12 will be assessed and
BP 4.12                                    determined during project preparation.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No            The Program does not involve any dams.
Projects on International     No           The Program does not involve international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No          The Program will not be located in any known
BP 7.60                                    disputed areas as defined in the policy.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 23-Mar-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The existing EGDP of the HSIP and CNP will be updated based on the SA and consultations, and
disclosed both through Infoshop and in-country at a convenient location prior to Program appraisal
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Laura L. Rose,Phetdara Chanthala
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                        Date: 24-Mar-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Toomas Palu (PMGR)                        Date: 24-Mar-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


