                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC7756

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Togo                             Project ID:      P149277
                            Project Name:      Togo: Mining Governance and Development Project Preparation - Phase I
                                               (P149277)
                            Task Team          Brigitte Marie Khadidja B
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       27-Oct-2014                         Estimated        11-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GEEDR                                Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other Mining and Extractive Industries (100%)
                            Theme(s):          Other environment and natural resources management (40%), Managing for
                                               development results (35%), Other public sector governance (20 %), Export
                                               development and competitiveness (5%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     10.00                     Total Bank Financing:         10.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  10.00
                              Total                                                                        10.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           To strengthen the capacity of key institutions to manage the minerals sector, improve the conditions
                           for increased investments in and revenues from mining, and facilitate an effective and efficient
                           spending of mining revenues.
                         The specific development objectives and activities of a possible second project would be defined on
                         the basis of the experiences and lessons learned from the implementation of this Project.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project is consistent with the overall objective of developing the mining sector in a
                         context of transparency and good governance. The implementation of the project will contribute
                         ultimately to a major overhaul of the mining sector in its quest to be one of the main pillars on which
                         the government intends to use to achieve the objectives of boosting growth on a sustainable basis .

                         A. Component 1: Ensure access to resources. This component of the EITI value chain is the
                         fundamental barriers to access to resources and to promotion of mining activities in Togo. The
                         project will focus on (i) developing an infrastructure of geological and mining data and on evaluation
                         of the country’s mineral resources and their potential value, and in ( ii) developing a modern mining
                         cadastre .

                         B. Component 2: Building Sector Management Capacity. This component will address the limited
                         capacity of the current Government's sector management, monitoring its performance and
                         enforcement of rules of law. In this regards, the project aims at: (i) building capacity in key oversight
                         institutions, (ii) strengthening the capacity to negotiate contracts and manage portfolio, and (iii)
                         developing human resources in the mining sector. Particularly regarding human resources capacity,
                         the project will build on the existing Earth Sciences Faculty at the University of Lomé as regards its
                         academic training program and plans to equip the faculty program of an additional new Center for
                         training in technical mine professions.

                         C. Component 3. Improve Transparency and Accountability. The Project will support activities
                         aimed at: (i) improving and promoting transparency and setting-up sound monitoring mechanisms in
                         commercial transactions, sector and revenue management (eg. the EITI process), (ii) strengthening
                         awareness of the tax administration system and tax collection systems, (iii) establishing a broad
                         platform for dialogue and accountability involving various stakeholders in the mining sector, (iv)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         helping to create community development committees; and (v) developing effective tools for modern
                         management of the mining sector of Togo.

                         D. Component 4. Sustainable Development and the Development of Side stream Activities around
                         mining activities. The project will: (i) define and develop business to promote the creation of national
                         SMEs capable of producing inputs to be used by the local mining industry and hence generating a
                         more significant macroeconomic impact of the mining industry. Similarly, the component will
                         support: (ii) the management of social and environmental issues in the mining sector, (iii) artisanal
                         and small-scale mining, and (vi) full integration of the mining sector into broader national
                         development efforts.

                         E. Component 5. Coordination and Project Management. This component will support the Project
                         Implementation Unit, based in the Ministry of Mines, in the management of fiduciary activities,
                         project monitoring and evaluation and the implementation of activities.

                         Issues and recommendations of the project will be used by the government in the development of
                         global or sectoral policies to improve the management of mineral resources of the country and
                         contribute to job creation and the improvement of the conditions of livelihoods of rural people.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           To be determined at a later stage
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Togo is currently significantly challenged in the environmental and social management of the mining
                           sector because of the inadequately staffed and/or trained personnel in key ministries, including the
                           Ministry of Mines and the Ministry of Environment.

                           The safeguards team (including both social and environment) will work closely not only with the
                           Ministry of Mines and the Ministry of Environment Task team on mining issues, but also with civil
                           society and communities at the vicinity of mines. The current IDA will also install an ombudsman so
                           that any potential grievances can be identified and mitigated early on.

                           The ongoing revision of the Mining legislation puts special emphasis on environmental issues. As
                           such, the capacity of the relevant institutions will be deemed appropriate to handle the new project
                           once the new Mining Law is passed. Meanwhile the project will conduct a detailed assessment of
                           existing tools in place to monitor environmental issues related to mining.

                           In sum, the project is designed to assist the Government of the Republic of Togo (i) to put in place
                           the appropriate legal, regulatory and fiscal frameworks, as well as updated social, environmental and
                           other relevant standards and guides; (ii) to build capacity to increase oversight for technical,
                           economic, environmental, health and safety compliance of the sector; (iii) to promote transparency
                           and build accountability mechanisms; and (iv) to stimulate further socio-economic benefits.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (GURDR)
                           Abdoulaye Gadiere (GENDR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The proposed project is Technical Assistance
                           BP 4.01                                              (TA) aimed at strengthening the legal,
                                                                                regulatory and institutional framework, as well
                                                                                as at improving capacity, governance, and
                                                                                planning in the mining sector. The project does
                                                                                not involve civil works or land acquisition.
                                                                                However, future mining development activities
                                                                                are expected to build on the TA activities and
                                                                                will have environmental and social adverse
                                                                                impacts that would be regulated under the
                                                                                strengthened legal and institutional framework.

                                                                                The terms of reference for a Sectoral
                                                                                Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA)
                                                                                will be developed, but the sectoral assessment
                                                                                itself will be carried out as part of the project
                                                                                implementation. This approach has been used
                                                                                                                                 for similar technical assessment projects, and
                                                                                                                                 the TOR will be disclosed for consultation both
                                                                                                                                 in the country and Infoshop prior to Appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 The SESA will examine the current situation in
                                                                                                                                 the sector in terms of environmental and social
                                                                                                                                 management and describe potential
                                                                                                                                 environmental and social impacts in the sector,
                                                                                                                                 including site-specific and cumulative impacts,
                                                                                                                                 pollution, health and safety, and social issues (e.
                                                                                                                                 g inclusion, gender, vulnerable groups, land
                                                                                                                                 administration/Management, labor issues,
                                                                                                                                 conflict, etc.). This assessment will draw on
                                                                                                                                 extensive consultations with stakeholders and
                                                                                                                                 include discussions on community participation
                                                                                                                                 in the sector, governance, transparency and
                                                                                                                                 conflict resolution.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-Sep-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The specified studies and their timing will be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. The terms of
                                      reference related to the Sectoral Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will be prepared,
                                      consulted upon and disclosed both in in-country and Infoshop prior to Appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Brigitte Marie Khadidja B

                                 Approved By:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)          Date: 02-Sep-2014
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Christopher Gilbert Sheldon (SM)   Date: 11-Sep-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
