                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6298
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Armenia                           Project ID:    P146318
                            Project Name:      Armenia Social Protection Administration II Project (P146318)
                            Task Team          Ivan Drabek
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          20-Jan-2014                       Estimated   25-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSH3                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Social safety nets (70%), Improving labor markets (10%), Social risk mitigation
                                              (10%), Other social protection and risk management ( 10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      25.50           Total Bank Financing:                21.20
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        4.30
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              21.20
                              Total                                                                                    25.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are to (i) improve social protection service
                           delivery and (ii) strengthen analytical and monitoring and evaluation functions of the agencies
                           delivering social protection benefits and services.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         The Social Protection Administration Project (SPAP) II will comprise five components as follows:

                         Component I. Rolling-Out of Integrated Social Protection Service Delivery (US$17 million, of which
Public Disclosure Copy




                         World Bank credit US$14.3 million).
                         This component would support rolling-out of integrated social protection service delivery that was
                         initiated and piloted under the SPAP project. The project would finance the following types of
                         activities: i) civil works, IT equipment, furniture, and other goods for 37 Integrated Social Protection
                         Centers (ISPCs), ii) strengthening of ISPCs management information systems across all ISPCs,
                         further software development, and IT support; iii) drafting of legislation for the implementation of
                         the adopted model of integrated social protection service delivery; iv) training for ISPC staff in
                         integrated social protection service delivery, as well as follow up support to the local staff through
                         mentoring and on-the-job training, and v) public outreach through awareness campaigns and printed
                         materials. This component will also include civil works, furniture and other goods for the central
                         offices of two agencies – the State Employment Service Agency (SESA) and the Agency for
                         Medico-Social Expertise (AMSE) - whose functions will be incorporated into the ISPCs at the
                         decentralized level.

                         Component II. Supporting the Implementation of the New Employment Strategy by the Government
                         (US$2.6 million, of which World Bank credit US$2.2 million).
                         The employment component of this project seeks to address some specific challenges of the
                         Armenian labor market, namely: a high share of unemployed and NEET (not in education,
                         employment or training) youth; a low rate of job creation; a lack of specific technical skills which
                         sometimes prevents employers from opening or filling vacancies; and a low awareness and coverage
                         of public employment services among both job seekers and employers. In response to these issues,
                         the project will support a limited set of measures that build on existing initiatives and infrastructure
                         and include: i) strengthening essential capacities of the SESA central services by investing in training
                         activities and IT infrastructure (including upgrading the GORTS management information system);
                         ii) piloting two targeted Active labor Market Programs (ALMPs) ; iii) expanding career orientation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         towards specific skills and supporting its information system, drafting and introduction of online
                         consultancy and distance-training programs implemented via the web page, developing and
                         installation of software for testing of professional orientation; and iv) strengthening monitoring and
                         evaluation capacities, including implementation of rigorous impact evaluations of the ALMPs piloted
                         under the project.

                         Component III: Modernization of the Pension System (US$1.1 million, of which World Bank credit
                         US$0.9 million).
                         The pension component will support the State Social Security Service (SSSS) in improving its core
                         business processes and upgrading them in line with ISPC requirements. SSSS will focus on: i)
                         strengthening its technical capacity through investment in IT technology and further development of
                         its electronic pension information system, ii) development of the risk-based fraud-and-error
                         supervision software and system, iii) improving its HR capacity through training in core and new
                         business processes, such as central payment services for the integrated social delivery system.

                         Component IV: Strengthening Analytical Capacity and Monitoring and Evaluation Systems of
                         MLSA (US$1.3 million, of which World Bank credit US$1.1 million).
                         Activities under this component are aimed at strengthening the capacity of the monitoring and
                         evaluation unit within the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (MLSA) and developing an
                         integrated system of monitoring and evaluation of social protection benefits and services (in total


                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         over 70 different programs). Capacity would be built around both quantitative and qualitative M&E
                         methodologies, and on beneficiary-led tools. This would enable the MLSA to gauge direct
                         beneficiary feedback on quality, satisfaction and impact, streamline the indicators and methodology
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for monitoring the implementation of its policies on the ground (both in terms of impact on the
                         general population as well as on the most vulnerable target groups, and including gender-sensitivity
                         throughout), analyze possible reform options and their impacts, adjust policy solutions, and
                         eventually increase efficiency of the system of social protection. Part of the activities would be
                         focused on case management, continuous training and supervision of case managers in ISPCs.
                         Research activities on poverty and different forms of monetary and non-monetary deprivations, for
                         different vulnerable groups including youth and women, would also be financed under this
                         component. The proposed component would additionally cover the cost of IT equipment, software
                         development, and training of the monitoring and evaluation specialists of the MLSA.

                         Component V: Project Management (US$1.9 million, of which World Bank credit US$1.3 million).
                         This component would finance the standard operation of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) at
                         MLSA for the duration of the project, trainings, and incremental operating costs. The PCU is in
                         charge of technical aspects of the project and ensures overall monitoring and supervision of project
                         activities. The cost of project management would also partially cover the Foreign Financial Project
                         Management Centre (FFPMC) staff time, for those who will perform fiduciary activities for the
                         SPAP II project, as well as maintenance costs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will be implemented countrywide. Individual investments will be made in multiple
                         locations, not all of which are known upfront. Two beneficiary institutions, selected for having their
                         premises rehabilitated, are located in the city of Yerevan: the SESA and the AMSE.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sarah G. Michael (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The Project will finance refurbishment and area
                          BP 4.01                                             landscaping works at 37 ISPCs, including the
                                                                              possibility of small scale new building
                                                                              construction, and refurbishment of premises of
                                                                              the SESA and the AMSE. Most of individual
                                                                              investments will be identified at the early stage of
                                                                              the Project implementation. The envisaged civil
                                                                              works will have modest local environmental and
                                                                              social impacts, which would be easy to mitigate
                                                                              by ensuring that works providers adhere to the
                                                                              conventional good construction and
                                                                              environmental practices. The Project triggers OP/
                                                                              BP 4.01 and, based on the principles of this
                                                                              Policy, is classified as environmental Category B.

                                                                              The 37 ISPCs will be selected and detailed



                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                                                                         designs for their refurbishing or construction will
                                                                         be developed on the rolling basis. Therefore, not
                                                                         all of these decisions will be made and not all
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         designs be prepared by appraisal. However, the
                                                                         environmental and social risks related to the
                                                                         works at all of these centers will be pretty similar
                                                                         and insignificant, and most of them are already
                                                                         known. Because of the above, due diligence for
                                                                         the Project preparation required development of
                                                                         an Environmental and Social Management
                                                                         Framework (ESMF), which describes the main
                                                                         types of expected environmental and social
                                                                         impacts of the expected Project investments, and
                                                                         provides a generic set of their mitigation
                                                                         measures. ESMF also includes guidance for
                                                                         screening upcoming investment proposals, so that
                                                                         no activity gets supported if, by chance, it is
                                                                         associated with higher risks then a Category B
                                                                         Project should finance. Site-specific simple
                                                                         Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) were
                                                                         prepared for the rehabilitation of the SESA and
                                                                         the AMSE offices. Similar EMPs will be
                                                                         developed for individual investments into ISPCs
                                                                         once detailed designs get ready for them. ESMF
                                                                         carries a suggested template of an EMP Checklist
                                                                         for Small Construction and Rehabilitation
                                                                         Activities.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The majority of physical works to be financed
                         4.12                                            from the Project will be for the refurbishment of
                                                                         the existing buildings and upgrading land plots
                                                                         assigned to these buildings, however there is a
                                                                         possibility of several small-scale new building
                                                                         constructions. Also, there is certain likelihood of
                                                                         minor encroachment to the publicly owned land
                                                                         plots around the buildings to be refurbished,
                                                                         Therefore, a precautionary Resettlement Policy



                                                                 Page 4 of 8
                                                                                Framework (RPF) is prepared. RPF provides
                                                                                detailed guidance for developing investment-
                                                                                specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                prepared and implemented prior to
                                                                                commencement of works at a site where
                                                                                resettlement is taking place.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Project will finance refurbishment and area landscaping, and construction works at 37 ISPCs,
                              and rehabilitation of premises for the SESA and the AMSE. Because the Project carries physical
                              investment component involving construction/reconstruction of buildings, the OP/BP 4.01
                              Environmental Assessment is triggered. The envisaged civil works will have modest local
                              environmental and social impacts, which would be easy to mitigate by ensuring that works
                              providers adhere to the conventional good construction and environmental practices. Therefore,
                              the Project is classified as environmental Category B.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Operation and maintenance of small to medium size public offices, such as ISPCs, the SESA and
                              the AMSE carry small scale risks of pollution due to improper management of household waste,
                              poor operation of heating systems, and sub-standard connections to the municipal networks of
                              power supply, water supply and sewage. However, the Project-supported refurbishment of
                              buildings will address the existing glitches in the operation of these systems, and in case of new
                              construction - due attention will be given to the design and installation of grid connections and
                              heating systems. Therefore, the Project is expected to result in a neutral or a positive long term
                              impact on the environment.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              For each ESPC office, proposed for inclusion into the Project's work program, alternatives or
                              refurbishment of the existing building vs. construction of new premises will be carefully explored.
                              Fixing of the existing buildings will allow reducing the Project's environmental footprint, however
                              for some heavily damaged buildings, refurbishment may not be justifiable from the economic
                              standpoint and new construction may be preferable option. Seismic stability of the existing
                              buildings and existence of structural damage will be factored into the analysis of alternative
                              solutions for the provision of decent premises to ISPCs.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.


                                                                        Page 5 of 8
                           The 37 ISPCs will be selected, and detailed designs for their refurbishment/construction will be
                           developed on the rolling basis. Therefore, not all of these decisions could be made and not all
                           designs were prepared by the Project appraisal. However, the environmental and social risks
Public Disclosure Copy




                           related to the works at all of ISPCs are known to be pretty similar and insignificant, and most of
                           them are already known. Because of the above, an Environmental and Social Management
                           Framework (ESMF) was prepared to guide further environmental work under the Project. Site-
                           specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) were also developed for works at the SESA
                           and the AMSE premises. EMPs for ISPCs will be prepared once detailed designs are produced.
                           Commencement of works will not be allowed at any site till the respective EMP is disclosed and
                           consulted with local stakeholders.

                           The MLSA is the Project Implementing Entity for SPAP II, and the Foreign Financial Project
                           Management Centre (FFPMC) under the Ministry of Finance will provide financial management
                           services for the Project. After having implemented the first SPAP project, the MLSA has basic
                           understanding of the Bank's safeguard policies. However, the first SPAP was classified as
                           environmental Category C, and the MLSI now has to expand its institutional capacity in applying
                           safeguards under a more complex Category B project by recruiting staff of consultant, or assigning
                           an existing staff to safeguards management, including supporting and overseeing implementation
                           of the EMPs and RAPs, as required. This may be one of the engineers currently on staff (with
                           appropriate supplementary training), or a qualified new staff, or a consultant engaged for this
                           purpose. This person will work closely with safeguards specialists of the Bank team and receive
                           on-the-job training sufficient for handling safeguards issues under a low risk Category B project.
                           Institutional arrangements for handling safeguards must be in place within MLSA by the time of
                           Project effectiveness and shall be maintained through the Project life.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Project stakeholders include the MLSA, SESA, AMSE, SSSS, development partners (USAID,
                           UNICEF), ISPCs and their beneficiaries.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The draft final ESMF, satisfactory to the Bank, was disclosed in-country by posting Armenian and
                           English versions of the document on the web page of the MLSA, and through the Bank's
                           InfoShop. Site-specific EMPs for the rehabilitation of the SESA and the AMSE offices were also
                           disclosed in a similar manner. A public consultation meeting was held to discuss draft ESMF and
                           EMPs with Project stakeholders on January 14, 2014. Other site-specific EMPs will also be
                           disclosed countrywide, with special emphasis on their accessibility to locally affected
                           communities, and will be consulted with interested stakeholders.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                   06-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                15-Jan-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Armenia                                                       30-Dec-2013
                           Comments: Public consultation meeting was held on January 14, 2014.



                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      28-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Armenia                                                          30-Dec-2013
                           Comments: Public consultation meeting was held on January 14, 2014.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?


                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:   Name: Ivan Drabek
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Penelope Jane Aske Williams (SM)   Date: 15-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                Page 8 of 8
