                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6114
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ethiopia                          Project ID:    P133591
                            Project Name:      Ethiopia Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Project (P133591)
                            Task Team          Tesfaye Bekalu Wondem
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          09-Dec-2013                       Estimated   20-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTU1                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Sanitation (30%), Water supply (70%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (25%), Urban services and housing for the poor
                                              (25%), Decentralization (24%), City-wide Infrastruc ture and Service Delivery
                                              (13%), Participation and civic engagement (13%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     233.80           Total Bank Financing:                205.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        28.80
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              205.00
                              Total                                                                                    233.80
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed development objective of the project is to “increase access to improved water supply
                           and sanitation services for residents in participating woredas/towns and communities in Ethiopia.”
                            3. Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         To achieve its Development Objectives, the project will have the following three key components.

                         Component 1. Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (R-WaSH US$ 121 million): This component will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         finance: (i) construction and rehabilitation of community water supply schemes and institutional
                         sanitation facilities; (ii) promotion of improved hygiene and sanitation practices in beneficiary
                         communities; (iii) activities to strengthen and sustain the capacity of beneficiary Woredas to
                         effectively plan, implement and manage their R-WaSH; and (iv) activities to strengthen and sustain
                         the capacity of beneficiary communities to effectively plan, implement and manage their water
                         supply and sanitation facilities. The component will specifically support the creation of sustainable
                         water supply system management through activities such as: (a) the establishment of sustainable
                         spare part supply chains, procurement of equipment and tools for O&M, and capacity building of the
                         local private sector to support water supply service delivery; (b) strengthening the O&M units in the
                         government structures at all levels to provide adequate back stopping; and (c) supporting the
                         establishment of O&M training curriculum under the TVETs and equipping them.

                         Component 2. Urban Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (U-WaSH US$ 96.8 million): This
                         component will finance: (i) improvement of urban water production and distribution systems; (ii)
                         preparation of an urban sanitation strategy and priority sanitation investments in beneficiary towns;
                         and (iii) activities to strengthen the capacity of participating water boards/committees and operators
                         to effectively manage their water supply and sanitation facilities. Works in larger urban centers with
                         existing water supply and sanitation systems that need to be expanded or improved are to be financed
                         on an on-lending basis, consistent with the Government's policy on cost recovery for urban water
                         supply and sanitation. The Water Resources Development Fund (WRDF) will be the implementing
                         agency for these Sub components, responsible for appraisal of proposed projects and monitoring and
                         evaluation. Funding will be provided to enhance the capacity of participating water boards and water
                         utility staff to effectively manage their water supply and sanitation facilities. This will include
                         activities such as strengthening the management capacity of boards and utilities and preparation of
                         business plans. In addition, separate capacity building packages will be provided for Medium Towns
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to improve operational efficiency of the utilities and enable them to operate as business entities.
                         Funding will also be provided to capacitate utilities to reduce unaccounted for water, for improving
                         billing systems, to improve customer relations and services, and for implementation of proper tariff
                         and organizational development.

                         Component 3. Program Management (US$ 11 million): This component will provide financing to
                         MoFED, MoH, MoE and MoWE, and to the regional Health, Education and Water bureau as well as
                         Woreda WaSH offices, BoFED and WoFED personnel and regionally-based consultants to: (i)
                         support program implementation, (ii) refine policies and program implementation arrangements, (iii)
                         monitor and evaluate the program, (iv) equip water quality testing and training centers, and (v)
                         improve information availability and flow. A “Learning by Doing” approach to capacity building
                         will be maintained. At the woreda, town and community levels, capacity building will be
                         incorporated into Technical Assistance contracts and combined with implementation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Ethiopia has adequate surface and ground water resources to meet the demands for potable water and
                         sanitation facilities. However, the spatial distribution of water sources, particularly in the drier parts
                         of the country requires different types of water lifting technologies for water extraction. For instance,
                         in the pastoral areas, deep boreholes drilling machines might be used, while in the central highlands,
                         with shallow water wells, might require the use of water pumps and or simple digging because of the


                                                                        Page 2 of 8
                         closeness of the ground water sources. The project will support government's national program which
                         covers rural and urban beneficiaries all over Ethiopia. The project specific sites will be identified
                         during implementation and for this reason the project is using a framework approach to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental and social issues. The environmental and resettlement consequences of the project's
                         civil work activities are likely to be very minor, however, due to the uncertainties on the nature and
                         scope of the civil works and the nation wide spread of the project, including the participation of
                         undeserved communities in the remote areas, it was determined that ESMF, RPF and SA will be
                         prepared, cleared and disclosed before project appraisal and the required mitigation plans will be
                         prepared before commencement of any civil work. The World Bank is also considering providing
                         technical assistance in the form of capacity building activities to the project team so that they can
                         adequately manage the safeguards aspects of the project during implementation.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS)
                         Asferachew Abate Abebe (AFTN3)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              OP 4.01 is triggered by the proposed project due
                         BP 4.01                                              to its planned rehabilitation and construction
                                                                              activities under components 1 & 2. Since specific
                                                                              investment locations cannot be identified at this
                                                                              stage, the Borrower has revised the
                                                                              Environmental and Social Management
                                                                              Framework used by the recently closed WSSP,
                                                                              particularly with regards to current developments.
                                                                              The prepared safeguards instruments have been
                                                                              consulted upon and disclosed prior to appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               Both urban and rural water development
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              infrastructure will be implemented in areas settled
                                                                              by humans that are not close to any natural
                                                                              habitats. The project, therefore, will not have any
                                                                              impact on natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               No water development sub-project will be
                                                                              implemented in forested areas, nor doe the project
                                                                              involve forestry.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09             No               The project does not involve pest management
                                                                              measures.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes              The project will not affect any physical cultural
                         BP 4.11                                              resources. However, as precaution measure, the
                                                                              policy has been triggered and the necessary
                                                                              procedures are included in the ESMF and
                                                                              screening forms.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes              Based on the screening conducted by the World
                                                                              Bank, the majority of people in the project area
                                                                              meet the criteria defined under OP4.10, and
                                                                              therefore, the project has triggered OP/BP 4.10
                                                                              and an enhanced social assessment (SA) was


                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                                                                             conducted to complement the RPF and to identify
                                                                             social issues . Key stakeholders were consulted
                                                                             in the Woredas, Kebeles and communities,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             including identified vulnerable and undeserved
                                                                             groups to seek their broad support for the project
                                                                             and emphasize the importance of WaSH services
                                                                             to themselves and their families. The findings of
                                                                             the enhanced social assessment and extensive
                                                                             consultations, including measures to ensure that
                                                                             the project involves and benefits appropriately the
                                                                             various groups has been fully reflected in the
                                                                             PAD. The social assessment has been consulted
                                                                             upon and disclosed before appraisal.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             OP 4.12 is triggered by the proposed project due
                            4.12                                             to its planned rehabilitation and construction
                                                                             activities under components 1 & 2. Since specific
                                                                             investment locations cannot be identified at this
                                                                             stage, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                                                             has been prepared, consulted upon and will be
                                                                             disclosed to ensure that appropriate measures are
                                                                             in place to address any issues which might arise
                                                                             from potential land acquisition and or restriction
                                                                             of access to communal natural resources under
                                                                             the Project. When the investment sites are
                                                                             identified the borrower will prepare a
                                                                             Resettlement Action Plan (RAP).
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No              The proposed project under component 1&2 plans
                                                                             to rehabilitate and construct water supply sources
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             that may include small dams. None of these dams
                                                                             raise dam safety issues and therefore OP/BP 4.37
                                                                             is not triggered.
                            Projects on International        Yes             OP 7.50 is triggered because the proposed project
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                             will finance water supplies to several smaller
                                                                             towns and rural settlements that will cause
                                                                             abstraction of surface and ground water.
                                                                             Therefore, Ethiopia's riparians have been notified
                                                                             and were advised to provide comments no later
                                                                             than January 20, 2014.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No              The policy is not triggered; as no water
                            7.60                                             development sub-project will be implemented in
                                                                             disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


                                                                     Page 4 of 8
                          The project is classified as category B. Five safeguards polices have been triggered. The
                          Environmental Assessment, Physical Cultural Resources, Involuntary Resettlement, Projects on
                          International Waterways, and Under-served People (Vulnerabilities). The overall environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                          impacts of the project are positive, especially as planned activities will supply safe drinking water
                          and sanitation facilities. Some of the negative impacts are site specific and these will be localized
                          and can be reduced or avoided with proper mitigation measures.

                          The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be used to address any
                          environmental and social impacts of the project. The ESMF will be disclosed in-country and
                          through the InfoShop in accordance with Bank requirements on November 30, 2013

                           The project’s anticipated social impacts have triggered OP4.12 and OP4.10 and in keeping with
                           good practice established under WSSP, this project have to put in place mitigation mechanisms
                           acceptable to the World Bank to mitigate these impacts. For impact on land use and structure,
                           Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) used under WSSP is updated and customized to the
                           specificity of the WaSH-II, to address any potential impacts, which is expected to be site specific
                           and minor. The Bank’s OP4.10 is triggered, based on the screening conducted by the World Bank,
                           which indicates that the majority of the people in the project area meet the criteria defined under
                           OP4.10. Therefore, a social assessment (SA) was conducted to complement the RPF. The PAD
                           includes measures to ensure that the project has free, prior and informed consultation leading to
                           broad community support; mitigates any adverse impacts on communities; includes culturally
                           appropriate benefit-sharing; includes a grievance redress mechanism; and, has a monitoring and
                           evaluation system. The social assessment was consulted upon and disclosed prior to appraisal.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The project will not have potential indirect or long term impact.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The existing traditional institutional structure for water supply will be enhanced and the planning
                           and management of sub-projects will involve the participation of beneficiary communities’ benefit
                           sharing and mitigating adverse environmental and social impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The borrower has good experience in preparing safeguards instruments and screening sub-projects
                           to identify environmental and social impacts; however its institutional capacity for the
                           implementation of mitigation measures is limited. The project will support measures that will
                           strengthen the Borrower's capacity to identify and assess potential adverse environmental and
                           social impacts and to implement and monitor appropriate mitigation measures. Specifically, the
                           borrower will designate a qualified and experienced sociologist and an environmental officer to be
                           responsible for social and environmental safeguards matters and they will receive training on
                           World Bank safeguards policies. The project has developed a grievance redress system, and a
                           culturally appropriate benefit-sharing mechanism.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders were consulted in the Woredas, Kebeles and communities, including identified
                           vulnerable and under-served groups (meeting the OP 4.10 criteria) to seek their broad support for
                           the project and emphasize the importance of WaSH services to themselves and their families.

                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         07-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      29-Nov-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                            28-Nov-2013
                           Comments: THE Social Assessment(SA),Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                         (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework(RPF) documents currently uploaded
                                         and disclosed in:-
                                         1.     Ministry of Water Irrigation and Energy web-site
                                         2.      The hard copy of the documents placed in the ministry library for consumers
                                         3.     The documents hard copy sent to all regional water bureaus for further
                                         utilization
                                             Additional we will upload in other websites and introducing in different
                                         workshops and forums
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         14-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      29-Nov-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           United States                                                       03-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         04-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      29-Nov-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           United States                                                       03-Dec-2013
                           Comments: Social Assessment of the Water Supply and Sanitation Program-II
                                         WaSH–II
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources




                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Tesfaye Bekalu Wondem
                            Approved By



                                                                        Page 7 of 8
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)    Date: 23-Feb-2014
                         Advisor:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Rosemary Mukami Kariuki (SM)   Date: 24-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            Page 8 of 8
