                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA7986
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Africa                             Project ID:    P147489
                            Project Name:      Great Lakes Emergency Sexual and Gender Based Violence & Women's Health
                                               Project (P147489)
                            Task Team          Miriam Schneidman
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       03-Mar-2014                           Estimated   26-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTHW                                  Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other social services (60%), Health (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (50%), Gender (40%),
                                              Health system performance (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     107.10           Total Bank Financing:                  107.10
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                  15.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                    92.10
                              Total                                                                                       107.10
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           20.     The project will contribute to the broader goal of reducing vulnerability of women and girls
                           in the Great Lakes region. More specifically, the project aims to: (i) expand the provision of services


                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                         to mitigate the short and medium term impact of sexual and gender based violence; and (ii) expand
                         utilization of a package of health interventions targeted to poor and vulnerable females.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Holistic Support for Survivors of Sexual and Gender Based Violence and Violence
                         Prevention (US$ Million). This component will support delivery of an integrated package of short
                         and medium term assistance to survivors of SGBV at both the community and health facility level
                         while promoting gender equality, behavioral change, and violence prevention in the intervention
                         zones of each participating country. The holistic or integrated response aims to support survivors’
                         physical, mental, social and economic well-being. Guiding principles for support to survivors
                         include: confidentiality, informed consent, and respect. The component aims to strengthen the
                         capacity of existing structures and systems at the community and health facility levels with referral
                         mechanisms strengthened in order to provide a continuum of care.

                         Specifically, this component will support: (a) Integrated Support for Survivors of SGBV and
                         Prevention of Violence at Community Levels, (b) Integrated Support for Survivors of SGBV at
                         Health Facility level, and (c) Supporting Existing Integrated Centers of Excellence (CoE) in the
                         Kivus.

                         Integrated Support for Survivors of SGBV and Prevention of Violence at Community Level includes:
                         (i) supporting case management, rapid initial support, and referral (DRC, Burundi); (ii) providing
                         mental health and psycho-social support to reduce post-traumatic stress and improve daily
                         functionality (DRC); (iii) providing of legal aid (DRC); (iv) providing support for economic
                         empowerment (DRC, Burundi) or referrals to existing social protection programs (Rwanda); and (v)
                         supporting awareness building and advocacy for behavioral change through activities that promote
                         gender equality, behavioral change and violence prevention, including sexual violence. In addition,
                         this sub-component will: (i) support and strengthen integrated service delivery systems in CBOs, (ii)
                         pilot approaches to working with perpetrators (DRC); (iii) strengthen Family and Community
                         Development Centers to provide support to survivors (Burundi); (iv) promote behavioral change
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through the scaling-up of effective models for working with women, men, boys and girls at the
                         community level to change behaviors and reduce violence in cooperation with other development
                         partners, and (v) supporting safe houses to help survivors of SGBV to benefit from temporary safe
                         housing before returning to their communities of origin.

                         Integrated Support for Survivors of SGBV at Health Facility Level Strengthening the health system
                         in DRC at all levels (health center, general referral hospital, and provincial referral hospital) to boost
                         technical capacity through specialized training and operation cost, and setting up or upgrading OSCs
                         at existing hospitals (Burundi, Rwanda) to put in place technical capacity to deliver specialized
                         services; (ii) supporting clinical care , case management, rapid initial support and referrals; (iii)
                         providing mental health care; (iv) providing medico-legal support and forensic support; and i(v)
                         providing post exposure prophylaxis (PEP), emergency kits, surgery equipment and medical
                         consumables. In addition, this sub-component will provide support for: (i) specialized training in
                         clinical care, mental health, judicial-medical support, including collection of forensic evidence, and
                         use of screening tools (DRC, Burundi, Rwanda); (ii) legal aid to survivors in cooperation with
                         specialized NGOs and strengthened capacity of the police and judiciary to handle cases involving
                         survivors, including specialized chambers and mobile courts (Burundi); and legal aid through police
                         services, legal advice, free legal counseling and representation in court, transport and judicial follow
                         up with social services (Rwanda).



                                                                        Page 2 of 9
                         Supporting Existing Integrated Centers of Excellence in the Kivus. In DRC, specialized referral
                         facilities (Panzi Hospital/Foundation in South Kivu and Health Africa in North Kivu), will be
                         supported to: (i) provide medical services, including for the most complex cases; (ii) conduct
Public Disclosure Copy




                         forensic evidence collection and analysis; (iii) provide support for legal services; (iv) provide facility
                         based counseling; (v) support survivors and their children rejected by families; (v) conduct mobile
                         clinics in remote areas to reach the most vulnerable groups; (vi) provide training and capacity
                         building for health providers from both DRC and other countries, and (vii) support research related to
                         SGBV Support for training and capacity building will include serving as base for study attachments
                         so that national and regional participants can take advantage of the specialized expertise in
                         performing complex surgeries, compiling forensic evidence, and providing high quality medical and
                         mental health services at these facilities.

                         Component 2: High Impact Basic Health Services (US$ Million). The second component is being
                         implemented in DRC and Burundi where service gaps and quality deficiencies are acute. In DRC,
                         the project will improve utilization and quality of a package of health interventions targeted to
                         underserved areas and poor and vulnerable females through Results Based Financing (RBF),
                         including: (i) provision of RBF Grants to health facilities, conditional on the quantity and quality of
                         health services delivered, as stipulated in the RBF Performance Contracts; (ii) funding of the initial
                         replenishment of essential drugs; and (iii) strengthening of regulatory capacities at the provincial,
                         districts and local levels through RBF Performance Contracts with Health Authorities. On the
                         demand side, the project will support improved access to health services for the most vulnerable
                         groups by: (i) conducting a household survey to identify constraints to accessing care; (ii) identifying
                         the poorest households; and (iii) funding health services for identified poor in the targeted health
                         facilities. The Performance Purchasing Agencies, responsible for the RBF scheme, will receive
                         funding for management and operating costs and a web-based application.

                         In Burundi, the project will reinforce maternal, reproductive and emergency obstetric services at the
                         same health facilities which participate in the national RBF program and where SGBV services are
                         being established. The project will support: (i) training of medical personnel in emergency medicine
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and complex surgery; (ii) provision of specialized equipment, consumables and mobile phone
                         applications for alerting personnel of medical emergencies and strengthening referral systems; (iii)
                         planning and capacity building of the National Reproductive Health Program; and (iv) introduction
                         of screening tools for SGBV. To focus on a highly vulnerable group for both sexual violence and
                         unwanted pregnancy, the project will support expansion of youth friendly services in health facilities
                         and community structures through: (i) development and introduction of educational materials to raise
                         awareness about reproductive health and SGBV; and (ii) contracting of specialized local NGOs and
                         CBOs to expand the youth friendly community based model.

                         Component 3: Regional and National Knowledge Sharing Research and Capacity Building (US $
                         Million). This component will fund activities which will bring together stakeholders from the three
                         participating countries as a community of practitioners who are embarking on a common agenda.
                         Activities supported will include: (a) Regional and National Learning and Capacity Building, (b)
                         Research and Surveys, (c) Communication, and (d) Project Management.

                         Regional and National Learning and Capacity Building by: (i) documenting and sharing innovative
                         activities to promote gender equality, SGBV, and strengthen maternal health through RBF; (ii)
                         funding study tours to neighbouring countries (including on SGBV and RBF programs); (iii)
                         promoting knowledge sharing at the regional and national levels, including supporting or
                         participating in annual peer learning events on SGBV and RBF (including ICGLR); (iv) participating

                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         in high quality regional training programs; and (v) carrying out institutional capacity building to
                         assist a local institution to serve as a centre of excellence for research and training on SGBV
                         (Burundi, Rwanda), and (vi) operationalization of the ICGLR’s RTF to deliver high quality regional
Public Disclosure Copy




                         training programs. The World Bank will contribute to the knowledge sharing agenda by bringing in
                         experience and lessons from global knowledge on SGBV in countries such as Afghanistan,
                         Colombia, Brazil, India, and Ivory Coast.

                         Research and Surveys on various thematic areas, such as: (i) understanding the underlying causes of
                         SGBV; (ii) assessing the impact of selected service delivery models for survivors of SGBV and for
                         women of reproductive age through quantitative and qualitative surveys; (iii) evaluating the
                         effectiveness of screening tools for early identification and referral of women at risk; (iv)
                         understanding the effects of interventions aimed at changing behaviours and norms to promote
                         violence prevention and gender equality (DRC, Rwanda); (v) SGBV in general through research and
                         training on SGBV by centers of excellence. (vi) assessing the impact of introducing community score
                         cards (DRC); (vii) evaluating the impact of interventions aimed at perpetrators (DRC); (viii)
                         assessing the effectiveness of youth friendly services in responding to the special needs of youths
                         (Burundi); (ix) producing reliable data and information on knowledge, attitudes, practices
                         surrounding SGBV and RH (Burundi); and (x) developing a centralized GBV Integrated
                         Management System (Rwanda).

                         Communications (DRC, Burundi), including: (i) development and implementation of a national
                         communications strategy (i.e. including information on services offered to key groups and key laws
                         and policies; mechanisms for facilitating intra and inter country collaboration, including use of media
                         tools; and activities and tools for disseminating results); (ii) support to mount media campaigns
                         during the 16 days of Activism Against Gender Based Violence; and (iii) installation of video
                         conferencing facilities at selected participating hospitals and ministries to facilitate communications
                         within and across countries. In DRC, this sub-component will support the MoGFC to develop and
                         implement a communications strategy to disseminate the forthcoming revised Family Code. For the
                         ICGLR, this sub-component will support (i) development and implementation of tools in the GLR
Public Disclosure Copy




                         related to SGBV and (ii) capacity building on media and communications to address SGBV and
                         facilitating networks of communication professionals.

                         Project Management including support to carry out efficient and effective coordination, fiduciary
                         management, monitoring and evaluation at the national and local level through technical assistance,
                         capacity building, institutional strengthening and equipment. At the country level, ths component
                         will include support for strengthening existing coordination structures and country systems to ensure
                         mainstreaming and sustainability of project activities in each country. Support provided through the
                         ICGLR grant will also include (i) supplying video conference facilities at the CS offices as well as
                         the RTF; (ii) training on resource mobilization; (iii) supporting the establishment of a Partner Forum;
                         and (iv) supporting development of a monitoring and evaluation framework for the implementation
                         of the Kampala Declaration.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Burundi . The project activities will be implemented throughout the country with the potential project
                         locations characterized by pre-existing use as medical facilities, usually within larger villages or
                         cities, within urbanized areas, and compounds designated as hospitals for several years already, and
                         entirely within existing structures.



                                                                      Page 4 of 9
                         DRC. The provinces of North and South Kivu are the target administrative and geographical
                         locations of the project. At local level, established health centers, General Referral Hospitals (GRHs)
                         at the health zone level and referral hospitals at the tertiary level, will constitute the adjacent
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environments of the project. Potential sites for small scale rehabilitation of health centers will be in
                         pre-existing medical facilities, but the particular health centers are yet to be determined. In addition,
                         selected villages in the two provinces will benefit from small scale economic empowerment support.
                         The physical environment of the target provinces is characterized by forests savanna, and highlands/
                         mountains and hills (North and South Kivu, landslides are frequent). Accessibility of areas off the
                         main roads is a constant challenge. The provinces (North Kivu 59,483 km2, South Kivu 65,070 km2)
                         cover an area of about 124.000 km2; that is about the size of Belgium, Denmark and the Netherlands
                         together.

                         The presence of indigenous people (Batwa) in North and South Kivu, was identified and confirmed
                         during project preparation. The Batwa constitute a vulnerable and marginalized group in the project
                         area. The risk of social exclusion of Batwa in the context of the project cannot be ignored, to ensure
                         that the Batwa will benefit from the project, OP/BP 4.10 has been triggered.

                         Rwanda. The project activities will be implemented throughout the country with the potential project
                         locations characterized by a pre-existing use as medical facilities, usually within larger villages or
                         cities, within urbanized areas, and compounds designated as hospitals for several years already, and
                         entirely within existing structures. The medical facilities within which the OCSs would be
                         established are currently well managed, especially in terms of medical waste generation, which is
                         treated in modern incinerators, which are installed in about 90 percent of the 42 current district
                         hospitals.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)
                         Wolfhart Pohl (AFTSG)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              As there will be the potential for minor,
                         BP 4.01                                               temporary negative environmental and social
                                                                               impacts, that will need to be identified, assessed
                                                                               and managed, OP4.01 was triggered. The
                                                                               safeguards instruments to be produced will
                                                                               include ESMPs, waste management plans and an
                                                                               IPP.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        Yes              The presence of indigenous people (Batwa) in
                                                                               North and South Kivu, was identified and


                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                                                                                 confirmed during project preparation. Batwa
                                                                                 constitute a vulnerable and marginalized group in
                                                                                 the project area. The risk of social exclusion of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 Batwa in the context of the project cannot be
                                                                                 ignored, to ensure that Batwa will benefit from
                                                                                 the project, a OP/BP 4.10 has been triggered, and
                                                                                 an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) focusing on
                                                                                 outreach and inclusion will be prepared.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is not expected to have large scale, significant, or irreversible environmental or social
                              impacts. Project activities are focused on delivery of an integrated package of short and medium
                              term assistance to survivors of SGBV at both the community and health facility level, as well as
                              providing high impact maternal and reproductive health services or vulnerable and poor women
                              (in Burundi and DRC). To ensure survivors of SGBV will be received in an adequate environment,
Public Disclosure Copy




                              the project will support setting up in existing health centers special rooms and upgrade existing
                              ones.

                              Two types of activities have a potential to cause three types of adverse impacts that will need to be
                              minimized, mitigated and managed: (i) The civil works related to the small construction or
                              rehabilitation activities may cause noise, vibrations and emissions from vehicles and machinery,
                              generate construction waste and involve potential risks regarding workplace and community health
                              and safety. (ii) During the operation of the health facilities the generation of additional quantities
                              of medical waste will increase slightly over the current baseline. (iii) In addition, in DRC small
                              in-kind grants will be provided to CBOs in support of their ongoing activities, which may entail
                              tools for agricultural activities. However, all three types of anticipated impacts will be temporary,
                              site specific and localized, and limited in scope.

                              The presence of indigenous people (Batwa) in North and South Kivu, was identified and
                              confirmed during project preparation. Batwa constitute a vulnerable and marginalized group in the
                              project area. The risk of social exclusion of Batwa in the context of the project cannot be ignored,
                              to ensure that Batwa will benefit from the project, a OP/BP 4.10 has been triggered, and an
                              Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) focusing on outreach and inclusion will be prepared.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:


                                                                         Page 6 of 9
                           The planned project activities are not anticipated to have long-term or indirect negative social or
                           environmental impacts. The project is expected to increase social cohesion at the family and
                           community level by specifically addressing issues of stigmatization and rejection of survivors of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           SGBV, as well as activities to promote gender equality and change negative attitudes and norms
                           towards women and girls. In addition, the project support will provide targeted communities with
                           better access to basic health service. Project investments may strengthen sound environmental and
                           social practices in the construction sector and around health facilities. The country annexes
                           provide details for the environmental and social safeguards for each respective country.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not applicable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           At national level, the three countries have legislative and regulatory frameworks which are
                           conducive to good environmental management. In addition, they have signed a number of
                           international treaties and conventions to ensure good environmental governance. At sector level,
                           the three countries already implement Bank safeguards policies in various sectors. At project level,
                           the three beneficiary countries have agreed to prepare and implement the safeguards policies
                           triggered by the project. In accordance with World Bank policy guidelines, the borrowers will
                           prepare: (i) Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), and (ii) Medical Waste Management Plans
                           (MWMPs). In addition, for DRC an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be developed which will
                           focus on outreach and inclusion.

                          The EMPs will ensure that any potential negative safeguard impacts would be detected and
                          mitigated, including through: (i) a checklist of potential environmental and social impacts of small
                          rehabilitation and construction in existing health facilities, (ii) relevant potential environmental
                          and social mitigation measures, and (iii) a screening form to detect potential negative social and
Public Disclosure Copy




                          environmental impacts of small in-kind grants for CBOs in DRC. The MWMPs will cover (a)
                          anticipated waste composition and quantity; (b) existing medical waste management system,
                          including free capacity, deviations from, and gaps to BAT, (c) existing regulatory framework and
                          supervision / monitoring arrangements; (d) plan for using the existing medical waste management
                          system, including any measures to upgrade or remedy identified gaps and deviations; and (e)
                          additional arrangements for supervision and monitoring of medical waste management. In DRC,
                          where indigenous people (Batwa) have been identified in the project area, the borrower will
                          prepare IPP and put in place mitigation mechanisms to ensure indigenous people benefit from the
                          project.

                          As the project is prepared under the special policy exceptions and considerations described in
                          paragraph 11 of OP 10.00 (namely, an emergency operation), the preparation of the safeguards
                          instruments has been deferred from the project preparation phase into the implementation phase.
                          Thus the EMPs, the MWMPs and the IPP will not be prepared before appraisal as would be
                          mandated under normal procedures, but will be finalized before actual physical works / footprints
                          occur during the project implementation phase. To develop, explain and commit to the production
                          and implementation of the required safeguards instruments, the Task Team has, in consultation
                          with the Recipient, prepared an environmental and social action plan (ESAP) addressing
                          applicable environmental and social policies during project implementation for every country.
                          This action plan has been annexed to the PAD.


                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The preparation of the project has relied on consultations with government officials at relevant
Public Disclosure Copy




                           levels, provincial officials, donors’ community, implementation partners, community and civil
                           society groups, and direct beneficiaries of the project. The implementation of the project will
                           likewise rest on various consultations. The preparation of safeguards instruments (ESMPs,
                           MWMPs, and IPP) will include additional consultations, at local, provincial and national level.
                           Upon review and approval by the government, the MWMPs, EMPs, and IPP will be disclosed by
                           governments in local languages to project-affected groups and NGOs in publicly accessible places
                           for consultations, and by the World Bank, in the Infoshop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       29-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    11-Sep-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       29-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    11-Sep-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?


                                                                    Page 8 of 9
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Miriam Schneidman
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 22-May-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Trina S. Haque (SM)                            Date: 22-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
