                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA6196
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nepal                              Project ID:    P143036
                            Project Name:      Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Improvement Project (P143036)
                            Task Team          William D. Kingdom
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          09-Dec-2013                        Estimated   18-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDU                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Water supply (80%), Sanitation (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (80%), Decentralization (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         82.00                 Total Bank Financing:        65.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        10.30
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               65.00
                              Local Communities                                                                          6.70
                              Total                                                                                     82.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objectives of the project are to: (i) Increase sustainable access to improved water
                           services and promote improved sanitation and hygiene practices in rural areas; and (ii) Develop and
                           implement a long-term support mechanism to promote the sustainability of water supply schemes in
                           selected Districts.


                                                                       Page 1 of 11
                          3. Project Description
                         Component 1 – Access to Improved Water Supplies and Promote Improved Sanitation & Hygiene
                         Practices will include: (i) physical investment for new water supply systems, (ii) improved sanitation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         units at community level (health facilities, schools, etc.), (iii) hygiene education and awareness
                         building to complement the physical infrastructure and improve health outcomes, and (iv) expansion
                         and rehabilitation of schemes in five districts selected for Component 2. This will, in general, follow
                         the approach adopted under the earlier Bank supported Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Projects
                         (RWSSP I and II). In those Districts selected for Component 2, the Component 1 activities will
                         expand beyond the construction of new schemes and will develop and establish approaches for
                         demand responsive and sustainable investments in:
                         1.       Water system rehabilitation – where schemes have deteriorated and need investment.
                         2.       Water system expansion – where increases in the size of a community has not been matched
                         by system expansions.

                         Component 2 – District Level Institutional Strengthening, will support technical assistance and
                         capacity building in five districts to improve institutional arrangements and strengthen the linkages
                         among the key agencies during planning, implementation and post construction. The goal is to
                         improve long term scheme sustainability which has been identified as a critical weakness in the
                         sector in a number of recent sector studies, joint reviews and workshops.

                         Component 3 – Technical Assistance/Capacity Building and Project Management, will finance
                         incremental project management and administration costs for Components 1 and 2 as well as a
                         variety of financial and safeguards audits, miscellaneous capacity building activities and sector
                         studies.

                         Component 4 – Contingency Emergency Response, In case of an adverse natural event that causes a
                         major disaster, the government may request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to support
                         emergency response and reconstruction. This component would draw resources from the unallocated
Public Disclosure Copy




                         expenditure category and/or enable the government to request the Bank to re-categorize and
                         reallocate financing from other project components to partially cover emergency response and
                         recovery costs. This component may also be used to channel additional funds that may become
                         available to respond to the emergency.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in 55 out of 75 districts of Nepal. Villages will be selected on the
                         basis of requests for WASH services through the district’s planning process and will be subject to the
                         selection criteria for financing under the Fund Board’s approach. Component 1 of the project will be
                         open to villages across the country, in all regions - mountain, hills and the terai - but project
                         resources will be weighted towards those Districts with lower levels of access to water supply and
                         sanitation thus addressing current inequities in service provision and building a platform for shared
                         prosperity. 60% of investment will be directed to the 20 Districts with the lowest coverage levels.

                         The districts participating in Component 2 have been selected on the basis of their institutional
                         capacity (the Minimum Conditions- Performance Management scores of the districts for FY
                         2012/13), the size of the districts (excluding districts that were too large or too small), and the scale
                         of major rehabilitation requirements (per NMIP) so that rehabilitation and expansion models can be
                         tested in these districts.


                                                                       Page 2 of 11
                         The schemes to be funded under the project will be community-based, demand driven and small in
                         nature, and they will be scattered in large geographical areas across the country. For example, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         larger schemes may serve around 130 household and may use around 0.7-0.8 liters per second (lps)
                         for gravity flow type. However, for schemes serving larger villages and using ground water, the
                         extraction may be as high as 5 lps and can be from several underground sources.

                         The project will be scattered in the terai, hill and mountain regions with typical environmental issues
                         pertaining to such sub-projects. Some of the adverse impacts that may be encountered include the
                         risk of flash floods, groundwater contamination, and water quality in the terai region, and landslides,
                         depletion of water source, pollution water source, deforestation in the hill and rugged mountain
                         regions. No involuntary resettlement is expected under the project. Further, by virtue of its design,
                         the project will provide significant benefits to women, indigenous people, and other vulnerable
                         groups. Experiences from the implementation of RWSSP I and II have shown that the adverse
                         environmental and social impacts of schemes supported under RWSSIP would be minor/simple and
                         can be easily addressed through planning, design and management by the users/community.

                         The project as a whole is categorized as Category B, while several of individual schemes to be
                         supported by the project are likely to be Category C.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)
                         Bandita Sijapati (SASDS)
                         Annu Rajbhandari (SASDI)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes               The project supports small scale demand driven
                         BP 4.01                                              water supply schemes using surface sources such
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              as small spring or stream or ground water.
                                                                              Typically these schemes serve 50 to 130
                                                                              households (through public taps or tube-wells/
                                                                              wells). The project will also support rural
                                                                              sanitation such as latrines in schools and health
                                                                              posts. Water quality (pollution at source and
                                                                              transmission), drainage around taps/ wells (risk of
                                                                              disease vector), scheme damage by floods &
                                                                              landslides, depletion of source, competing use of
                                                                              source etc are potential environmental issues.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes               20% of the total landmass of Nepal is defined as
                                                                              protected area. The proposed sub-projects with
                                                                              water source inside the core protected area or in
                                                                              critical natural habitat will not be eligible for
                                                                              implementation. The ESMF will have screening
                                                                              provision for natural habitat and provide guidance
                                                                              for avoiding and mitigation of adverse impacts
                                                                              per the policy requirements. If the alignment of
                                                                              the distribution and transmission line traverses



                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                                                                         through the buffer zone or adjacent to the
                                                                         boundary of the protected area, environmental
                                                                         screening as per ESMF will check potential risk,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         required safeguard document and mitigations will
                                                                         be prepared, as well as permit from the competent
                                                                         authority will be obtained.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No             There will be no commercial logging and
                                                                         clearing of forests. Some springs located in
                                                                         community forest may be used as a source: in
                                                                         which case impacts will be assessed and
                                                                         mitigation measured employed (under EA OP/BP
                                                                         4.01).
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No             Project will not use pesticides

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              The project will support small scale activities in
                         BP 4.11                                         rural areas which is unlikely to impact physical
                                                                         cultural resources. Past experience from RWSSP
                                                                         I and II also did not encounter this issue.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             The precise location for each schemes are not
                                                                         known, but given that indigenous peoples are
                                                                         interspersed throughout the country, this policy
                                                                         has been triggered to ensure that there are no
                                                                         negative impacts on IPs. Besides mitigating the
                                                                         negative effects, the project seeks to specifically
                                                                         benefit disadvantaged groups, including the IPs.
                                                                         The ESMF developed for the project includes a
                                                                         Vulnerable Communities Development Plan
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         (VCDP) which includes measures for mitigating
                                                                         negative effects, if any, and enhancing project
                                                                         benefits to vulnerable groups, including the IPs.
                                                                         The VCDP is in line with the government and
                                                                         World Bank’s policies on indigenous and other
                                                                         marginalized groups, and also includes measures
                                                                         to ensure broad community support through
                                                                         culturally-appropriate consultation.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No              There were no cases of involuntary resettlement
                         4.12                                            in RWSSP I and II and none are expected in the
                                                                         current project. In cases where land is required
                                                                         for water supply and sanitation schemes, it will be
                                                                         done in public lands, on a voluntary basis or
                                                                         mutually agreed sale. As done in RWSSP II, land
                                                                         donations and their voluntary nature will be
                                                                         recorded in a memorandum of understanding.
                                                                         Also, a negative list of projects has been
                                                                         developed in the ESMF to ensure that land
                                                                         donation does not cause adverse impacts



                                                                 Page 4 of 11
                                                                                including loss of livelihood to the donating
                                                                                households. In the case of private sale, the land
                                                                                purchased by the community will be registered
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                under the ownership of the WUSGs.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               No dam construction will be supported nor any
                                                                                investments dependent on the operation of a dam.
                            Projects on International           Yes              All water from Nepal flows to India. Hence the
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                policy is triggered. Scheme will use small
                                                                                quantities of water from local sources like
                                                                                streams, spring, and ground water which is
                                                                                unlikely to affect quantity and quality of water in
                                                                                the downstream riparian country. The World
                                                                                Bank, on behalf and at the request of the
                                                                                Government of Nepal, submitted Riparian
                                                                                Notification to the Governments of India and
                                                                                Bangladesh as lower riparian states, and to the
                                                                                Government of China as an upper riparian state
                                                                                on December 24, 20013.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  No activities will be supported in disputed areas.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Key Environmental issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The main impacts associated with the project implementation are water quality and pollution at
                             sources (surface runoff, animal, etc.), microbiological contamination, arsenic in ground water
                             source, drainage around tap stands (risks of vector-breeding), seepage around wells (which in turn
                             may pollute groundwater), damage of the scheme intakes and/ or other components by landslides
                             or erosion in the hills and/or by floods, and depletion of the source especially in the dry season. In
                             addition issues related with sanitation and hygiene will be mainly related with latrine/ septic tank
                             effluents and biological water pollution due to leaves, insects, algae, etc. in the scheme
                             components,

                             The depletion of the water source and sustainability of the schemes will be one of the significant
                             impacts for which alternatives for water source and mitigation measures needs to be clearly
                             indicated in scheme’s design and environmental management plan.

                             Key Social issues
                             One of the main social issues relating to the project is the risk of exclusion of vulnerable groups,
                             particularly ethnic minorities and low caste groups. Nepal is ethnically and socially diverse but
                             despite the diversity, minority ethnic groups (IPs) and low caste groups (also known as Dalits)
                             have often be unable effectively to participate in and benefit from development interventions.
                             There is a risk of continued exclusion of these groups if effective measures are not taken from the


                                                                        Page 5 of 11
                           beginning.
                           Further, in the rural communities of Nepal, women play a significant role in the management of
                           water supply and sanitation but also suffer disproportionately from the effects of poor drinking
Public Disclosure Copy




                           water and sanitation. However, social norms have discouraged and even actively excluded women
                           from openly participating in development planning and implementation across most subjects –
                           including water and sanitation. There is thus a need to develop measures to enhance the
                           participation of women in RWSSIP and also ensure that they are able to benefit from the project.
                           Finally, on the issue of land acquisition, under RWSSP I and II, there were no cases of involuntary
                           resettlement and it is highly unlikely that there would be any under this project. Similarly, land
                           acquisition also does not seem to have been a problem in the past since any requirements for land
                           was managed through public lands, voluntary donation or mutually agreed sale.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The design element of the project draws from the experiences of RWSSP I and II, and hence,
                           indirect and/or long-term impacts due to future activities are not anticipated. Further, the nature of
                           the project, that is, small-scale and demand driven water supply schemes, suggests that the
                           possibility of adverse effects in the long-term would be unlikely. Finally, the project will be
                           dispersed throughout the country thus any type of location-specific impacts of the sub-project
                           activities is unknown prior to project implementation. To minimize and mitigate any such risks,
                           the ESMF developed for the project includes procedures and guidelines on screening of sub-
                           projects, identification and mitigation of adverse environmental and social impacts, and measures
                           to mitigate the possible risks.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           No project alternatives were considered because as a community-based and demand-driven
                           project, the precise nature of the social and environmental impacts cannot be ascertained prior to
                           project implementation. However, each sub-project (schemes) will be subjected to screening as per
                           the provision made in the ESMF. Based on the screening, alternatives for water source, alignment
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of the pipe lines, stability of the terrain etc. will be sought to ensure the sustainability of the
                           project. In addition, the past experience suggests problems of source depletion thus requiring
                           alternative measures for augmentation of the dry season flow (e.g., rain water harvesting) to be
                           investigated.

                           The schemes source or transmission inside the core protected area and/or critical natural habitat
                           will not be eligible for implementation and alternative for such schemes will be considered.

                           The ESMF developed for the project includes simple procedures to be used at the community level
                           to screen project alternatives for their economic viability, level of priority, cost-effectiveness, and
                           social and environmental impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           A project-level Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been developed
                           as a basic guideline for the effective management of the social and environmental aspects of the
                           project. The ESMF includes: (i) basic parameters (e.g., screening checklists) for the identification
                           and understanding of the social and environmental impacts of the individual schemes during the
                           pre-feasibility phase and other phases of the scheme implementation; (ii) guidelines and measures
                           for enhancing and sustaining the positive environmental and social benefits of the project; and (iii)


                                                                      Page 6 of 11
                         measures for avoiding, minimizing, or mitigating negative environmental and social impacts, if
                         and when they are identified.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In addition, based on the experience of RWSSP I and II, social and environmental issues that were
                         of particular concern in the past have already been integrated as part of the overall project design.
                         More specifically, these measures include:

                         Environmental Issues
                         •        Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared for each scheme during the
                         implementation phase which will be further incorporated in design and estimate of the scheme and
                         implemented accordingly during the implementation phase. The EMP will give the mitigation
                         measures for source protection, surface drainage improvement, protection of pipelines and fencing
                         of structure etc.
                         •        Water Quality testing: The provision of water quality test for the proposed water sources
                         three times in the scheme cycle during prefeasibility, development phase and after implementation
                         of the scheme will be made in the ESMF. The test results will be shared with SO’s and
                         communities. Suitable mitigation measures will be incorporated in the design and EMP to address
                         the problems in the implementation phase. Furthermore, for issues like arsenic content, the ESMF
                         will have provision for arsenic testing and awareness and training program for the local
                         communities.
                         •        Supervision and Monitoring: The ESMF requires regular supervision and periodic
                         monitoring of environmental and social aspects. While regular supervision and monitoring will be
                         done by SOs and SAs, Fund Board will carry out periodic monitoring. Fund Board will appoint an
                         Environmental and Social Manager for overall oversight and management social and
                         environmental aspects in the project.
                         •        On the Sanitation and hygiene component the ESMF has proposed mitigation measures
                         like awareness programs, provision of soak pit and provision of drainage system etc.

                         Gender Issues: Efforts to ensure women are effectively included in project will be two-fold and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         involve:
                         •        Gender Mainstreaming in all project structures and activities and benefits
                         o        The ESMF includes guidelines for increasing opportunities for women under the project
                         o        Requirement for Water User Committees to include at least 33% women, and encourage
                         WUCGs to nominate women in key positions
                         o        Trainings and awareness-raising activities on gender to make the Board, project staff, SOs,
                         local government institutions, etc., aware and sensitive to the equity and efficiency impacts of
                         gender based discrimination.
                         o        Disaggregation of all monitoring information by gender.
                         •        Addressing Women’s Special Needs
                         o        A major impact of the project would the reduction in time that women spend collecting
                         water. Under the Jeevika program, funds and capacity building opportunities will be made
                         available to women wishing to use this newly available time to engage in income generating
                         activities.

                         Vulnerable Groups: The project will continue to focus on ensuring that vulnerable groups,
                         including indigenous groups are able to benefit from the project, and will seek to proactively
                         encourage the participation of poorer households, socially disadvantaged caste groups, disabled,
                         and certain vulnerable ethnic groups. To achieve this, the following measures will be taken:
                         •       The ESMF includes a section on Vulnerable Community Development Plan that includes,

                                                                    Page 7 of 11
                          guidelines for identifying vulnerable groups, methods for engaging them in consultation, and
                          measures to ensure that they are not only adversely affected by the project but are able to benefit
                          from it
Public Disclosure Copy




                          •        Selection of schemes under the project will be based on the districts’ planning process but
                          be informed by HDI scores and Disadvantaged Groups (DAG) Mapping.
                          •        The manuals of the Fund Board will be reviewed and revised, and incentive structure built
                          in for SOs and NGOs to focus on unreached areas
                          •        Guidelines for the design of water supply and sanitation schemes will incorporate
                          technical design elements that are disability-friendly
                          •        Information campaigns and communication plans related to the project will emphasize the
                          use of local language
                          •        Through the Jagaran program, third-party monitoring of the schemes will be carried out to
                          provide timely feedback, including on the experiences of vulnerable groups, and hold the project
                          staffs, SOs, etc., accountable to the community.
                          •        The MIS for the project will continue to disaggregate beneficiary information so that
                          project support to the vulnerable groups is easily monitored, and corrective actions taken if
                          required.

                          Land Acquisition: Any form of involuntary resettlement is not expected in the project. In cases
                          where land is required for water supply and sanitation schemes, it will be done in public lands, on
                          a voluntary basis or mutually agreed sale. As mentioned in the ESMF, the following guidelines
                          will be observed while acquiring land for the water and sanitation schemes under the project:
                          •        There will be no involuntary resettlement under the project
                          •        In cases where land is required for water supply and sanitation schemes, it will be availed
                          by using public land, mutually agreed sale or voluntary land donation. Land donations and their
                          voluntary nature will be recorded in a memorandum of understanding.
                          •        In cases of private sale, the land purchased will be registered under the ownership of the
                          WUSGs
                          •        The negative list of projects included in the ESMF to ensure that land donation does not
Public Disclosure Copy




                          cause adverse impacts including loss of livelihood to the donating households, will be observed.

                          Further, to ensure due diligence on social and environmental concerns related to the project, the
                          guidelines and procedures that are identified in the ESMF will also be internalized in the
                          operational manual developed for the project.

                           The Fund Board which is responsible for the implementation of Component 1, where both the
                           environmental and social safeguards issues are central, has significant experience through RWSSP
                           I and II in the planning and implementation of the measures described above. However, because
                           the schemes are decentralized, ensuring that the support organizations, NGOs, etc., working at the
                           community level are also equally adept would be a key. To address this, the Fund Board, together
                           with the MoUD will be required to carry out a series of trainings and capacity building workshops
                           for these organizations as well as local government bodies on the importance of safeguards issues,
                           including the ESMF. In addition, fulltime staff that will provide social and environmental
                           oversight at the project level is necessary. Besides, for better and sustained social and
                           environmental performance and compliance, even after project completion, establishment of a
                           dedicated environmental and social unit within the Fund Board can be explored during
                           implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure


                                                                    Page 8 of 11
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders for the project are community members and local government organizations.
                           During the preparation of the ESMF, various agencies were visited and issues and options
Public Disclosure Copy




                           discussed. Besides, draft ESMF was presented and discussed in a workshop organized in
                           Kathamndu on December 13, 2013. The participants at the workshop included a wide range of
                           stakeholders including government agencies, NGOs working in the WASH sector, community
                           representatives, etc. Feedbacks from the consultations have been incorporated in the draft ESMF,
                           which was disclosed, along with Nepali translation of the Executive Summary, in the client’s
                           website (http://www.rwss.org/downloads.php?mainid=15) on December 15, 2013. During
                           implementation, all the project documents, including the ESMF will be disclosed in the Fund
                           Board and the MoUD’s website.

                           In addition, during project implementation, the Fund Board and the MoUD will jointly review and
                           revise the communication plan developed for RWSSP II to emphasize greater engagement,
                           consultation and disclosure about project benefits and impacts to community members.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nepal                                                            15-Dec-2013
                           Comments: The ESMF was disclosed in the country on December 15, 2013, with Executive
                                         Summary both in English and Loacal Language. The ISDS is updated regarding the
                                         OP7.5 Riparian Notification sent on December 24, 2013.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nepal                                                            16-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?

                                                                   Page 9 of 11
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                             Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of critical natural habitats?
                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS


                                                                       Page 10 of 11
                         Task Team Leader: Name: William D. Kingdom
                         Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)   Date: 26-Dec-2013
                         Advisor:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Ming Zhang (SM)            Date: 26-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Page 11 of 11
