                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA7634
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Mongolia                          Project ID:    P148110
                            Project Name:     MN Education Quality Reform Project (P148110)
                            Task Team         Prateek Tandon
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                           Estimated   31-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    EASHE                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Primary education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (60%), Education for the knowledge economy (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         26.00               Total Bank Financing:        26.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             26.00
                              Total                                                                                   26.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve the quality of education for primary school
                           children in Mongolia with particular emphasis on improving reading and math learning outcomes.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project consist of four components:



                                                                      Page 1 of 6
                         Component 1: Improving learning outcomes (estimated cost: US$8.3 million).

                         Sub-component 1.1 will involve a scaling up of the existing READ program to achieve national
Public Disclosure Copy




                         coverage.
                         Sub-component 1.2 will support the national roll-out of Early Grade Reading and Mathematics
                         Assessments (EGRA and EGMA) for 1st and 2nd grade students as well as the national assessment
                         for 5th grade.

                         Component 2: Pre- and in-service professional development of teachers (estimated cost: US$3.7
                         million).

                         Sub-component 2.1 will support primary education Teacher Training Colleges throughout the
                         country.
                         Sub-component 2.2 will support pedagogical in-service training for teachers and the improvement of
                         academic leadership of school principals and aimag methodologists.

                         Component 3: Implementation of a school grants program (estimated cost: US$8.8 million). The
                         component will scale up the Ministry of Education and Science’s (MES) “Talent Program” of school
                         grants that is currently being rolled out in 100 pilot schools throughout the country.

                         Component 4: System management, monitoring and evaluation (estimated cost: US$5.3 million). The
                         purpose of this component is to support MES to effectively implement the project with the support of
                         qualified technical assistance.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Nationwide. The project aims to improve the quality of education for primary schools in Mongolia.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Feng Ji (EASCS)
                         Jun Zeng (EASCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes              The project will not finance civil works, but
                          BP 4.01                                            support capacity building activities for primary
                                                                             schools in Mongolia, including scaling up the
                                                                             existing READ Program (i.e., development and
                                                                             provision of books and classroom libraries,
                                                                             teacher training, and an impact evaluation), and
                                                                             Talent Program (i.e., management, staff
                                                                             development, services, teaching materials, sports,
                                                                             furniture and equipment, and maintenance). The
                                                                             project will have minimal or no adverse
                                                                             environmental impacts. Considering the type,
                                                                             location, sensitivity, and scale of the project and
                                                                             the nature and magnitude of its potential
                                                                             environmental impacts, no environmental
                                                                             instruments will be prepared.


                                                                     Page 2 of 6
                                                                         This policy is triggered due to the need to assess
                                                                         and take into account, in an integrated manner,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         the social aspects of the project, particularly any
                                                                         impacts on IP communities.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            The project does not have the potential to cause
                                                                         significant conversion (loss) or degradation of
                                                                         natural habitats, whether directly (through
                                                                         construction) or indirectly (through human
                                                                         activities induced by the project).
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            The project will not have impacts on the health
                                                                         and quality of forests, nor affect the rights and
                                                                         welfare of people and their level of dependence
                                                                         upon or interaction with forests, nor aim to bring
                                                                         about changes in the management, protection, or
                                                                         utilization of natural forest or plantations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project will not include any procurement of
                                                                         pesticides or pesticide application equipment; nor
                                                                         introduce any new pest management practices, or
                                                                         expand/alter existing pest management practices;
                                                                         nor lead to substantially increased pesticide use
                                                                         and subsequent environmental and health risks.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The project will not have impacts on physical
                         BP 4.11                                         cultural resources, or be designed to support the
                                                                         management or conservation of physical cultural
                                                                         resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           This project aims to improve the quality of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         education for primary schools in Mongolia, and it
                                                                         is a nationwide project. Though largely an
                                                                         ethnically homogeneous nation, with 80-86% of
                                                                         the population estimated to be of Khalkh Mongol
                                                                         origin, Mongolia is home to more than 10 ethnic
                                                                         minorities that have historically resided within the
                                                                         current state boundaries. These ethnic minorities
                                                                         include Kazakh, Tuva, Dukha, Chantuu, Khoton
                                                                         and others.

                                                                         At the preparation stage of the project, the exact
                                                                         locations of project activities cannot be
                                                                         determined. According to the Bank’s OP4.10, an
                                                                         Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF)
                                                                         has been prepared. The main purpose of the
                                                                         document is to: 1) ensure ethnic minority groups
                                                                         can benefit from the project; 2) guide “free, prior,
                                                                         and informed consultation” with ethnic minority
                                                                         communities; and 3) ensure issues raised by



                                                                 Page 3 of 6
                                                                                ethnic minority communities are incorporated into
                                                                                subcomponent designs.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No              The project will not finance civil works but
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4.12                                                support capacity building activities for primary
                                                                                schools in Mongolia, including scaling up of the
                                                                                existing READ Program (i.e., development and
                                                                                provision of books and classroom libraries,
                                                                                teacher training, and an impact evaluation), and
                                                                                Talent Program (i.e., management, staff
                                                                                development, services, teaching materials, sports,
                                                                                furniture and equipment, and maintenance).
                                                                                Therefore, no involuntary resettlement is
                                                                                expected for the purpose of the project
                                                                                implementation.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                policy.
                            Projects on International        No                 The project is not associated with an international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                waterway.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 The project is not located in disputed areas.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The project will not finance civil works, but support capacity building activities for primary
                              schools in Mongolia, including scaling up of the existing READ Program (i.e., development and
                              provision of books and classroom libraries, teacher training, and an impact evaluation), and Talent
                              Program (i.e., management, staff development, services, teaching materials, sports, furniture and
                              equipment, and maintenance). The project will have minimal or no adverse environmental
                              impacts. The EA policy is triggered due to the need to assess and take into account, in an
                              integrated manner, the social aspects of the project particularly any impacts on IP communities.
                              The project is not required to prepare an instrument under OP4.01 policy. The project is classified
                              as Category B.

                              This project aims to improve the quality of education for primary schools in Mongolia, and it is a
                              nationwide project which will bring significant social benefit to local people. Though largely an
                              ethnically homogenous nation, with 80-86% of the population estimated to be of Khalkh Mongol
                              origin, Mongolia is home to more than 10 ethnic minorities that have historically resided within
                              current state boundaries. These ethnic minorities include Kazakh, Tuva, Dukha, Chantuu, Khoton
                              and others.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              N/A



                                                                        Page 4 of 6
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           According to the Bank’s OP4.10, an Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF) was prepared
                           by the client. The main purpose of the document is to: i) ensure ethnic minority groups can benefit
                           from the project; ii) guide “free, prior, and informed consultation” with ethnic minority
                           communities; and iii) ensure issues raised by ethnic minority communities are incorporated into
                           subcomponent designs. The IPPF was disclosed locally on February 18, 2014 and the English
                           version of the IPPF was submitted and disclosed at the Infoshop on February 18, 2014.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           N/A
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   18-Feb-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mongolia                                                         18-Feb-2014
                           Comments: Link (http://www.meds.gov.mn/forum140218)
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   18-Feb-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mongolia                                                         18-Feb-2014
                           Comments: Link (http://www.meds.gov.mn/forum140218)
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples




                                                                     Page 5 of 6
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Prateek Tandon
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Luis Benveniste (SM)                          Date: 25-Feb-2014




                                                                        Page 6 of 6
