                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC6396

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Jamaica                         Project ID:      P147665
                            Project Name:      Jamaica Foundations for Competitiveness and Growth (P147665)
                            Task Team          Thomas A. Vis
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          12-Feb-2014                     Estimated        20-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSPF                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Public administration- Industry and trade (15%), SME Finance (30%), Agro-
                                               industry, marketing, and trade (15%), General industry and trade sector (40%)
                            Theme(s):          Regulation and competition policy (10%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
                                               support (45%), Export development and competitiveness (4 5%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     50.00                    Total Bank Financing:         50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       50.00
                              Total                                                                       50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           To strengthen the enabling environment for private sector competitiveness to help Jamaica unleash
                           productivity and jobs growth. This will be done by enhancing competition in the business
                           environment, facilitating private investment and supporting training and financing of SMEs.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed operation will focus on four complementary areas related to building competition and
                           capabilities essential for unleashing private sector productivity upgrading and growth in Jamaica.
                           This multi-pronged programmatic approach is needed to effectively address the interlinked
Public Disclosure Copy




                           challenges constraining the Jamaican private sector. Local enterprises will be incentivized and
                           enabled to catch up to the global knowledge frontier through:
                           (1) Enhanced competition through improvements in the business environment, leading to more
                           efficient resource allocation across all enterprises and industries over time. This will include support
                           to spur competition through regulatory reform and implementation assistance; customs and other
                           trade facilitation reforms; and support to implement other investment climate regulatory reforms.
                           (2) The attraction of large anchor investors to stimulate competition, directly generate jobs, diffuse
                           global practices and provide greater international market access for local SMEs. This will include a
                           project preparation facility and investment generation support to facilitate strategic investments with
                           private participation such as in logistics infrastructure and divestment of government assets in the
                           tourism industry.
                           (3) Skills and finance support to local SMEs to ensure that they benefit from the improved business
                           environment and the global knowledge and market access provided by the anchor investors. This will
                           include a skills and knowledge transfer business training program and a SME credit line.
                           A final component will facilitate monitoring of the results and impact of these three components,
                           ensuring continuous learning and improvements over time.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Project activities may take place anywhere in Jamaica. Specific SMEs to be supported with training
                           and finance, as well as strategic investments facilitated through feasibility and other studies and TA,
                           will be determined during project implementation based on the most viable value chain linkages and
                           projects identified for support.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Government of Jamaica's (GOJ) institutional capacity for safeguard policies is considered high.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           GOJ policies relevant to the Project Preparation Facility (PPF) such as the PPP and Divestment
                           Policies require compliance with environmental and social impact policies as required by the
                           National Environmental and Planning Agency. The Development Bank of Jamaica (DBJ) as the lead
                           technical agency for the PPF requires that all projects supported by DBJ comply fully with these
                           policies. DBJ will also implement the lines of credit to financial institutions for on-lending to SMEs,
                           and has experience requiring that relevant GOJ environmental legislation and regulations are
                           complied with in the lending operations. Further investigation of institutional capacity for safeguard
                           policies will be explored during preparation missions.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Jose Vicente Zevallos (LCSSO)
                           Michael J. Darr (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Although no project interventions will have
                           BP 4.01                                               direct environmental impacts, future
                                                                                 investments associated with project activities
                                                                                 may have environmental implications in the
                                                            future. The Project Preparation Facility will
                                                            finance studies and TA for the design,
                                                            construction, and operation of large investment
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            projects, such as infrastructure projects
                                                            associated with the Logistics Hub Initiative or
                                                            privatization of government assets in the
                                                            tourism industry that could have environmental
                                                            implications. The credit lines to SMEs will
                                                            finance agriculture and manufacturing activities
                                                            that also could have environmental implications.
                                                            Given this, OP4.01 is triggered. The team will
                                                            agree with the client on the need to address
                                                            environmental issues that may occur as a result
                                                            of the subsequent investments facilitated by the
                                                            project. The team will also assess the
                                                            environmental management practices of DBJ to
                                                            support its capacity in implementing the PPF
                                                            and LOC from an environmental perspective.
                                                            The operations manual for the PPF will include
                                                            requirements to incorporate environmental
                                                            analysis into funded studies as appropriate to
                                                            ensure they are consistent with the principles of
                                                            the Bank’s safeguard policies, as well as
                                                            relevant environmental policies and legislation
                                                            of the Government of Jamaica.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No   This policy is not triggered, as the project will
                                                            not finance activities that have a direct impact
                                                            on natural habitats. All environmental analysis
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            conducted related to studies to support
                                                            subsequent private investment activities will
                                                            consider the potential impacts of the
                                                            investments on natural habitats as appropriate.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No   This policy is not triggered, as the project will
                                                            not finance activities that have a direct impact
                                                            on the management of forests or forest-
                                                            dependent communities. All environmental
                                                            analysis conducted related to studies to support
                                                            subsequent private investment activities will
                                                            consider the potential impacts of the
                                                            investments on forests as appropriate.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No   This policy is not triggered, as the project will
                                                            not finance the procurement or use of pesticides.
                                                            All environmental analysis conducted related to
                                                            studies to support subsequent private investment
                                                            activities, or the environmental considerations
                                                            regarding loans to SMEs, will consider the
                                                                                                                                 potential need of the investments to purchase or
                                                                                                                                 use pesticides as appropriate.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            This policy is not triggered, as the project will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         not finance activities that have a direct impact
                                                                                                                                 on physical cultural resources. All
                                                                                                                                 environmental analysis conducted related to
                                                                                                                                 studies to support subsequent private investment
                                                                                                                                 activities will consider the potential impacts of
                                                                                                                                 the investments on physical cultural resources
                                                                                                                                 as appropriate.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            This policy is not triggered, as there are no
                                                                                                                                 indigenous peoples as defined under OP 4.10 in
                                                                                                                                 Jamaica.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            This policy is not triggered, as the project will
                                 4.12                                                                                            not finance activities that will directly cause
                                                                                                                                 involuntary resettlement or require land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition. All social analysis conducted
                                                                                                                                 related to studies to support subsequent private
                                                                                                                                 investment activities will consider the potential
                                                                                                                                 need for land acquisition associated with the
                                                                                                                                 investments, as well as the situation of land
                                                                                                                                 ownership and occupation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This policy is not triggered, as the project will
                                                                                                                                 not finance any activities related to dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            This policy is not triggered, as the project will
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            not finance activities that have a direct impact
                                                                                                                                 on international waterways. All analysis
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 conducted related to studies to support
                                                                                                                                 subsequent private investment activities will
                                                                                                                                 consider the potential impacts of theinvestments
                                                                                                                                 on international waterways as appropriate.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This policy is not triggered, as the project will
                                 7.60                                                                                            not finance any activities in disputed areas as
                                                                                                                                 defined under the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 13-Feb-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The inclusion of environmental and social considerations in the PPF, as well as in the LOC for on-
                                      lending to SMEs, will be discussed with GOJ counterparts and determined during project
                                      preparation in December 2013 and January 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Thomas A. Vis



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Approved By:
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)             Date: 05-Feb-2014
                         Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Subrahmanya Pulle Srinivas (SM)   Date: 05-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
