                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC8542

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Dominican Republic              Project ID:     P147483
                            Project Name:      Caribbean Regional Communications Infrastructure Prog - Dominican Rep.
                                               (P147483)
                            Task Team          Elena Gasol Ramos
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       19-May-2014                        Estimated       24-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: TWICT                               Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Telecommunications (50%), Information technology (50%)
                            Theme(s):          Regional integration (10%), Regulation and competition policy (30%),
                                               Infrastructure services for private sector development (60%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     30.00                    Total Bank Financing:        30.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      30.00
                              Total                                                                      30.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective (PDO) of the Dominican Republic CARCIP seeks to increase
                           access to regional broadband networks and advance the development of ICT-enabled services in the
                           Caribbean Region.

                           CARCIP’s objective is expected to be achieved through: (a) targeted investments in ICT
                         infrastructure that fill the gaps at the national and municipal level, preferably in partnership with the
                         private sector; (b) creating an open innovation ecosystem that fosters the development of ICT skills
                         and ICT enabled services; and (c) strengthening institutional capacity/arrangements to ensure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         effective program implementation and outcomes.
                         C. Project Description
                         The program is being implemented in phases, based on country demand and readiness. Phase 1 of
                         CARCIP includes four countries (Grenada, Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines under
                         sub-Phase APL 1A, joined by the Dominican Republic under sub-Phase SOP 1B), and initiated in
                         FY13. Other eligible CARIFORUM countries may join in subsequent phases, and would be targeted
                         for development in FY13-14. The components for SOP 1B will be as follows:

                         1. Component 1: Regional Connectivity Infrastructure ($25 million). This component will support
                         the reduction of connectivity gaps between rural and urban, and poor and developed areas in the
                         Dominican Republic, through the deployment of a National Fiber Optic Network. This network will
                         provide high-speed fiber optic connectivity to several municipalities in the country. The
                         infrastructure will contribute to increase access to more affordable high-speed connectivity in the
                         Dominican Republic. The fiber optic network will reach interconnection points with regional and
                         global backbone networks, as part of CARCIP’s regional strategy.
                         There are two subcomponents: (A) Enabling Environment (US$1million); and (B) Broadband
                         Backbone Network (US$24million). Subcomponent 1A will provide technical support to ensure that
                         the legal and regulatory framework is aligned with the project, as well as design the PPP bidding
                         process to leverage the project funds with private sector investment. Subcomponent 1B will roll out
                         the connectivity infrastructure according to the proposal awarded in the competitive bidding process.

                         2. Component 2: Open Innovation Hub ($3.5 million). This component will provide targeted support
                         for human capacity and business development, while facilitating the creation of a culture of use and
                         adoption of ICTs throughout the general public. Funds under this component would also contribute
                         to collaboration with the private sector for targeted skills development, building on top of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         INDOTEL’s social programs (e.g. telecenters).

                         3. Component 3 ($1.5 million): Implementation Support. This component will provide resources for
                         the establishment and logistic support for a core PCU staff to administer and coordinate the project’s
                         implementation and conduct monitoring and evaluation. It will also support oversight arrangements
                         and capacity building for key Policy and Regulatory institutions.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The physical components of terrestrial connectivity to be financed under the Program will likely
                         include construction of ducts, poles and deployment of earthed and unearthed cables, to form
                         networks at the national, governmental, and rural levels. The most cost-effective option identified
                         for the land-based National Optical Fiber Backbone Infrastructure is the adaptation of existing
                         capacity, such as in the country's national electricity transmission company, ETED (Empresa de
                         Transmisión Eléctrica Dominicana). Use of the existing land network would also minimize
                         environmental and social impacts by reducing the need for excavation and construction of new cable
                         segments; however, emplacement of new buried cables would still be necessary where the existing
                         infrastructure does not extend. Most of the cables would be located along existing rights-of-way and/
                         or roadways, which again would serve to minimize environmental and social effects. There are
                         existing cables across the island, reaching the western border of the Dominican Republic with Haiti
                         at several points. Expansion of the system to reach new areas may occur in future phases of the
                         project. Trenching activities will require environmental management for runoff control, traffic
                         safety, dust control, vegetation clearing, laydown areas and access points, and other standard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental provisions. Additional construction or rehabilitation works may include
                         communications centers or other buildings, landing stations, and towers.

                         Several existing submarine cables extend from Landing Stations on the north, east, and south coasts,
                         near Puerto Plata, Punta Cana, and Santo Domingo respectively, and reach landing points which are
                         already existing and in operation, therefore any civil works in coastal areas will be excluded. The
                         cost of new submarine cables is considerable, therefore existing cable capacity will be utilized and
                         no new submarine cables will be constructed

                         Given the nature of the planned investments (new construction and rehabilitation) small-scale land
                         acquisition is anticipated in the project. OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) is therefore
                         triggered. The exact nature and extent of acquisition is unknown during project preparation since the
                         specific project sites have not yet been determined. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
                         prepared to guide the implementation of land acquisition during the lifetime of the project. During
                         implementation, land acquisition will be assessed on a sub-project specific basis. When involuntary
                         land acquisition and/or resettlement is confirmed, and specific program areas are known, Land
                         Acquisition and Resettlement Plans will be prepared, according to the guidelines set out by the
                         Involuntary Resettlement Framework, and submitted to the Bank for no objection prior to sub-project
                         financing. Major impacts are not anticipated given that facilities are expected to follow existing
                         rights of way, especially roads; however, irregularities in land titling or rights-of-way may require
                         land acquisition and/or title regularization, particularly along rural roads

                         The Program is not expected to impact indigenous peoples in any negative way, however, since the
                         actual lay out of the network will come only after the contract to build the infrastructure is
                         determined, it is still to be determined whether OP/BP 4.10 is triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Program is expected to have positive social impacts by improving access to communications; the
                         development of ICT enabled services, and improved government decentralized service delivery.
                         Particularly, the program is expected to: (i) enable ICT to become a driver for sustainable economic
                         growth; (ii) increase employment opportunities through the development of ICT-based services; (iii)
                         enable the government to use ICT to provide decentralized services; (iv) improved access and quality
                         of ICT services for the population, business, and government; (v) reduce isolation and enhance
                         economic activities in rural areas; and (vi) create additional opportunities for women entrepreneurs to
                         develop ICT-related careers.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         A PCU will be established in INDOTEL and will be in charge of the day-to-day management of the
                         project technical and logistical aspects, including the work program and coordinating with the
                         relevant ministries and departments, procurement, financial management and monitoring and
                         evaluation. INDOTEL previously managed a co-financed 7-year telecommunications Project for a
                         total amount of US$33.3 million, US$12.3 million financed with Bank proceeds and US$20.0
                         provided as counterpart contribution. INDOTEL was awarded a US$250,000 grant under the Spanish
                         Trust Fund for LAC (SFLAC) for feasibilities studies for the broadband backbone network for DR as
                         part of the Preparation of the CARCIP Program.

                         To ensure the program has a strong local implementation oversight over borrowed resources, and to
                           ensure adequate coordination with the various groups and initiatives being implemented at the
                           national level, a Project Coordinator will be recruited and located at INDOTEL. The Project
                           Coordinator will be responsible for the effective and flexible coordination, management, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation of the project, liaise effectively with selected Dominican Republic focal points, and
                           with all public and private stakeholders involved in the implementation of the project.
                           The capacity of the PCU will be augmented under the project to accommodate the additional
                           environmental and social management and supervision work to be undertaken. During the project
                           preparation process, consideration was given to establishing an Environmental Unit within
                           INDOTEL to manage the permitting and environmental management aspects, but the environmental
                           and social management functions may also be accomplished by an at least part time environmental
                           and social safeguards and additional specialists as needed, depending on the tasks being undertaken
                           by INDOTEL. Environmental specialists at ETED may also support INDOTEL if electric lines are
                           used. Liason with the federal environmental authority (the Ministerio de Medio Ambiente y
                           Recursos Naturales, MIMARENA) will be required to fulfill permitting requirements, to receive and
                           implement additional permit conditions (including a Plan de Manejo y Adecuación Ambiental
                           (PMAA), if required by MIMARENA), and to coordinate field supervision of project works with
                           provincial MIMARENA offices. Coordination with municipal authorities will also be required to
                           ensure local permitting and environmental management concerns are addressed.

                           Additional support will be provided through periodic supervision by World Bank specialists and by
                           periodic reporting by the Project Coordinator on environmental and social management aspects.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong (LCSSO)
                           Michael J. Darr (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             Deployment of terrestrial broadband
                           BP 4.01                                             telecommunications infrastructure will not have
                                                                               significant adverse environmental impacts due
                                                                               to the use of existing cable systems when
                                                                               possible, as well as the small footprint of the
                                                                               cable and its positioning along existing
                                                                               roadways where possible. New sections of
                                                                               cable will require environmental management of
                                                                               trenching activities. Construction or upgrading
                                                                               of towers could create impacts from road
                                                                               improvements and/or associated civil works.
                                                                               The project will connect to existing landing
                                                                               points on shoreand will install no submarine
                                                                               cables or landing stations. The project is
                                                                               assigned to environmental category B, and an
                                                                               Environmental and Social Management
                                                                               Framework (ESMF) laying out the applicable
                                                                               policies and guidelines will be prepared and
                                                                               disclosed in the Dominican Republic. The
                                                                 ESMF will be based on the existing CARCIP
                                                                 regional ESMF but adapted to the context of the
                                                                 Dominican Republic and this project. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 ESMF willalso contain environmental
                                                                 management plans (EMPs) to identify, mitigate,
                                                                 manage and offset potential environmental
                                                                 impacts from the expected trenching activities
                                                                 and civil works.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   Most project activities are not expected to affect
                                                                 natural habitats, especially those involving
                                                                 cables along existing roadways and
                                                                 rehabilitation of towers and structures.
                                                                 However, since the exact scope of the network
                                                                 will only be decided through the network’s
                                                                 bidding process a screening criterion to avoid
                                                                 negative impacts in Natural Habitats and avoid
                                                                 critical natural habitats will be included in the
                                                                 ESMF.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    This policy is not triggered given that project
                                                                 activities will not include forest management
                                                                 and that any impacts are likely to be of small
                                                                 scale due to the small foot print of the cable and
                                                                 its positioning along existing roadways where
                                                                 possible. In addition,. Nevertheless, the ESMF
                                                                 will contain screening mechanisms to ensure
                                                                 that any potential small scale impacts on forests
                                                                 be mitigated through measures defined as part
                                                                 of the broader approach on environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 management.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    Any incidental pesticide use for building
                                                                 maintenance may be managed by including it in
                                                                 the appropriate EMPs. This will include non-
                                                                 chemical measures for pest management and
                                                                 guidelines for proper selection, application,
                                                                 storage, handling, transport and disposal of
                                                                 pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   This policy is triggered given that some physical
                         BP 4.11                                 interventions would result in earthworks
                                                                 involving the chance finds of physical cultural
                                                                 resources. The ESMF will include specific
                                                                 screening provisions for evaluating potential
                                                                 impacts on cultural resources and provide
                                                                 specific guidance on the chance finds
                                                                 procedures within the EMP/contracting
                                                                 documents.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     TBD                           Since the actual lay out of the network will
                                                                                                                                 come only after the contract to build the
                                                                                                                                 infrastructure is determined, it is still to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 determined whether OP/BP 4.10 policy is
                                                                                                                                 triggered.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           Small-scale land acquisition is anticipated in the
                                 4.12                                                                                            project, therefore OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement) is triggered and a Resettlement
                                                                                                                                 Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared.
                                                                                                                                 Major impacts are not anticipated given that
                                                                                                                                 facilities are expected to follow existing rights
                                                                                                                                 of way, especially roads; however, irregularities
                                                                                                                                 in land titling or rights-of-way may require land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition and/or title regularization,
                                                                                                                                 particularly along rural roads. When involuntary
                                                                                                                                 land acquisition and/or resettlement is
                                                                                                                                 confirmed, Resettlement Plans will be prepared,
                                                                                                                                 prior to sub-project financing
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This policy is not triggered as the project will
                                                                                                                                 neither support the construction or rehabilitation
                                                                                                                                 of dams nor will it support other investments
                                                                                                                                 which rely on services of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             OP 7.50 is not triggered since the project will
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            not build any submarine cables.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This policy is not triggered as the project will
                                 7.60                                                                                            not work in such areas as defined under the
                                                                                                                                 policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 22-May-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Draft versions of the ESMF and RFP will be prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal. Comments
                                      from consultation will be incorporated into the Final version.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Elena Gasol Ramos

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                                                Date: 29-May-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Randeep Sudan (SM)                                                                                                   Date: 29-May-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
