                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA5337
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          India                              Project ID:    P145502
                            Project Name:     TECHNOLOGY CENTER SYSTEMS PROJECT (TCSP) (P145502)
                            Task Team         Vincent Palmade
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         11-Dec-2013                        Estimated   24-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    SASFP                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        SME Finance (50%), Other industry (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       500.00              Total Bank Financing: 250.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 250.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    250.00
                              Total                                                                                    500.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Program’s Development Objective (PDO) is enhancing MSME’s access to trans-formative
                           technologies and skilled workers, through systems of financially sustainable Technology Centers.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project/program is about upgrading and expanding the network of Technology Centers
                           which have as their mission to improve the competitiveness of MSMEs in key manufacturing

                                                                      Page 1 of 12
                         industries across India – with a strong emphasis on Low Income States. Technology Centers provide
                         on a fee basis an integrated suite of services to MSMEs: ranging from technical and management
                         advisory to technical training of workers. The Proposed Program will reinforce the technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                         capability of the Technology Centers as well as their governance by further increasing the
                         participation of the private sector in key decisions at both the National and Local levels.
                         The program implementation responsibility will be with the Development Commissioner of the
                         Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, Govt. of India. The proposed national Program
                         will finance the following activities grouped into the following three components:
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Final locations to be determined. EA is therefore on a Framework basis.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Samuel Thangaraj (SASDS)
                         Francis V. Fragano (SARDE)
                         Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (SASDI)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              Specific interventions (under Component 2)
                          BP 4.01                                           envisaged under the project such as creation of 15
                                                                            new Technology Centers and upgrading of
                                                                            building and related infrastructure of the existing
                                                                            18 Tool Rooms may have some potential adverse
                                                                            environmental impacts in the local context. Even
                                                                            though it is expected that the new buildings/
                                                                            blocks would be located within an existing
                                                                            industrial estate or on available government land
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            elsewhere, planning, construction and operation
                                                                            of buildings would require appropriate integration
                                                                            of environment, health and safety measures to
                                                                            ensure that adverse environmental impacts are
                                                                            minimized and properly managed.
                                                                            Impacts pertaining to: (a) location (environmental
                                                                            and social features of the site and surrounding
                                                                            land-uses); (b) design (sanitation, water supply,
                                                                            drainage, solid waste arrangements, waste water
                                                                            management, ventilation, access, energy
                                                                            efficiency, material usage, fire safety, storage
                                                                            facility and natural disaster dimension); (c)
                                                                            construction and worksite safety management,
                                                                            including occupational health and safety of
                                                                            construction workers, public safety issues,
                                                                            management of borrow areas and debris/waste
                                                                            material; and; (d) operation/maintenance aspects
                                                                            of physical assets such as buildings, equipment/
                                                                            tools/machinery (such as sanitation and



                                                                    Page 2 of 12
                                                                    cleanliness/hygiene in the campus and its various
                                                                    facilities, waste management from workshop
                                                                    floor, e-waste management, noise and air
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    pollution from generators and other workshop
                                                                    machinery etc.).would require attention. There is
                                                                    also an opportunity to improve the over-all
                                                                    environmental footprint by creating ‘green
                                                                    buildings’ or ‘greener facilities’ under the
                                                                    program.
                                                                    On other project interventions pertaining to
                                                                    training/curriculum development and testing/
                                                                    developing prototypes the anticipated
                                                                    environmental impacts are not likely to cause any
                                                                    significant or serious damage to natural and
                                                                    physical environment. In fact, the Program offers
                                                                    opportunity to promote improved environmental
                                                                    performance of the selected industrial sectors and
                                                                    safer working practices through introduction of
                                                                    new/ appropriate technology (equipment/
                                                                    machines) and training.
                                                                    OP 4.01 has been triggered to ensure that all
                                                                    major (like building infrastructure) and minor
                                                                    (tools/equipment/machinery, training and
                                                                    curriculum related) interventions are planned and
                                                                    designed to be environmentally sound by
                                                                    integrating appropriate principles and approaches
                                                                    into the over-all decision making process.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No             No physical interventions proposed under the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    project are expected to affect natural habitats. No
                                                                    civil works will be financed under the project in
                                                                    designated protected areas/wilderness areas/
                                                                    critical natural habitats. The environment
                                                                    screening tool will be used to ensure compliance
                                                                    in this regard. Therefore, OP 4.04 is not being
                                                                    triggered for the project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No             OP 4.36 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                    no interventions are envisaged in forest areas and
                                                                    therefore no conversion/degradation of this
                                                                    natural resource would occur.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No             OP 4.09 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                    biological/environmental control methods or
                                                                    reliance on synthetic chemical pesticides is not
                                                                    envisaged. In case, such a need arises on account
                                                                    of selection of a specific trade/sector, the
                                                                    requirement is likely to be very limited. In such a
                                                                    scenario, the requirements under the pest
                                                                    management policy of the Bank will be built-in as


                                                            Page 3 of 12
                                                                         part of the over-all Environment Management
                                                                         Plan to be developed for the Technology Center/s
                                                                         in question.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             By and large, implementation of the project/
                         BP 4.11                                         program is not likely to affect religious structures
                                                                         of local significance. Screening and site
                                                                         verification protocols will help establish this.
                                                                         However, since civil works are involved, ‘chance
                                                                         finds’ at work sites is a likely impact that will
                                                                         have to be managed by incorporating appropriate
                                                                         provisions in the bidding/contract documents.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             The states to be covered under the project have
                                                                         not yet been finalized at this stage. Once the
                                                                         selection of States is completed and sites are
                                                                         short-listed, social screening will be undertaken.
                                                                         However, the policy stands triggered as the
                                                                         project beneficiaries would include tribal
                                                                         population and would benefit Scheduled Tribes
                                                                         students/unemployed youth through specific
                                                                         interventions.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             Based on the information available, while
                         4.12                                            extension/upgrading of existing Centers will take
                                                                         place within the existing complexes and will not
                                                                         require additional land, setting-up/establishment
                                                                         of new Centers may require acquisition of land.
                                                                         Availability of a site free from encumbrances has
                                                                         been built-in as a criterion in the site selection
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         process by MoMSME but in the unlikely event of
                                                                         such a requirement that may come-up for a
                                                                         specific site; the required processes have been
                                                                         built into the Social Management Framework to
                                                                         prepare resettlement instruments, as and if
                                                                         required. Keeping this possibility in mind, OP
                                                                         4.12 has been triggered.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              OP 4.37 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                         there is no construction of new dams or activities
                                                                         that are concerned with safe functioning of
                                                                         existing dams.
                         Projects on International         No              OP 7.50 will not be triggered for this project as
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            there are no interventions planned/ proposed over
                                                                         or around an international waterway that could
                                                                         cause a potential conflict. There are also no
                                                                         activities that may affect the use or pollute such a
                                                                         waterway.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No               OP 7.60 is not being triggered as the project is
                         7.60                                            not proposed in any disputed area.



                                                                 Page 4 of 12
                                                                                Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address
                                                                                Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in
                                                                                Bank-Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                �

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The establishment of 15 new Technology Centers and strengthening of 18 existing ones is
                              envisaged over a six-year period under the project. These facilities will focus on improving access
                              to technology, providing skill up-gradation and offering advocacy support for specific industries
                              with high growth potential. The centers are to provide technical advisory support for entrepreneurs
                              and workers while offering opportunities for technical skill development for the youth. The long
                              term vision of this project/Program is to ensure competitiveness of the MSME system by
                              strengthening further their linkage to the mainstream manufacturing sector in the country. The
                              ultimate goal is to ensure easy access to high quality technology and holistic skill development and
                              training across the industry value chain, geographies and functionalities.
                              Environmental Issues. While the project interventions would have an over-all positive impact on
                              economic growth, skill development and job creation, specific interventions (under Component 2)
                              envisaged under the project such as creation of 15 new Technology Centers and upgrading of
                              building and related infrastructure of the existing 18 Tool Rooms may have some potential adverse
                              environmental impacts in the local context. Even though it is expected that the new buildings/
                              blocks would be located within an existing industrial estate or on available government land
                              elsewhere, planning, construction and operation of buildings would require appropriate integration
                              of environment, health and safety measures to ensure that adverse environmental impacts are
                              minimized and properly managed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Impacts pertaining to: (a) location (environmental and social features of the site and surrounding
                              land-uses); (b) design (sanitation, water supply, drainage, solid waste arrangements, waste water
                              management, ventilation, access, energy efficiency, material usage, fire safety, storage facility and
                              natural disaster dimension); (c) construction and worksite safety management, including
                              occupational health and safety of construction workers, public safety issues, management of
                              borrow areas and debris/waste material; and; (d) operation/maintenance aspects of physical assets
                              such as buildings, equipment/tools/machinery (such as sanitation and cleanliness/hygiene in the
                              campus and its various facilities, waste management from workshop floor, e-waste management,
                              noise and air pollution from generators and other workshop machinery etc.) would require
                              attention. There is also an opportunity to improve the over-all environmental footprint by creating
                              ‘green buildings’ or ‘greener facilities’ under the program.
                              On other project interventions pertaining to training/curriculum development and testing/
                              developing prototypes, the anticipated environmental impacts are not likely to cause any
                              significant or serious damage to natural and physical environment. In fact, the Program offers
                              opportunity to promote improved environmental performance of the selected industrial sectors and
                              safer working practices through introduction of new/appropriate technology (equipment/machines)
                              and training. There is also an opportunity to improve the over-all environmental footprint by
                              creating ‘green buildings’ or ‘greener facilities’ under the program.
                              In view of the project’s potential impacts on the environment, the Bank’s OP 4.01 on
                              Environmental Assessment and OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources have been triggered, and


                                                                        Page 5 of 12
                           the project is designated as Category B. On the whole, with proper management, the project
                           interventions are not likely to cause large scale, significant or irreversible damage to natural,
                           physical or social environment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Social Issues/Impacts. The extension/upgrading of existing Centers will take place within the
                           existing complexes and will not require additional land or entail a change in current land use. The
                           negative social impacts (land acquisition and associated full or partial displacement) therefore are
                           unlikely, as the Service Centers will be established on available government land and will not
                           involve any change in land use. However, setting-up/establishment of new Centers may require
                           acquisition of land. Availability of a site free from encumbrances has been built-in as a criterion in
                           the site selection process by MoMSME but in the unlikely event of such a requirement that may
                           come-up for a specific site; the required processes have been built into the Social Management
                           Framework to prepare resettlement instruments, as and if required.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           By strengthening delivery mechanisms for MSMEs, the project is likely to contribute to an
                           increase activities of the sector - and hence to their environmental impact – both positive and
                           negative. Such environmental impacts may include issues pertaining to resource utilization,
                           pollution management and occupational health and safety. These need to be considered as the
                           project seeks to strengthen delivery mechanisms and improving capacity for the MSME sector
                           even though no direct physical investment would be made beyond the Technology Centers under
                           the project.
                           Further, some specific long-term environmental impacts are associated with the operation and
                           management of the Technology Centers itself. Appropriate water and sanitation facilities, noise
                           and air pollution management, e-waste handling, recycling of materials and disposal of wastes are
                           some of the issues that require regular attention. However, such adverse impacts are not likely to
                           be large-scale or irreversible in nature. These can be avoided/minimized to a great extent and the
                           positive outcomes from the program can be enhanced substantially by putting appropriate
                           institutional mechanisms, procedures and capacity in place. Considerations of environment, health
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and safety dimensions in the project design would help in ensuring the soundness and
                           sustainability of such specific programs from an environmental perspective.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           AAs part of the project preparation process, a selection/screening methodology is being developed
                           to allow for appropriate selection of states, clusters and trades that will finally find coverage under
                           the program. A system of weightages to the assigned criteria and feedback from key stakeholders
                           will be used to determine the location and nature of trade activities that will be ultimately
                           supported under the project. This system of selection and elimination also includes environmental
                           and social parameters such as availability of unencumbered land/site. This mechanism also allows
                           for avoiding potential impacts on environmentally sensitive features/areas.
                           The Technology Centers will be established only on available government land as far as possible
                           and will not involve any change in land use – in most cases the land would be made available
                           within existing/established industrial estates. Further, through the application of the Environment
                           Management Framework, it is planned that as and where required, building orientation/design
                           alternatives (including green/greener elements) will be explored to take into account site specific
                           features/constraints.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.


                                                                      Page 6 of 12
                         Safeguard policy issues have been considered by carrying out environment and social assessments
                         and by applying OP 4.01, OP 4. 11 and OP 4.10 - this has resulted in preparation of distinct
                         safeguard instruments for the proposed operation. The safeguard instruments, thus prepared for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project include: (a) Environment Management Framework (EMF) and; (b) the Social Management
                         Framework (SMF). Specific details are given in the sections below:
                         Management of Environmental Issues and Risks
                         Environment Assessment. A limited Environmental Assessment (EA) study was undertaken by the
                         MoMSME for the proposed project. The EA study provides an analysis of the potential positive
                         and negative impacts of the three primary project activities that are relevant from the
                         environmental management and safeguards perspective. These are: (1) creation of 15 new
                         Technology Centers; (2) upgrading of 18 existing Technology Centers and (3) strengthening
                         technological/technical/training capabilities. As part of the EA, the current capacity of the
                         MoMSME and the existing Tool Rooms (as they are currently called) from an environmental
                         management perspective, was also reviewed.
                         Environment Management Framework. The Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
                         developed as an outcome of this assessment provides guidelines for site selection, design,
                         construction and maintenance of environment-friendly Technology Centers in line with relevant
                         legal and regulatory requirements of Govt. of India and the environment safeguard policies of the
                         World Bank. The environment management process and tool (EMF) for the project have been
                         designed keeping in mind this varied scope of work, which includes setting-up of 15 new
                         Technology Centers; upgrading of 18 existing Tool Rooms, including building, supporting
                         infrastructure/equipment and; technical assistance for technological and business needs support,
                         including exposure of new technologies, providing access to cutting-edge equipment, developing
                         and testing new products and patenting. Accordingly, to effectively plan, design and integrate
                         environmental dimensions into the over-all project preparation and implementation, an
                         Environment Management Framework (EMF) has been prepared. The EMF has been informed by
                         the results of a limited environment assessment exercise that was conducted by the MoMSME and
                         experiences from the Bank funded Vocational Training Improvement Project (VTIP), currently
Public Disclosure Copy




                         under execution apart from other projects associated with/supporting the MSMEs in the country/
                         region.
                         The key elements of the Environment Management Framework developed for the project includes:
                         (i) a screening exercise to identify key issues (such as availability of unencumbered site) and
                         consider those in the selection of sites for 15 new Technology Centers; (ii) application and
                         implementation of Codes of Practice for Design and Construction of Green/-er Buildings for the
                         15 new and 18 existing Tool Rooms/Technology Centers and; (iii) mainstreaming/strengthening
                         environment, health and safety dimensions in the operations based on the nature, need and scope
                         of trades/sectors finally selected under the Program.
                         As part of training and capacity building activities, the project will support development of
                         appropriate mechanisms to deal with issues of occupational health and safety. Further, based on
                         the final selection of trades/activities (based on nature, need and scope), the Implementation
                         Partner will explore the opportunities for bringing-in new technologies/ materials that are cost-
                         effective, efficient and yet environment friendly.
                         Borrower’s Capacity Assessment
                         The key implementing agency for the Program/project will be the Ministry of Micro, Small and
                         Medium Enterprise (MSME), Govt. of India.
                         At present, through the Office of Development Commissioner, the Ministry operates 10 Tool
                         Rooms and 8 Technology Development Centres (together referred as Technology Centres).
                         Several of these are set up through collaborations with German and Danish agencies as well as


                                                                  Page 7 of 12
                         with the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO). These Technology
                         Centres are to a large extent self-sustaining centres that have been providing technical and
                         vocational training programs to more than 100,000 trainees annually including All India Council
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for Technical Education (AICTE) and National Council for Vocational Training (NCVT)
                         approved certification. They also provide design and manufacturing support to entrepreneurs
                         alongside technical consultancies.
                         There is variance in the levels of training itself, which is demonstrative of a wide spectrum of
                         technical sophistication in training inputs. The recent evaluation studies of Technology Centres
                         have found a strong need to replicate the facility at more places. The studies also point to the need
                         for technological up-gradation, improved training output and innovation in the business models of
                         the Technology Centres, strengthening of workforce supply and to increase the capacities to train
                         youth in India.
                         Under the proposed project, establishment of 15 new Technology Centers and strengthening of 18
                         existing ones is envisaged over a six-year period. These facilities will focus on improving access
                         to technology, providing skill up-gradation and offering advocacy support for specific industries
                         with high growth potential. The centres are to provide technical advisory support for entrepreneurs
                         and workers while offering opportunities for technical skill development for the youth. . It is also
                         envisioned that these existing Technology Centres will act as mother units and thought leaders to
                         the sectors and space in which they operate. The long term vision of this Program is to ensure
                         competitiveness of the MSME system by strengthening further their linkage to the mainstream
                         manufacturing sector in the country.
                         The activities under the project are likely to focus on priority industries, including such as Tooling,
                         Electronic System Design & Manufacturing (ESDM), Fragrances & Flavours, Leather and leather
                         products and Glass & Ceramics, among others. The ultimate goal is to ensure easy access to high
                         quality technology and holistic skill development and training across the industry value chain,
                         geographies and functionalities.
                         To succeed, the proposed Program requires strong private sector involvement in all the key
                         decisions pertaining to the design and implementation. Also, involvement and timely coordination
                         between MSME Ministry and other major stakeholders such as Ministry of Science and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Technology, Ministry of Communication and Information Technology, Ministry of Heavy
                         Industry, Ministry of Labor (DGE&T), State Governments (through their Department of
                         Industries), Industry Associations, representatives from the relevant business associations,
                         Industry Leaders is required for strengthening the Indian MSME system through the Program.
                         While there is strong commitment and interest in the Ministry for the program, there are
                         institutional challenges and limitations in capacity to manage an ambitious program/project of this
                         nature and scale. The institutional deficiencies/gaps exist in terms of staffing shortage, lack of up-
                         to-date technical knowledge on various industrial sectors and lack of capacity to coordinate/bring
                         together a large number of diverse stakeholders in a systematic and time-bound manner. There is
                         an over-all lack of quality information and understanding on what the key safeguard
                         (environmental and social) issues, risks and opportunities are in the context of the MSME sector.
                         In the light of the importance of the program, complexities involved in the operation and current
                         limitations in institutional capacity, the preparation and implementation of the project requires
                         strong technical, advisory, safeguards and management support from consultants/agencies with apt
                         international experience and expertise to handle this program.
                         Management of Social Issues and Risks.
                         The Technology Centers are the implementing agencies at the state level and they do not have any
                         structure and process for addressing social safeguard/management processes at present as the need
                         for such a structure and process had not been felt at the Centers so far. Nevertheless, each
                         Technology Centre will have a designated Nodal Officer for Social Development who will not

                                                                    Page 8 of 12
                           only be responsible for social safeguard process but also for social development aspects of the
                           Centre such as gender, equity and social inclusion.
                           The Nodal Officer will be someone who is at present working on extension activities of the Centre
Public Disclosure Copy




                           such as support to Community Based Organizations such as Self-Help Groups for sustainable
                           sources of livelihood and income and also Corporate Social Responsibility programs. In case it is
                           not possible for a Centre to appoint a Nodal Officer from among its existing staff, the Centre will
                           appoint a Social Development Consultant who will also work with the PIU on aspects related to
                           social safeguard and social development. The designation of a Nodal Officer and/or appointment
                           of a Social Development Consultant will be completed within three months of the approval of
                           TCSP on the basis of terms of reference to be approved by the Bank.
                           The Nodal Officers and Social Development Consultants will undergo a series of training
                           programs related to (i) structure and process of social safeguard management; (ii) grievance
                           redress; (iii) indigenous peoples development, where required; (iv) gender, equity and social
                           inclusion. The training will also focus on participatory planning, implementation and monitoring
                           of Social Management Plans and IPDPs.
                           The PIU will also organize series of training programs for Project Affected Families, vulnerable
                           sections among Project Affected Families, Non-Government Organizations, Civil Society
                           Organizations and Community Based Organizations on (i) income generating programs; (ii)
                           participation and grievance redress; (iii) access to technical/vocational programs provided by the
                           Centre to facilitate gender, equity and social inclusion.
                           The PIU will prepare a detailed plan for capacity building through a series of training programs
                           and this would include the contents of training program, the methodology, the time frame and the
                           budget in consultation with the Nodal Officers, the Social Development Consultants, the Project
                           Affected Families, NGOs, CSOs and CBOs based on Focus Group Discussions with a view to
                           identify the exact needs. This means the proposed specific capacity building programs will be an
                           outcome of participatory process of training needs analysis (TNA) within the broad framework
                           outlined.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Stakeholders: The primary stakeholders include the intended target population or beneficiaries of
                           the program being supported under the proposed operation – the Indian micro, small and medium
                           enterprises (MSMEs) (specifically beneficiary MSMEs availing services of these centers
                           especially from Auto, Plastic, Electronic, Aerospace, Consumer durables and other general
                           engineering sector); larger firms (who are a part of the value chain); as well as students and
                           workers at the Tool Rooms/Technology Centers. The secondary stakeholders include officials
                           from MoMSME, Ministry of Labour and Employment, Department of Science and Technology,
                           National Skill Mission, the Regional/Sectoral Industry Associations representing MSMEs,
                           trainees, the Regional/National level Academic and Vocational Training Institutions.
                           Consultations: Stakeholder participation is central to design and implementation of the project and
                           provides for information sharing, consultation and collaboration measures. A consultation
                           framework has been laid out in the Environment Management Framework and Social Management
                           Framework to ensure proper consultation and participation of stakeholders at the various stages of
                           Program preparation and implementation.
                           In accordance with applicable Bank policies, consultations at the local or Tool Room/Technology
                           Center level) so far have been carried out as part of the limited environment and social assessment
                           process. The public consultation process has indicated that the stakeholders strongly support the
                           proposed project. The feedback/inputs from these field based discussions have been primarily used
                           for preparing the environment and social management instruments (EMF and SMF) of the project.


                                                                    Page 9 of 12
                           Once the detailed plan preparation process for the various sites is initiated, specific inputs on site
                           selection, design of the facility, technological choices and other such maters will be sought.
                           Additionally, at the national level, stakeholders from the line ministries (such as Science and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Technology and Ministry of Labour and Employment), industry associations, cluster leaders,
                           academia and officials from the National Skill Mission have been consulted on December 2, 2013.
                           Consultations in the field as well as national level are expected to be a regular feature of the
                           project and will add value to the decisions being finally made to support and execute the Program,
                           including on issues related to mainstreaming environmental and social dimensions into the
                           Program design and execution.
                           Disclosure. The environment and social management and safeguard instruments prepared for the
                           project, namely, the Environment Management Framework (EMF) and the Social Management
                           Framework have been disclosed in the in Project Authority’s website (http://dcmsme.gov.in/tcsp.
                           html). The same are being disclosed in the Bank’s Infoshop prior to Appraisal. The executive
                           summary of the documents will be translated in vernacular language (Hindi) and will be made
                           public through MoMSME’s website. Further, the documents, including the executive summaries,
                           are/will be available at the office of the Development Commissioner, MSME; office of the
                           Implementation Partners and all 18 existing Tool Rooms/Technology Centers for reference and
                           use of interested stakeholders.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            06-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            06-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            06-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                                                                     Page 10 of 12
                         Physical Cultural Resources - Done - Covered under EMF.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?


                                                                    Page 11 of 12
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Vincent Palmade
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Henry K Bagazonzya (SM)                   Date: 10-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
