INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCIO43
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Dec-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Rwanda                     Project ID:   P150634
Project Name:    Rwanda Electricity Sector Strengthening Project (P150634)
Task Team        Paul Baringanire
Leader:
Estimated        18-May-2015                Estimated     22-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Public administration- Energy and mining (25%), Transmission and Distribution
of Electricity (65%), General energy sector (10%)
Theme(s):        Other public sector governance (25%), Other urban development (10%),
Infrastructure services for private sector development (55%), R ural services and
infrastructure (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      80.00             Total Bank Financing:    80.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                      80.00
Total                                                            80.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to enhance access, efficiency, and accountability of electricity
service delivery in Rwanda.
C. Project Description


﻿The project is proposed to have two main components: (i) Increased Access to Electricity services
through providing additional connectivity and up-grading the existing networks; and (ii) Technical
Assistance to improve sector capacity in the short-medium term through the setting up of several, but
integrated, business improvement plans and capacity building of the relevant institutional bodies.
Component 1- Increased Access to Electricity Services (US$ 55.0 million)
Support to the EARP: This sub-component will fund the continued expansion of EARP and will
finance activities to connect new consumers through the purchase of equipment for grid extensions,
reinforcements and consumer connections, installation services including for upstream system
reinforcements, where required, to ensure that network expansion doesn't result in the deterioration
of the quality of supply.
Upgrading of substations and the associated transmission and distribution network - The sub-
component will finance proposed works related to 110/70/30/15/6KV substation extensions and
upgrading. The upgrading and expansion of the distribution system substations is aimed at increased
network capacity to meet demand from new access connections and consumption arising out of
increased economic activities in the proposed project areas. The network strengthening activities will
also focus on reducing technical losses, increased reliability by rearranging and upgrading
distribution network in selected areas as well as other reinforcement measures.
Component 2: Sector Performance Management Improvement and Project Implementation Support
(US$25 million)
Electricity Sector Performance Management Improvement: This sub-component will establish
comprehensive management information systems (MIS) to ensure efficient, transparent and
accountable processes covering the network operations and maintenance (O&M); commercial
functions; and management of corporate resources. The primary activities will include the design,
supply, installation and operationalization (including staff training) of key management systems
O
covering commercial, network operation and corporate functions.
a)     Commercial processes improvement: This subcomponent will finance the design,
procurement and implementation of a new Customer Management System (CMS) in order to provide
support to the utility business functions related to revenue and customer management with the
objective of improving customer service at the same time strengthening the business performance,
especially reduction in commercial losses. The CMS will include aspects related to: (i) customer data
base; (ii) Commercial Procedures; (iii) a revenue protection program including Advanced Metering
Infrastructure (AMI) for the large electricity consumers.
b)     Integrated Distribution Management System (IDMS): This subcomponent will support
implementation of several system modules to develop and implement business plans to improve the
distribution network system reliability, operating efficiency and outage management to assure
increased customer satisfaction. Reduced outage time duration to customers, shall improve overall
utility reliability indices (such as fault localization & restoration time, System Average Interruption
Frequency Index (SAIFI), System Average Interruption Duration Index (SAIDI), Customer Average
Interruption Duration Index (CAIDI) and customer satisfaction index). The IDMS will provide a
comprehensive network management system for effective operation of distribution system by
enhancing routine net  work monitoring, fault location and restoration; planning the network


﻿requirements and further, will lay down the foundation for future SMARTGRID initiatives. The
IDMS will include: (i) Geographical Information Systems (GIS); (ii) Outage Management System
(OMS)including an Incident Recording System (IRS); (iii) Distribution Systems Operations and
Maintenance and (iv) Distribution System Control And Data Acquisition (SCADA) system.
o
c)     Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) System: The subcomponent shall finance the design,
supply and implementation of a corporate ERP system covering the core corporate functions such as
human resources, finance, procurement and asset management to support the utility to better plan and
manage all of its resources.
Sector Working Group Document Depository and Management Information System (MIS): This sub-
component will finance an electronic document filing system and an MIS system for the Sector
Working Group secretariat at the MININFRA which will help to coordinate the budget, aggregate
sector relevant data and track stakeholder activities, etc. The sector data will include indicators from
the sector value-chain and will build from a comprehensive data collection exercise from sector
agencies. This is particularly relevant given the ongoing corporatization process, where the boards
will also use data to support internal target setting, monitoring, and assessment, and this exercise
contributes directly to the ability of the sector to respond to external stakeholder demands - whether
from the ministry, donors, civil society, the media, or the regulator. This kind of performance
management system, in the form of key performance indicators, will set methodical and predictable
ways of achieving business results aligned with the strategic goals of the utilities and more broadly,
the sector. The Bank has carried out such exercises in many countries in the world, including
Bangladesh and Nepal, and will draw from them to inform the design and implementation of such a
system in Rwanda.
Feasibility and Diagnostic Studies: This component will support studies to address sector
performance improvements in the medium to long term, especially those related to grid supply and
reliability as well as options for sector development. For the former, assessments will include (but
not be limited to) identification of investments required to (i) increase system reliability especially
for the central business districts, such as Kigali City and the special economic zones, (ii) reduce
network down time and operations costs through automation of network operations by considering
options related to the integration of the distribution system operations and data acquisition to the
national SCADA center in addition to SCADA extension to some of the secondary
a       110/70/30/15/11/6KV substations. In addition, the assessments will include distribution network
protection studies (fault calculations and protection grading) that will be required to enable the
proposed network automation. For the latter, studies will support required feasibility studies and just-
in-time policy advisory notes that are required to inform decision making regarding emerging sector
issues.
Project Implementation: This sub-component will finance execution, design, and supervision
consultants to assist the entities in project implementation, sector management and coordination.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The proposed project will fund a series of investments related to the construction of medium and low
voltage distribution lines; and medium Voltage substation construction and rehabilitations in various
places across the Rwandan territory. The project may result into limited potential environment and
social impacts that will be mitigated through measures indicated in the safeguards instruments(ESMF
and RPF).


﻿E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Preparation, implementation and monitoring of the safeguards instruments for the proposed Project
will be the responsibility of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU). Currently, the PCU has four staff;
Environmental and Social Officers (two each). The safeguards staff have been trained in World
Bank Safeguard Policies and Procedures and have adequate experience gained through the
implementation of the ongoing Electricity Access Roll-out Program (EARP). Under this proposed
project, the staff will receive further training and skills upgrading. For any subproject that triggers
a       the Involuntary Resettlement Policy, the Unit will be supported by Consultants to prepare and
execute specific resettlement action plans (RAPs), in collaboration with all relevant stakeholders,
including potential project affected persons.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (GSURR)
Edward Felix Dwumfour (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment     Yes         The proposed Project is a Category B (Partial
OP/BP 4.01                               Assessment). Limited potential adverse
environmental and social impacts are possible due to
construction and rehabilitation and extension of the
distribution network (T-lines and substations). As the
sites and works are not finalized, the project will
prepare an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) that will be consulted upon and
disclosed prior to project Appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No           Project target areas will be outside ecologically
sensitive areas. Caution will be taken in siting
substations and transmission poles in areas that are
not part of natural habitats. Thus, the Project is not
expected to affect natural habitats. Using the
checklist annexed to the ESMF, implementers will
screen proposed project activities to ensure that
natural habitats are avoided altogether. Diversion
routes and alternative sites will be proposed, where
possible.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           Project target areas will avoid forest areas. Caution
will be taken in siting substations and transmission
poles in areas that are not part of forests. Using the
checklist annexed to the ESMF, project
implementers will screen proposed project activities
to ensurethat forests are avoided altogether.
Diversion routes and alternative sites will be
proposed, where possible.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No           Project will not include the manufacture, purchase,


﻿transport, use and disposal of agrochemicals or drugs
and hazardous substances.
Physical Cultural Resources   TBD          Although the proposed Project will have limited
OP/BP 4.11                                 earth works associated with rehabilitation and
construction of distribution network, it may include
chance finds of physical cultural artifacts. Chance
finds procedures will be mandated by the ESMF and
included in the earth works (civil works) contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes          The project may involve some limited land take,
BP 4.12                                    limited and temporary displacement of people, loss
of assets and livelihoods due to construction
activities, right of way and way leave acquisition,
etc. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
prepared to guide the resettlement and compensation
of PAPs, if any. The RPF will also be consulted upon
and disclosed prior to Project Appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No            The Project will not support activities associated
with construction or use of dams.
Projects on International     No           The Project will not result in changes to quality or
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       quantity of surface (or ground) water categorized as
international waters.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No          The project will not take place in disputed areas.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
O
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 27-Feb-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
O
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) will be prepared and disclosed both in-country and at the World Bank Infoshop
before Project Appraisal scheduled for May 2015.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:     Name: Paul Baringanire
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                 Date: 09-Dec-2014
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/     Name: Lucio Monari (PMGR)                       Date: 11-Dec-2014
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


