INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCIO58
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Feb-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Serbia                     Project ID:   P152104
Project Name:    Serbia Competitiveness and Jobs (P 152104)
Task Team        Thomas Edward Haven
Leader(s):
Estimated        20-Apr-2015                Estimated     29-Jul-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTCDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Other social services (30%), General industry and trade sector (70%)
Theme(s):        Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (15%), e-Services (5%), Export
development and competitiveness (30%), Technology diffusio n (20%),
Improving labor markets (30%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     100.00             Total Bank Financing:   100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          0.00
0         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development            100.00
Total                                                           100.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed PDO is to improve the investment climate, foster innovation, and enhance the job
opportunities of registered unemployed.
C. Project Description
The project is expected to include the following three components:


﻿Component 1. Investment climate and export promotion. This component aims to encourage new
investment by making interactions between businesses and the state more transparent, predictable,
and efficient. Increased investment, in particular in tradable sectors, will lead to higher productivity
O
U       and better competitiveness. Also, the component will support activities on enhancing Serbia's
institutional framework for export and investment promotion, including by possibly redesigning
financial instruments supporting exporters, or by providing new services, like manufacturing
extension, value chain support, and market intelligence. All of these activities are ultimately expected
to result in more exports and formal private sector jobs. There are two subcomponents: 1.A
Inspections reform and 1.B Reform of the agencies for investment and export support.
Component 2: Innovation. The component will support four main activities: a) scaling-up enterprise
innovation; b) establishing competitive applied research financing; c) consolidating the public
research sector for efficiency; and d) enabling the technology transfer, entrepreneurship, and
innovation ecosystem. These project activities will leverage the institutional capacity built at the
Serbia Innovation Fund (IF) and the enterprise innovation programs piloted under the 2011 EU
Instrument for Pre-Accession Serbia Innovation Project (EU IPA SIP). This project will also build
on the strategic research and innovation sector planning activities and technology transfer initiatives
of the 2013 EU IPA Serbia Research, Innovation, and Technology Transfer Project (SRITTP).
Component 3: Labor. The proposed operation will support the Ministry of Labor, Employment,
Veteran and Social Affairs in the implementation of selected objectives of the National Employment
Strategy, particularly with a view to improving the performance of the National Employment
Service (NES) in terms of placement of active jobseekers into jobs. The support will result from
three sets of activities: a) enhancement of service delivery capacity of the currently over-stretched
National Employment Service (NES); b) improvement of the design, provisioning, and targeting of
active labor market programs (ALMPs); and c) improvement of incentives for formal jobs for a
targeted subset of disadvantaged workers.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in the Republic of Serbia.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The project will work with five or more ministries and agencies, including the Ministry of Economy
(MoE) and its development agencies, Ministry of Public Administration and Local Self-Government
(MoPALSD), Ministry of Education, Science and Technology Development (MoESTD), Ministry of
Labor, Employment, Veteran and Social Affairs (MoLEVS), and the newly-created Public Policy
Secretariat. Overall project coordination will be done by the Public Policy Secretariat (PPS), which
depends on the office of the Deputy Prime Minister. The PPS was created under the new government
in the spring of 2014, and it does not have experience implementing Bank-financed projects. It
remains to be determined if there will be mini-PIUs in one or more of the implementing agencies,
such as the MoESTD.
At this stage of project preparation, it is unclear which counterpart ministry or agency would be
responsible for carrying out the environmental assessment process and related safeguards
requirements.
The PPS will likely take the lead, with strong coordination with the MoESTD. EA capacity of the


﻿responsible agency will be analyzed during project preparation and if necessary institutional capacity
building on safeguards will be provided.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Julianna Flanagan (GPVDR)
Naima A Hasci (GSURR)
O
Nina Rinnerberger (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         Along with the Technical Assistance (TA) activities,
OP/BP 4.01                              the proposed Project will support reforms linked to
the three pillars of the operation (investment climate,
innovation, labor) largely through reimbursing
expenditures for existing Government programs
using the results-based lending instrument. Support
for reforms is expected to improve the effectiveness
of those programs. While no direct, physical
environmental impacts are anticipated to result from
the proposed project, some of the reforms and grant
and research financing to be supported may have a
wide range of environmental impacts, both positive
and negative. Overall, it is expected that potential
environmental impacts could mainly result from:
Component 2 on Innovation (e.g. through support for
startups and enterprises in different sectors across
Serbian regions; scale-up of operations of the
Technology Transfer Facility focusing on technology
Q)                                              transfer outcomes; and development of the
entrepreneurial and innovative ecosystem by
supporting various ecosystem actors, including
science and technology parks, accelerators and
incubators). No environmental impacts are
anticipated to result from Component 3 on Labor.
To address these potential environmental issues, an
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) will be prepared and applied to the Eligible
Expenditure Programs with national or sub-national
implications. The ESMF will specify the procedures
that the project will have in place during
implementation, with the objective that all reforms
supported under the project will be environmentally
and socially sound and sustainable, and consistent
with the WB safeguard policies and Serbian national
legislation. The ESMF will provide guidance to
ensure all project activities supporting the


﻿development of reforms and institutional capacities
would include considerations on environmental
protection based on best international practices in
this regard. It will also outline beneficiaries'
obligations in screening and categorizing activities
according to their possible environmental impact,
mitigating the associated risks, and defining
monitoring activities, if and when required. The
ESMF would describe exclusions that will not be
financed under the Eligible Expenditure Program.
Gender: Overall, the project is expected to benefit
both women and men. However, in order to ensure
that the project neither continues nor exacerbates
gender inequality in employment, gender and citizen
engagement will be incorporated in component 3.C,
aligning incentives toward formal employment.
Additionally, analysis of and recommendations on
ALMP's under component 3.B will take into account
beneficiary characteristics (minorities--Roma and
underserved beneficiaries), including gender. The
project will also establish performance indicators and
collect and monitor sex disaggregated statistics
where applicable, such as for research grantees in
component 2.B and owners of enterprises and
startups in component 2.A.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No           The project will not affect natural habitats because
all financing will be done in the existing localities.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No           The project will not affect forests because all
financing will be done in the existing localities.
Pest Management OP 4.09       No           The project will not finance experiments or
production of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources   No           The project does not affect physical cultural
OP/BP 4.11                                 resources because all financing will be done in the
existing localities.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No           There are no indigenous people in the affected
4.10                                       project area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No           The components and sub-components of the project
BP 4.12                                    will not support reforms and/or grant and research
financing that might result in involuntary
resettlement or require land acquisition. The project
does not anticipate any direct, indirect or induced
negative social impacts; therefore the policy is not
triggered. However, analysis of the expected social
and institutional impacts, particularly for Component


﻿3, will be considered during the project preparation
process.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           N/A
a
rojects on International   No           While the project will be implemented nationally in
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      the Republic of Serbia on territories that include
basins of rivers which can be qualified as
international waterways, the project type does not
"involve the use or potential pollution of
international waterways" as per OP 7.50. No water
use/absorption or pollution of waters will be
generated by the project activities, which would
trigger this policy.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         N/A
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Apr-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The preparation schedule currently foresees Appraisal taking place in April 2015. The PAD Stage
ISDS will be prepared in time to disclose it before the Appraisal date.
The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be disclosed and consulted
in the country prior to Appraisal.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Thomas Edward Haven
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards    Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                       Date: 02-Feb-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/      Name: Paloma Anos Casero (PMGR)                 Date: 03-Feb-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


