                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC3218

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Rwanda                         Project ID:      P131464
                            Project Name:       Landscape Approach to Forest Restoration and Conservation (LAFREC)
                                                (P131464)
                            Task Team           Stephen Ling
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       09-Dec-2013                        Estimated        20-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTN2                               Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            GEF Focal Area:     Multi-focal area

                            Sector(s):          Forestry (80%), Flood protection (10%), Irrigation and drainage (10%)
                            Theme(s):           Biodiversity (40%), Other environment and natural resources management
                                                (30%), Climate change (20%), Natural disaster management (10% )
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      9.53                     Total Bank Financing:         0.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                            5.49
                              Least Developed Countries TF for Climate Change
                                                                                                            4.05
                              Activities
                              Total                                                                         9.53
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           To promote landscape management for enhanced environmental services and climate resilient
                         livelihoods, including via forest rehabilitation and sustainable land management investments in one
                         target landscape.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1- Nation-wide multi-sectoral landscape restoration planning and institutional
                         development $1,112,000 GEF
                         This component aims to establish a nation-wide, integrated institutional framework for effective
                         landscape restoration and conservation. Main activities will be:
                         1. Establishment of a knowledge platform that will provide a base for (i) identifying landscape
                         management priorities based on hotspots of degradation and associated impacts, and
                         complementarity between enhance environmental and economic functions; (ii) monitoring indicators
                         of landscape health and productivity; and (iii) sharing of information and lessons amongst diverse
                         stakeholders.
                         2. Development of a nation-wide landscape restoration strategy and operational guidelines for its
                         implementation.
                         3. Elaboration and implementation of a sustainable financing strategy, which will consider payment
                         for environmental services, climate-related financing, as well as policy opportunities to release
                         private financing.
                         4. Establishment of a national multi-stakeholder mechanism to ensure an integrated approach to
                         landscape restoration and conservation.
                         5. Advocacy, awareness and (as appropriate) targeted technical training activities to equip
                         stakeholders with the understanding and skills to engage effectively.

                         The scope of the activities financed by the GEF grant will depend in part on the success of the
                         parallel preparation by IUCN of a related project focused specifically on developing participation
                         platforms and sustainable financing mechanism, and to be financed by the German Environment
                         Ministry.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2 – Demonstration of land and forest restoration and conservation in a priority landscape
                         $4,120,000 GEF
                         This Component will support the application of the landscape approach to forest restoration and
                         conservation for the improvement of ecosystem functions and services in the Gishwati forest area,
                         and possibly adjacent parts of the Nile-Congo Crest. It aims to arrest and eventually reverse the
                         ongoing land conversion in the area thru forest restoration (if feasible), and agro-forestry approaches
                         in a manner that will maximize ecological connectivity and hydrological function in the landscape.

                         The main activities of this component are:
                         1. Landscape restoration and management plans developed through a participatory process informed
                         by analytics, integrated with sectoral plans & programmes, and implemented through District Action
                         Plans in selected priority sites.
                         2. Biological corridors identified and re-established to enhance connectivity and reduce
                         fragmentation to enhance biological diversity.
                         3. Community based sustainable forest management systems established, integrating biodiversity
                         consideration.
                         4. Adoption of new sustainable land management techniques including agro-forestry and in-field soil
                         and water conservation.
                         5. Testing of methodologies for monitoring above- and below-ground carbon stocks, exploration of
                         the potential for carbon finance.
                         Component 1 would support and guide the definition of the methodology for carrying out such
                         negotiated landscape planning and restoration, while Component 2 would put it into practice. It is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         expected that environmental benefits generated from restoration of forests and productive landscapes
                         in the Gishwati area will decrease the pressure on the remaining native forests while providing
                         additional habitat for biodiversity, including Chimpanzees. During project preparation the possibility
                         will be explored for extending national land-titling programs to the Gishwati area – i.e. providing
                         secure land tenure in what remains formally government land, in return for communal agreements to
                         implement necessary sustainability measures.

                         Component 3 – Community climate resilience $3,850,000 GEF
                         This Component seeks to enhance community resilience through promoting diversified and climate-
                         smart livelihoods, and implementing direct climate-risk management measures, potentially including
                         slope stabilization measures, drainage improvements, rural infrastructure hardening, community
                         awareness, early-warning and preparedness, and strengthening of government disaster response
                         systems. Rwanda’s NAPA identifies two sets of Districts for priority implementation of the climate
                         adaptation activities: (a) districts prone to drought - Bugesera, Kirehe, Kayonza, Gatsibo, Rulindo
                         and Nyamagabe; and (b) districts prone to floods - Nyabihu, Rubavu, Rutsiro and Ngororero. The
                         flood-prone districts are all situated around the Gishwati landscape, and it is likely that this area will
                         be the focus of the project, but needs and potential interventions in other areas will also be
                         considered during preparation.

                         The main activities under this component will be:
                         1. Risk and vulnerability assessments conducted and updated within the Gishwati landscape (and
                         potentially other areas).
                         2. Systems established to disseminate timely hazard warnings information.
                         3. Regional centers and networks trained and equipped to rapidly respond to extreme weather events.
                         4. Resilient rural infrastructure measures introduced through improved designs and/or retro-fitting,
                         and potentially through slope-stabilization or run-off management works in areas of acute landslide
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and flood risk.
                         5. Climate resilient livelihoods promoted that complement and strengthen landscape restoration
                         investments, including potentially value-addition for agricultural products that promote investments
                         in sustainable land management, diversified sustainable livelihood options including nature-based
                         tourism, improved water management practices, and alternative energy sources / increased fuelwood
                         efficiency.

                         Component 4 – Project management & monitoring $450,000 GEF
                         This component will finance project management and monitoring costs, within the funding limits
                         established by GEF.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Rwanda is a small, landlocked and mountainous country. The westernmost fifth of the country lies
                         within the Congo basin, whereas the remainder is part of the Nile basin. The Nile-Congo Crest
                         divides these two catchments along a north-south line, and forms part of the Albertine Rift Montane
                         Forest Ecoregion, which hosts 52% of all bird species and 39% of all mammal species on the African
                         continent. Rwanda’s two most important forest protected areas lie at either end of the crest – to the
                         north the Volcanoes National Park, and Nyungwe National Park to the south. The ridge in between
                         had been largely deforested, but includes two forest reserves – Gishwati and Mukura, which have
                         been designated Key Biodiversity Areas for supporting population of eastern chimpanzee and an
                         endangered swamp warbler, respectively.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Rainfall and topography are most severe in western Rwanda. Risks of flash floods and landslides are
                         highest where recent deforestation has occurred, such as within the Gishwati Forest reserve (see
                         Annex III). Its forests were largely intact in 1978, and substantial forest cover still remained in 1986
                         despite a significant decrease. But by 2001, following the settlement in the area of refugees from the
                         conflict in the mid 90s, only a small circular patch of native forest remained, and today the gazetted
                         area is only 86 ha, with a further 578 ha under natural regeneration. The remainder of the landscape
                         is composed of agricultural land, rangeland, tea plantations and pine plantations. Deforestation is
                         believed to have exacerbated local flooding, with one event in 2007 alone causing more than a dozen
                         deaths and leading to extensive crop and property damage. A study on the Economics of Climate
                         Change in Rwanda estimated that the direct economic costs of the 2007 flood ranged from US$4 m
                         to US$20 m in 2 districts alone. Landslides and erosion are estimated to cause the loss of a million
                         tons of soil per year, reducing local agricultural productivity and causing heavy siltation of the
                         Sebeya river, increasing water supply and hydropower maintenance costs.

                         The districts around Gishwati were identified as priority areas for disaster risk reduction and climate
                         adaptation in Rwanda's NAPA. The project aims to use an integrated landscape management
                         approach to both biodiversity and climate resilience functions in this important by vulnerable
                         landscape.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Government of Rwanda has an Organic Law on Environmental Protection and Management
                         (2005), which sets out the general legal framework for environmental protection and management in
                         Rwanda. Ministry of Natural Resources (MINIRENA) covers lands, water, forests, minerals and
                         environment. The Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA), under MINIRENA is
                         tasked with coordination of environmental protection activities and promotion of the integration of
                         environmental issues in development policies, projects, plans and programs. At the local level,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Ministry of Local Government, Good Governance Community Development and Social Affairs
                         (MINALOC) is responsible for managing resources, including natural resources at community level
                         in the districts. MINALOC is guided by the the Rwandan National Environment Policy of 2003,
                         which provides for the establishment of provincial, district and lower level environmental
                         committees responsible for environmental protection.

                         Despite the existence of policies and laws such as the Organic Law on Environment Protection
                         (2005), evidence on the ground still indicates overall capacity for implementation of environmental
                         and social safeguards policies is still lowlimited. REMA is a strong agency, competent staff and a
                         willingness to take firm and unpopular positions to prevent environmental impacts. However, their
                         human resources available for safeguards related work are limited and Tthere are alsois significant
                         shortcomings in the abilities of local and district level stakeholders to correctly monitor, mitigate and
                         manage environmental performance of development projects.

                         Sufficient understanding of the mechanisms for implementing the environmental and safeguards
                         instruments will need to be provided to the various stakeholders implementing LAFREC activities.
                         During project implementation it will be important to support the teams to appreciate their role in
                         providing supervision, monitoring and evaluation including environmental reporting on the projects
                         activities. However, REMA and other project implementing agencies have gained recent experience
                         of managing environmental and social impacts of similar activities, consistent with Bank safeguards
                           policies, through the LVEMP and LWH projects. This ongoing capacity development will be
                           considered when designing further inputs under LAFREC.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Yasmin Tayyab (AFTCS)
                           Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTN3)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes            The project is envisioned to support investments
                           BP 4.01                                          in climate-smart livelihood activities and
                                                                            sustainable land management infrastructure for
                                                                            erosion and flood control. This may involve
                                                                            small-scale water-related infrastructure such as
                                                                            gabions, very small check dams and polders, but
                                                                            will not involve any large-scale infrastructure.
                                                                            The project will primarily involve sustainable
                                                                            land management, agroforestry, forestry and
                                                                            sustainable livelihoods investments that are
                                                                            expected to have overwhelmingly positive
                                                                            environmental and social impacts. However,
                                                                            common sense measures will be needed to avoid
                                                                            inadvertent negative impacts (e.g. introduction
                                                                            of invasive species) and to ensure any small-
                                                                            scale construction is properly managed.
                                                                            Potential trade-offs between forestry and other
                                                                            land uses, and issues related to resource access
                                                                            restriction will also need to be considered. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            scope of watershed management and small
                                                                            infrastructure activities on the ground is not
                                                                            expected to exceed that under the baseline
                                                                            project, LVEMP II, which already an ESMF,
                                                                            prepared in line with the requirements of the
                                                                            National Organic Law (2005) and World Bank
                                                                            safeguards policies and can be adapted for
                                                                            screening of environmental impacts from
                                                                            activities proposed under this project. The
                                                                            LVEMP ESMF will be adjusted if at all
                                                                            necessary for application to LAFREC, consulted
                                                                            upon, and disclosed prior to appraisal, once
                                                                            specific sites and activities have been identified.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes            Although the remnant areas of natural habitat in
                                                                            the likely target areas are small, they are
                                                                            biologically important. The project will be
                                                                            designed to restore natural habitat elements
                                                                            within the landscape, and is extremely unlikely
                                                                            to have a negative impact, but nevertheless, the
                                                                 ESMF will consider and mitigate the potential
                                                                 for inadvertent impacts, and a Process
                                                                 Framework will likely be prepared to address
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 any resource access restriction issue under OP
                                                                 4.12 related to habitat restoration and
                                                                 management.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   The project envisages to carry out establish
                                                                 community sustainable forest management
                                                                 systems, forest restoration in Gishwati and
                                                                 agroforesty approaches to improve the
                                                                 ecosystem functions and services. These may
                                                                 entail planting of trees and possibly enhanced
                                                                 management of forests on state or communal
                                                                 lands. Large-scale commercial forestry
                                                                 operations are not included within the project.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   It is unlikely that the project will support the
                                                                 purchase of pesticides. However, it is likely to
                                                                 promote agronomic practices that may influence
                                                                 patterns of pesticide use. Appropriate integrated
                                                                 pest management guidance will be provided as
                                                                 an integral component of the ESMF, taking into
                                                                 account what is already included in the LVEMP
                                                                 II ESMF.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   The project will not support activities that are
                         BP 4.11                                 expected to impact physical cultural resources.
                                                                 The infrastructure investments will be very
                                                                 small scale and most of the project area is only
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 recently settled, and there are no indications of
                                                                 particular PCR concerns. But as some small-
                                                                 scale infrastructure may be involved, the chance
                                                                 finds procedures will be incorporated into the
                                                                 ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    There are no populations qualifying as
                                                                 Indigenous Peoples within the project target
                                                                 areas.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Small-scale infrastructure developed under
                         4.12                                    watershed or flood management activities may
                                                                 in rare cases involve limited land taking similar
                                                                 to the Lake Victoria Environmental
                                                                 Management Project II (LVEMPII). Forest
                                                                 restoration, management and possible river bank
                                                                 protection activities may also potentially
                                                                 involve some restriction of resource access. The
                                                                 project will trigger OP 4.12 as protection and
                                                                 conservation activities may result in loss of
                                                                 land, livelihood, and restrict access to natural
                                                                                                                                 resources. It will apply and if necessary adapt
                                                                                                                                 the LVEMPII RPF to mitigate loss of assets,
                                                                                                                                 services and livelihood prior to appraisal. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 need to develop an additional process
                                                                                                                                 framework will also be considered during
                                                                                                                                 preparation, but is anticipated to be likely.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         TBD                           Small-scale water-harvesting, gully
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation or flood protection infrastructure
                                                                                                                                 could potentially involve the construction of a
                                                                                                                                 small number of gabions, or very small-scale
                                                                                                                                 check dams (primarily for silt retention). This
                                                                                                                                 possibility will be assessed during preparation.
                                                                                                                                 No large dam construction will be involved, and
                                                                                                                                 the project is not dependent on any existing
                                                                                                                                 dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         TBD                           The project may involve land and water
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            management and/or floodwater attenuation
                                                                                                                                 investments that would have a small effect on
                                                                                                                                 flows within a tiny proportion of the Nile and
                                                                                                                                 Congo basins. The need for notification of
                                                                                                                                 downstream states will be assessed following
                                                                                                                                 the selection of activities.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             No project activities will be conducted in
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 25-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Safeguards documents are expected to be mainly adopted (and if necessary in some specific
                                      elements adapted) from those already used for LVEMP – i.e. the ESMF and RPF – as the range of
                                      project activities involving investments in watershed management and small-scale infrastructure
                                      will not exceed those already permitted under LVEMP. The scope of LVEMP activities on the
                                      ground includes works and improved land management for watershed rehabilitation, restoration of
                                      riparian habitat buffers, associated livelihoods subprojects, and investments in sanitation
                                      infrastructure. The LVEMP ESMF notes that whilst the overall social and environmental impacts
                                      are likely to be overwhelmingly positive, there remains potential for small and localized impacts
                                      through intensification of agricultural activities (that may increase incentives for expansion of
                                      agriculture, use of agri-chemicals, etc), limiting community access to natural resources in
                                      rehabilitated areas, and land requirements and temporary pollution from civil works. The potential
                                      scope of activities under LAFREC is very similar, except that sanitation investments are not
                                      included, and therefore the scale of civil works will be smaller. The scope of the screening,
                                      environmental management and resettlement compensation measures in the LVEMP ESMF &
                                      RPF are therefore expected to cover the range of impacts under LAFREC, except that a PCR
                                      chance finds procedure is likely to be added as a precautionary measure, and institutional
                                      arrangements / budget, etc. will be updated for the new project.



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             Moreover, due to the additional focus on protection and restoration of forest reserves under
                             LAFREC, it is anticipated that a Process Framework will also be required to address resource
Public Disclosure Copy




                             access restrictions. Given the small-scale nature of the project interventions, a safeguards category
                             of B is considered appropriate, in line with that of the existing LVEMP project in Rwanda.

                             As the specific scope of the activities under LVEMP and the IUCN project are further defined, it
                             will be determined whether the IUCN project should be considered associated and also covered by
                             the LVEMP safeguards documents. Any required adaptation of the LVEMP ESMF and RPF, and
                             development of a Process Framework, will be done in concert with the project design activities
                             which will mainly take place during June-October 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:       Name: Stephen Ling

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                         Date: 26-Jul-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (SM)                         Date: 04-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
