                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA9154
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bosnia and Herzegovina             Project ID:    P151157
                            Project Name:      BiH Floods Emergency Recovery Project (P151157)
                            Task Team          David Michaud
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          05-Jun-2014                        Estimated   30-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSUW                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Irrigation and drainage (25%), General energy sector (25%), General
                                               transportation sector (25%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector
                                               (25%)
                            Theme(s):          Natural disaster management (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       100.00           Total Bank Financing:  100.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     0.00
                              IDA Credit from CRW                                                                        100.00
                              Total                                                                                      100.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to meet critical needs and restore functionality of
                           infrastructure essential for public services and economic recovery in floods affected areas.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         The Project consists of three components: (i) Emergency Disaster Recovery Goods; (ii)
                         Rehabilitation of Key Public Infrastructure; and (iii) Project Implementation Support and Capacity
                         Building.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Emergency Disaster Recovery Goods (US$40.0 million). The recent floods have
                         created significant strains on the supply chains for a variety of goods crucially needed to ensure the
                         continuity of public services and economic opportunities. For example, some coal mines have been
                         flooded, resulting in an restriction of supply to the main thermal power plants; flooded areas have
                         been traditionally oriented towards agriculture and agribusiness which were severely affected by
                         floods, resulting in fodder and forage shortages and the urgent need for seeds and fertilizers for
                         reseeding. The Project will therefore finance, through the use of a positive list, the purchase of goods
                         urgently needed during the recovery phase. The positive list will include logistical goods,
                         reconstruction goods, emergency goods, energy and power sector goods as well as agricultural
                         recovery goods, with an initial priority set of fuel and food, agricultural goods and emergency goods.
                         See Annex 2 for further details.

                         Component 2: Rehabilitation of Key Public Infrastructure (US$57.0 million). Component 2 will
                         support the rehabilitation of both local and regional public infrastructure on the basis of the Recovery
                         Needs Assessment. The impact of the floods was concentrated on 60 municipalities in the central,
                         northwest and northeast parts of the country; and in many of these public services delivery were
                         severely impacted. This Component will therefore finance the rehabilitation or reconstruction of high
                         priority, public service delivery infrastructure in the worst affected areas. This component is
                         designed under a framework approach in which activities will be identified in a demand-driven
                         manner, based on the on-going Recovery Needs Assessment. The project will put particular emphasis
                         on Rural Development, Energy Supply, Transport and Water and Sanitation activities but other
                         public services (education, health) will be considered on a case-by-case basis. The Component will
                         be divided in two sub-components that will follow somewhat different project cycles, depending on
                         whether the infrastructure is local or regional (see Annex 2 for details):
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 2A: Regional Infrastructure Rehabilitation (US$30 million). Component 2A will
                         support the rehabilitation of strategic, regional-level public infrastructure such as transport links,
                         distribution and transmission infrastucture, dikes and other strategic public infrastructure. Definition
                         of the priorities for Subcomponent 2A activities will be based on the on-going Recovery Needs
                         Assessment, as well as availability of other sources of funding. Overall sector financial envelopes
                         will be set at entity level by the respective Steering Committees; Entity line ministries will then take
                         the lead in defining concrete activities for their sector and provide the PIUs with a list of relevant
                         activities.

                         Subcomponent 2B: Local Infrastructure Rehabilitation (US$27 million). Component 2B will be
                         focused on local-level infrastructure, such as water supply schemes, local roads and bridges etc. The
                         implementation process for Subcomponent 2B will be based on the following sequence of steps; the
                         first step (Recovery Needs Assessment) started on May 29, 2014 and is expected to be complete by
                         June 18, 2014. Subsequent steps will proceed immediately thereafter, in parallel with the formal
                         project approval and effectiveness process. The Project’s Operating Manual will provide further
                         details on the process and in particular on the allocation of funds and prioritization of municipalities.

                         Component 3: Project Implementation Support and Capacity Building (US$3 million). This
                         component will finance the management of the Project and any support needed for the identification


                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         and implementation of sub-activities. The component will also provide technical assistance and
                         capacity building on ensuring future improved disaster resilience. There will be two sub-components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 3A: Project Implementation Support (US$2.0 million). The subcomponent will cover
                         the incremental costs of the Project Implementation Units (Agriculture PIU in the FBIH, and the
                         Agriculture PCU – in the RS) housed in the respective entity level Ministries of Agriculture, Water
                         Management, and Forestry, which will be responsible for implementing the Project in their
                         respective entities. The RS APCU will also be responsible for the fiduciary arrangements and
                         contracting in the Brcko District part of the project. These units, which are already managing several
                         Bank-funded projects, will hire/supplement the required staff to carry out the responsibilities of the
                         PIU, including coordination, reporting, financial management, procurement, social and
                         environmental safeguards (see Implementation Arrangements, Section IV). Furthermore, the PIUs
                         will also need international technical assistance to extent their capacity in the new areas covered
                         under this Project. The units might also need additional equipment, and operating costs to secure
                         their effective operation. This subcomponent will also cover the costs of a small project
                         implementation team (PIT) that will be established in Brcko to oversee and coordinate the project
                         activities. Finally the component will also cover any necessary monitoring and evaluation, as well as
                         auditing costs.

                         Subcomponent 3B: Capacity Building for Disaster Resilience (US$1.0 million). The aim of this
                         subcomponent would be to improve BiH’s capacity to move to a more proactive approach of risk
                         management rather than a responsive approach. The project would support improving disaster
                         resilience capacity at the national level and at the local level through strengthening the knowledge on
                         risk assessment, planning, workshops, drills and targeted training for decision makers, practitioners
                         and communities. The implementation of this component would complement and be closely
                         coordinated with the existing Bank engagement in the Flood Management field through notably
                         through the recently approved BiH Drina Flood Protection Project that will fund protective
                         infrastructure on the Drina river; the proposed GEF Drina River Basin Management Project (US$10
                         million) that will provide TA, hydro-meteorological equipment; and the committed, West Balkan
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Investment Framework-funded TAs to develop an Investment Prioritization Framework for the Drina
                         basin to develop and implement a regional Joint Flood Management Strategy for the Sava River.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented throughout the flood affected area in the North-East part of the
                         country, spanning both entities (RS and FBIH) as well as the Brcko District.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Vera Dugandzic (ECSSO)
                         Esma Kreso (ECSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             Due to the nature of reconstruction works,
                          BP 4.01                                             relatively minor and easily mitigated
                                                                              environmental impacts such as dust, noise, waste
                                                                              management, proper management of obsolete
                                                                              equipment and traffic impacts can be foreseen.
                                                                              An ESSF has been prepared by the World Bank



                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                                                                             team outlining the procedure through which an
                                                                             ESMF and RPF will be prepared as a condition
                                                                             for Disbursement. The ESMF will provide a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             screening framework to avoid activities
                                                                             corresponding to Category A or triggering
                                                                             additional safeguards policies, as well as guidance
                                                                             on developing site-specific Environmental
                                                                             Management Plans (where needed).
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No             The Project will not finance any interventions in
                                                                             protected areas or natural habitats of exceptional
                                                                             value or importance.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No             No activities in forests will be supported. No
                                                                             logging or clearing, other than wastes caused by
                                                                             the flooding.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No             No works on cultural heritage sites is envisaged
                            BP 4.11                                          within the project. The ESSF and subsequently
                                                                             the ESMF will include a chance finds procedure
                                                                             for all categories of cultural heritage, UXO and
                                                                             mass graves.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes            The Project will not finance resettlement or
                            4.12                                             permanent land acquisition, but due to the nature
                                                                             of works temporary land acquisition may be
                                                                             required. As such, a precautionary RPF will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             developed and disclosed prior to Disbursement.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                            Projects on International         Yes            The Project triggers the International Waterways
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                             policy, but due to the fact that the Project will
                                                                             involve solely reconstruction of infrastructure
                                                                             impacted by the May 2014 flooding, there will be
                                                                             no changes in the water quality or quantity to the
                                                                             downstream riparians. As such, an Exclusion to
                                                                             Notification Memo has been agreed at the
                                                                             Decision Meeting.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


                                                                     Page 4 of 8
                           The Project is expected to have minor, temporary and readily mitigated environmental impacts
                           that can occur during the reconstruction works, that include noise and dust, waste management,
                           removal and demolition of infrastructure parts to be reconstructed, and removal of old equipment
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and utilities to be rehabilitated. The negative impacts anticipated for the Project activities are
                           easily mitigated by the appropriate due diligence documents, in order to meet the triggered OP
                           4.01 on Environmental Assessment.

                           The Bank Operational Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) has been triggered in view of
                           the fact that the infrastructure rehabilitation and reconstruction works in some cases may lead to
                           possible land acquisition. Land requirements are expected to be minor as the rehabilitation
                           investments will be carried out mainly on municipally owned land, or other government owned
                           land. However, restoration and/or rebuilding of damaged facilities to some extent might have
                           certain adverse social impact if the works would require some temporary acquisition of private
                           land for securing the right-of-way. Since the size, scale and location of subprojects cannot be
                           determined at the project preparation stage, the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and
                           Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared, providing guidance
                           for preparation and implementation of ESMPs and RAPs as required to mitigate potential
                           environmental and resettlement impacts.

                           Given the emergency response nature of the project, in order to facilitate the project processing,
                           the World Bank team has prepared an Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework . This
                           ESSF sets out how the safeguard policies will be applied during the preparation and
                           implementation of the project, including the deferring the requirement for preparation and
                           disclosure of the ESMF and RPF into the project implementation stage. Preparation and disclosure
                           of the ESMF and RPF will be a condition for disbursement of project funds under Components 2
                           and 3.

                           Recently developed ESMF and RPF for the Drina Flood Protection Project (approved on May 16,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           2014) will be revised and adapted to suit the specificities of the project. The documents have been
                           prepared in compliance with the Bank's OP 4.01 and OP 4.12 policies and relevant RS and FBiH
                           legislation with the aim to minimize and mitigate adverse impacts on environment and affected
                           population. Both documents have been prepared following disclosure and public consultations in
                           the areas that are also relevant for this project such as Bijeljina, Gorazde, Sarajevo and Banja
                           Luka.

                           The project triggers the International Waterways policy. Proposed Project activities however only
                           entail rehabilitation or reconstruction of existing infrastructure and as such fall under the exception
                           to the notification requirement under paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50, Projects on International
                           Waterways. A memo outlining the rationale has been prepared by the team and exception has been
                           granted by Bank Management.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Through the establishment of proper waste management procedures under the project activities,
                           and awareness raising of the local population , the project could also have positive environmental
                           impacts that could be long-lasting.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.



                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                           The ESSF enlists the criteria for screening and exclusion of subprojects corresponding to
                           Category A and other subprojects that may have irreversible impacts or trigger additional policies.
                           These provisions will also feed into the ESMF that the Client will prepare prior to Disbursement.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           It also contains measures such as screening, consultations, preparation and implementation of the
                           Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), if required, and extension of entitlements. The mitigation
                           measures, following provisions of the ESMF and RPF will subsequently be integrated into the
                           subproject planning, design, implementation, operation and maintenance. In addition, social
                           inclusion measures to address the special needs of the women, vulnerable families and
                           marginalized communities have been incorporated as well as guidelines for prior and informed
                           consultation with the respective municipalities/communities, grievance redress, information
                           disclosure and monitoring and evaluation.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           To ensure prompt and efficient implementation, the arrangement with the existing PIUs (APCU in
                           the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management in RS, and PIU in Ministry of
                           Agriculture, Water Management and Forestry in FBiH) implementing several Bank-funded
                           projects (agriculture/rural development; irrigation development; flood protection and forestry) will
                           also implement this Project. The PIUs are familiar with the provisions of the Bank's safeguards
                           policies, their implementation and monitoring in line with the provisions set out in the relevant
                           safeguards instruments - ESMF/EMPs and RPF/RAPs. Experienced safeguards specialists are
                           assigned in the PIUs. However, given the magnitude of the work ahead, the PIUs will be
                           strengthened with additional safeguards staff.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           As noted, the RPF and ESMF developed for the Drina Flood Protection Project have been
                           prepared with prior and informed consultations in Bijeljina, Gorazde, Banja Luka and Sarajevo
                           which almost entirely overlap with the flooded areas under this Project. As such, the revised
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ESMF and RPF will be re-disclosed, without repeated consultations. Moreover, community
                           consultations will be carried out during project implementation in the process of selecting and
                           prioritizing the subprojects to be rehabilitated in line with the expressed needs of the affected
                           communities .

                           The ESMF and RPF are condition for disbursement of project funds under Components 2 and 3.
                           The updated versions of ESMF and RPF will be submitted to the World Bank team in a draft form
                           by September 8, 2014. Pending review and comments from the World Bank team, the ESMF and
                           RPF will be disclosed by September 26, 2014, both in country and through the World Bank
                           Infoshop. All subsequent, site-specific EMPs and RAPs where needed, will be disclosed with
                           public consultations at the local, community level prior to start of works.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         08-Sep-2015
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      26-Sep-2014
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bosnia and Herzegovina                                           26-Sep-2014
                           Comments: The ESMF and RPF will be prepared and disclosed by September 26, 2014, as a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         condition for disbursement of project funds.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   26-Sep-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bosnia and Herzegovina                                           26-Sep-2014
                           Comments: The ESMF and RPF will be prepared and disclosed by September 26, 2014, as a
                                         condition for disbursement of project funds.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies


                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: David Michaud
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: John R. Butler (RSA)                           Date: 06-Jun-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Toshiaki Keicho (SM)                           Date: 06-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
