                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA5916
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Georgia                           Project ID:    P145040
                            Project Name:     Supporting Sustainable Wastewater Management (P145040)
                            Task Team         Xiaolan Wang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         15-Sep-2014                       Estimated   31-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSURR                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (80%), Public administration- Water,
                                              sanitation and flood protection (20%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        13.19           Total Bank Financing:   0.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  1.72
                              SIDA Georgia Wastewater Management Program                                               11.47
                              Total                                                                                    13.19
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the Project is to promote sustainable wastewater management in Georgia and pilot
                           the implementation of wastewater treatment plants.
                            3. Project Description
                           The Program consists of the following two components:

                                                                      Page 1 of 7
                         Component 1: Technical Assistance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (a)     Providing technical assistance to support the Recipient in developing adequate policy
                         environment documents for improved wastewater treatment infrastructure.
                         (b)     Carrying out on-the-job training in wastewater operation and maintenance, including sludge
                         management, disposal and reuse of water resources.
                         (c)     Carrying out: (i) training on wastewater management, including affordability, sustainability
                         and cost recovery; and (ii) study tours to learn about good practice of different sustainable
                         wastewater technologies.
                         (d)     Developing a policy for sludge management, including final disposal.
                         (e)     Carrying out of stakeholder consultations on wastewater management to promote public
                         participation.
                         (f)     Preparing feasibility studies, engineering designs, construction supervision, monitoring and
                         evaluation activities and providing technical assistance to the Project Implementing Entity and the
                         United Water Supply Company of Georgia (UWSC).

                         Component 2: Investment Grants

                         (a)    Rehabilitating 2-3 wastewater treatment plants in support of the regional development
                         programs (Imereti and Kakheti regions).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Technical assistance will be provided countrywide, while the investment component will be
                         implemented in Imereti and Kakheti regions, covered by the ongoing regional development program
                         supported by the World Bank. The first wastewater treatment plant to be rehabilitated in Imereti
                         region is already selected. It serves the town of Tskaltubo, a well established spa report with the
                         population of about 17,200. The existing wastewater plant is located in the outskirts of the town, has
Public Disclosure Copy




                         been out of operation for years and is grossly dilapidated. The other one or two wastewater treatment
                         plants to be covered by the Program are not selected yet.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Darejan Kapanadze (GENDR)
                         Nino Metreveli (GURDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              The Program carries investment components in
                          BP 4.01                                             support to infrastructure development and
                                                                              therefore triggers OP/BP 4.01 Environmental
                                                                              Assessment. None of the Project supported
                                                                              activities are expected to have significant, long
                                                                              term, or irreversible impacts on the natural
                                                                              environment, therefore the project is classified as
                                                                              environmental Category B.

                                                                              Discharged water quality standards applicable to
                                                                              the wastewater treatment plants to be rehabilitated



                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                                                                         under the Program will be in line with EU
                                                                         directives and will differ for release into regular
                                                                         water bodies and water bodies of high sensitivity.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Parameters to be used for measuring discharged
                                                                         water quality will include concentration of
                                                                         suspended particles, biological oxygen demand
                                                                         (BOD) and chemical oxygen demand (COD).

                                                                         The technical assistance to be provided by the
                                                                         Program will be used for improving institutional
                                                                         and regulatory framework for sustainable
                                                                         management of waste water in country, including
                                                                         introduction of innovative technologies of
                                                                         wastewater treatment feasible in the Georgian
                                                                         context. The recently developed national
                                                                         Wastewater Management Strategy will be a
                                                                         guiding document for technological
                                                                         improvements.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            The Program will finance rehabilitation of the
                                                                         existing wastewater treatment plants, and will not
                                                                         support construction of new treatment facilities in
                                                                         the locations previously not used for this purpose.
                                                                         Land plots carrying the existing deteriorated
                                                                         treatment plants are heavily transformed and
                                                                         cannot represent natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           Because the Program will finance rehabilitation
                         4.12                                            of the existing wastewater treatment plants, all of
                                                                         which had been placed on publicly owned land
                                                                         plots, no land take and physical relocation will
                                                                         occur. There is a minor likelihood of informal
                                                                         land use in the proximity to the existing non-
                                                                         operational treatment plants which would have to
                                                                         be terminated upon the program intervention.
                                                                         Also, there is a possibility of temporary relocation
                                                                         and/or loss of income or productive assets during
                                                                         construction. These aspects will be taken into
                                                                         consideration in the course of site selection and
                                                                         screening in accordance with the provisions of



                                                                 Page 3 of 7
                                                                                EMF documents, and if occurrence of informal
                                                                                land use is identified, the client will be obligated
                                                                                to develop Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                handle compensation in full agreement with the
                                                                                principles provided in the Resettlement Policy
                                                                                Framework (RPF). Works contractor may not be
                                                                                mobilized to a work site unless the process of
                                                                                compensation is completed and all requirements
                                                                                of RAP are met.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International          Yes              Once operational, the rehabilitated wastewater
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                treatment plants will discharge treated water into
                                                                                rivers or other natural water bodies, which may be
                                                                                an international waterways. Therefore, the
                                                                                Program triggers OP/BP 7.50 Projects on
                                                                                International Waterways. Because
                                                                                operationalizing of the treatment plants will
                                                                                contribute to the improvement of water quality in
                                                                                the recipient water bodies and will not alter
                                                                                cumulative water discharge, communication to
                                                                                the riparian states is not required. Exemption
                                                                                from the requirement for the communication to
                                                                                riparians was granted by the Regional Vice
                                                                                President of the Bank.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Program includes investment components to develop sewerage and wastewater treatment
                              infrastructure and thus triggers the OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. Because the Program
                              will not invest in the construction of new wastewater treatment plants, there areno risks commonly
                              related to the site selection and soil breaking. However, rehabilitation of the existing treatment
                              plants, which have been out of operation for extended periods of time, may require replacement
                              and/or addition of sewage piping and other elements of infrastructure. Other typical risks of
                              medium size construction works will also have to be considered and handled. The most important
                              issue of the operation phase would be the management of sludge, especially because the country
                              lacks solid waste management system and infrastructure that would provide straightforward
                              arrangements for sludge acceptance and disposal. Nonetheless, the environmental risks of the
                              construction and operation phases of the Program are fully manageable and none of them is
                              expected to have significant, long term or irreversible impacts on the natural environment. Thus,
                              the Program is classified as environmental Category B.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities


                                                                        Page 4 of 7
                           in the project area:
                           The expected long term environmental and social impacts of the Program implementation are
                           positive, because operationalizing of the wastewater treatment plants will lead to the decrease of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           human health risks and environmental pollution from the discharge of raw sewage.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Analysis of alternatives will be undertaken at the subproject level and will affect selection of the
                           wastewater treatment plans as well as the choice of technological solutions to be applied to
                           individual wastewater treatment plants. This process has already beenapplied in the process of the
                           preparation of the first investment subproject in Imereti.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Environmental Management Frameworks (EMFs) prepared for the ongoing Regional
                           Development Projects were used as a basis for developing an EMF for the Program in Support to
                           Sustainable Wastewater Management. The EMF guides the preparation of subproject-specific
                           Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs), including Environmental Management Plans (EMPs).
                           Similarly, the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPFs) prepared for the Regional Development
                           Projects were updated for the purposes of the Program implementation. RPF provides an outline
                           for the preparation of Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), as they may be required.

                           The Municipal Development Fund of Georgia (MDF) will be the implementing agency for the
                           Program. MDF has long history of implementing World Bank supported projects, though its in-
                           house institutional capacity for safeguards application and monitoring is relatively weak.
                           Arrangements for safeguards management under the currently ongoing Regional Development
                           Projects implies using of external international consultant services for technical supervision of
                           works, including supervision of safeguards application. This arrangement shall hold for
                           implementation of activities financed from the Program.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The Ministry of Regional Development and Infrastructure of Georgia, MDF, regional
                           administrations of Imereti and Kakheti, as well as the municipal governments of the selected
                           towns are the key stakeholders of the Program. Population of these towns, their visitors, and
                           businesses located in them will be direct beneficiaries of the planned investments.

                           The EMF, which is an update of the already disclosed and publicly discussed EMFs for the
                           Regional Development Projects, was disclosed in-country and through the Bank's InfoShop. Site-
                           specific EIA reports will be prepared satisfactory to the Bank, disclosed, and discussed with the
                           subproject-affected communities prior to tendering works under any individual investment. Local
                           stakeholders will be provided the EIA-related information in the format and through the media
                           most suitable for them.

                           The RPF, which is also an update of the already disclosed and publicly discussed RPFs for the
                           Regional Development Projects, was disclosed in-country and through the Bank's InfoShop. Site-
                           specific RAPs, as required, will be prepared satisfactory to the Bank, disclosed, discussed with
                           affected people, and implemented prior to mobilization of contractor to such site.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements


                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Georgia                                                          28-May-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   28-May-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Georgia                                                          08-May-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Xiaolan Wang
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/      Name: Sumila Gulyani (PMGR)                       Date: 17-Sep-2014
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
