                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC8609

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Jul-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Armenia                          Project ID:       P148836
                            Project Name:       Armenia Social Investment and Local Development Project (P148836)
                            Task Team           Ivan Drabek
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           08-Dec-2014                      Estimated         09-Feb-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GSPDR                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Public administration- Other social services (13%), Other social services (87%)
                            Theme(s):           Municipal governance and institution building (20%), Rural services and
                                                infrastructure (30%), Decentralization (10%), Other human de velopment
                                                (30%), Participation and civic engagement (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     55.00                       Total Bank Financing:         30.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:          25.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                          30.00
                              Total                                                                          30.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to: (i) enhance the accessibility and quality of local
                           social infrastructure and comprehensive public services in vulnerable areas; (ii) contribute to the
                           growth of living standards in the communities/territories through local social infrastructure projects
                           and employment generation; and (iii) strengthen ASIF’s capacity in order to transition it to a fully
                           functioning and sustainable territorial development fund.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed Social Investment and Local Development (SILD) project will build on current high
                         capacity of Armenian Social Investment Fund (ASIF) in implementing social infrastructure projects,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         while working to evolve their delivery model to meet the current needs and strategies of Armenia. It
                         involves four components:

                         Component 1: Support to Vulnerable Communities (US$16.0 million)
                         Since its creation, ASIF has been implementing small-sized, one-time investment projects in the
                         most vulnerable communities to satisfy their urgent basic needs.
                         This component will fund approximately 120 micro-projects and continue the main original work of
                         ASIF towards: a) rehabilitation and development of community infrastructures and services (public,
                         social, economic, environmental), (b) building institutional and financial capacity at the community
                         level to develop and implement these projects and services, and (c) providing consultancy and
                         technical assistance to the local partners. The first years of this project will focus primarily on the
                         continuing delivery of these core services of ASIF while gradually increasing the proportion of new
                         types of activities under the Component 2.

                         Component 2: ASIF’s Institutional Strengthening and Transition to a Territorial Development Fund
                         (US$1.0 million)
                         ASIF will transform into a sustainable territorial development fund with the objective of reducing
                         territorial disparities and supporting national plans to enlarge communities and improve their
                         cooperation. Its delivery model and funding model will both evolve, moving in the beginning
                         towards a greater diversity of funding sources and gradually working towards financial sustainability
                         towards the end of the project life. The project will support ASIF’s institutional strengthening
                         through: (a) development of new tools and approaches, including methodologies for appraisal,
                         promotion and selection of sub-projects (some of which will be carried out through Swiss
                         Development Cooperation funding during project preparation), (b) procedural improvements of
                         monitoring and evaluation, and financial systems, (c) staff capacity building, and (d) organizational/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         structural changes.

                         Component 3: Support to Growth Centers and Community Groups/Areas (US$10.0 million)
                         This component will fund the design, selection and implementation of approximately 30 of these new
                         types of projects. These projects will be based on long-term, sustainable, socioeconomic
                         development, involve multiple communities or groups and cover wider geographic areas. They will
                         be selected based on: (i) the community/area potential for growing and positively influencing the
                         nearby socio-economic development situation, (ii) the level of local co-financing, including co-
                         financing of communities, population and private business, (iii) expected medium-term social and
                         economic impacts of the project implementation, (iv) the level of coordination with other actors’
                         projects in the area, (v) their links to the mid-term development program of the region, and (vi) the
                         potential for sustainability. The specific selection criteria will be developed under Component 3.

                         Component 4: Project Management (US$3.0 million)
                         This component will provide institutional support to ASIF (and the future Territorial Development
                         Fund) to effectively implement its program through co-financing its operating costs including
                         salaries, utilities, office equipment, training, financial audits and MIS upgrade/maintenance for the
                         duration of the project. ASIF will be in charge of technical aspects of the project and ensure overall
                         monitoring and supervision of project activities. This component will also include fiduciary and
                         safeguard compliance.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Nationwide. SLID project will target vulnerable communities in all regions of Armenia.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The project will be implemented by ASIF - an agency with strong administrative capacity and
                           technical expertise with an operation history of 18 years. ASIF acted as an implementing entity for
                           several projects supported by the World Bank, and has a solid track record. ASIF has a high capacity
                           staff, sound financial management and procurement systems and reporting mechanisms that are
                           currently used under the ASIF III Project. Environmental management had been a relative weakness
                           of ASIF several years ago, however it improved considerably through the recruitment of an
                           environmental specialist; integration of environmental screening and monitoring into the general
                           procedures of projects' review, approval, and supervision; and quality enhancement of environmental
                           record keeping. Overall, no cases of major environmental incompliance have been identified during
                           implementation of the ASIF III Project to date, though there were issues with the quality of
                           documented reporting on the environmental screening and monitoring of operations. Hiring of an
                           environmental specialist led to tangible improvements which include the use of environmental
                           screening and field monitoring checklists, and photo documentation of the findings from site visits.
                           Maintaining a staff unit of an environmental specialist in ASIF will be critically important for
                           maintaining good environmental performance under SLID project. In terms of social safeguards, as
                           previous ASIF projects excluded civil works requiring land acquisition or resettlement, ASIF does
                           not have experience overseeing compliance with OP/BP 4.12 and is currently without a permanent
                           social specialist within its staff. To ensure adequate supervision of social aspects of the project,
                           including social safeguards compliance, it is expected that the Bank will request ASIF to retain and
                           maintain a qualified social specialist for the duration of the project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Darejan Kapanadze (GENDR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Sarah G. Michael (GURDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             Individual sub-projects to be financed under the
                           BP 4.01                                             SILD project will support rehabilitation or
                                                                               enhancement of small to medium size rural
                                                                               public infrastructure. This type of investment is
                                                                               unlikely to have significant negative
                                                                               environmental impacts. Vast majority of the
                                                                               potential sub-project proposals are likely to fall
                                                                               under environmental Category B or C. Category
                                                                               A sub-projects will be filtered out through
                                                                               environmental screening and will not be
                                                                               supported under the SILD project.

                                                                               Because the sub-project proposals will arrive
                                                                               and be reviewed on the rolling basis, most of
                                                                 them will not be known by the time of the
                                                                 project appraisal. Therefore, an Environmental
                                                                 and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 will be developed to establish guiding principles
                                                                 of (i) environmental and social screening of sub-
                                                                 project proposals, (ii) identification of the
                                                                 expected impacts of sub-projects at their
                                                                 construction and operation phases, (iii)
                                                                 establishing measures for mitigating
                                                                 environmental and social risks, and (iv)
                                                                 monitoring of environmental performance under
                                                                 the supported sub-projects. Site-specific
                                                                 Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) will
                                                                 be developed, disclosed, and consulted with
                                                                 local communities prior to commencement of
                                                                 works at any individual sub-project site.
                                                                 Environmental due diligence will be built into
                                                                 the general procedures of sub-projects'
                                                                 selection, approval and monitoring and the
                                                                 SILD project's Operational Manual will provide
                                                                 step-by-step guidance on this. Adherence to
                                                                 these procedures and implementation of EMPs
                                                                 will be closely supervised by ASIF.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    TBD   As the specific nature of the long-term
                         4.12                                    socioeconomic development projects which will
                                                                 be supported under project Component 2 are not
                                                                 yet known, it is not yet known whether OP 4.12
                                                                 will be triggered. If OP 4.12 is triggered, a
                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
                                                                 prepared. In this case, the RPF will provide
                                                                 detailed guidance and criteria for the
                                                                 development of investment-specific
                                                                 Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), which
                                                                 would be prepared and implemented prior to
                                                                 commencement of any sub-projects where
                                                                 resettlement or land acquisition was required.
                                                                 The RPF will be included as an annex to the
                                                                 project's Operations Manual.
                                                                                                                                 The question of excluding activities with
                                                                                                                                 potential resettlement impacts under this
                                                                                                                                 Component will be discussed with the client
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 during preparation and a decision on triggering
                                                                                                                                 OP 4.12 is expected to be taken by QER stage.

                                                                                                                                 As was the case for the Armenia Social
                                                                                                                                 Investment Fund III project (and its three
                                                                                                                                 additional financing projects), sub-projects
                                                                                                                                 supported under SILD project Component 1
                                                                                                                                 would exclude any activities which required
                                                                                                                                 resettlement, land acquisition or land
                                                                                                                                 restrictions.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The ESMF and RPF, if required, will be prepared before the project appraisal, shared with the
                                      Bank, disclosed, and consulted with relevant stakeholders. Site-specific EMPs, and RAPs (as
                                      needed), for individual sub-projects will be produced on the rolling basis, as the sub-projects are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      identified and designed. EMPs and RAPs will be drafted, shared with the Bank, disclosed, and
                                      discussed with the affected local communities prior to commencement of works.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Ivan Drabek

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 23-Jun-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Andrew D. Mason (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 22-Jul-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
