                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC1407
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                             Project ID:    P132620
                            Project Name:      Partial Risk Sharing Facility in Energy Efficiency (P132620)
                            Task Team          Ashok Sarkar
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          06-Oct-2014                       Estimated   13-Jan-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEEDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal          Climate change
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):         Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (20%), Climate change
                                              (80%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      43.00           Total Bank Financing:                    0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     0.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                        18.00
                              Climate Investment Funds                                                                 25.00
                              Total                                                                                    43.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)



                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                            A. Project Development Objective(s)
                            The project development objective is to assist India in achieving energy savings with mobilization
                            of commercial finance and participation of Energy Service Companies (ESCOs).
Public Disclosure Copy




                            B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                            The project development objective is to assist India in achieving energy savings with mobilization
                            of commercial finance and participation of Energy Service Companies (ESCOs).
                         3. Project Description
                         The project will achieve PDO by (1) leveraging project funds to encourage private sector investment
                         in energy efficiency projects, and (2) providing complementary technical assistance and capacity
                         building to stakeholders in India’s energy efficiency market

                         The PRSF project will consist of the following components:

                         Component 1: A risk sharing facility for energy efficiency, managed by Small Industries
                         Development Bank of India (SIDBI), of US$37 million, funded from a GEF contribution of US$12
                         million and backstopped by a CTF Guarantee, in the form of contingent finance, of US$25 million,
                         and
                         Component 2: A technical assistance and capacity building component of US$6 million, funded by
                         GEF, US$4 million managed by SIDBI and US$2 million managed by Energy Efficiency Services
                         Limited (EESL).

                         Component 1: Risk Sharing Facility for Energy Efficiency (US$37 million)
                         This component will be executed by SIDBI, the proposed Project Execution Agency (PEA), to
                         establish a Risk Sharing Facility for Energy Efficiency. This facility would provide partial credit
                         guarantees to cover a share of the default risk that financial institutions face in extending loans to
                         eligible EE sub-projects. Initially the partial credit guarantee from PRSF will be limited to 50 percent
                         of the EE loan.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Partial Risk Sharing Facility will be available to supporting EE loans made by SIDBI and by
                         participating financial institutions (PFIs) that will be empanelled and sign a memorandum of
                         understanding (MoU) with the PEA as part of this project. A sub-guarantee fee, at a pre-determined
                         rate, will be charged for each EE sub-project supported under PRSF. While the guarantee window for
                         SIDBI loans, to be maintained as a sub-account, will have an initial corpus of US$6 million of GEF
                         grant for risk coverage, the window for guarantee calls from other PFIs, in the second sub-account,
                         will also have an initial corpus of US$6 million GEF grant for risk coverage and will be backstopped
                         by additional risk coverage through CTF guarantee of US$25 million (contingent finance).

                         All the Facility fees and expenses covered from interest and sub-guarantee fee income which will
                         increase over time, will be maintained under the third sub-account of PRSF. This window will be
                         used to pay front-end fees and guarantee fees to CTF, fixed and variable management fees for SIDBI
                         as a PEA, and other operating expenses of the Facility (such as M&V expenses). The Facility will
                         have the flexibility to move funds to and from any of the three sub-accounts. In case funds from the
                         PFI sub-account have to be moved out, consent from IBRD/CTF/GEF will be required.

                         To be eligible for credit guarantees from PRSF, PFI loans will have to be for EE projects that are
                         implemented by ESCOs. For projects to be eligible, the implementing ESCO will have to have an
                         energy savings performance contract (ESPC) with the beneficiary host entity. Further, SIDBI and the


                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         PFIs will have to appraise the projects using the standardized appraisal documents and using the
                         PRSF Operations Manual (OM) and template agreements which form part of the OM.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (US$6 million)

                         This component will fund technical assistance and capacity building to ensure that Component 1 is
                         successful and to address other aspects of the energy efficiency ecosystem needed to sustain a strong
                         EE market transformation. It will develop the capacity of PRSF Facility; standardize transaction and
                         appraisal documents for ESCO projects; provide for monitoring and evaluation of the project;
                         provide marketing and awareness for the project; and develop a pipeline of sub-projects to utilize the
                         PRSF.

                         Component 2 will have two TA implementing agencies: SIDBI will manage US$4 million and EESL
                         will manage the remaining US$2 million. EESL has a GoI mandate to function as a market
                         aggregator for EE projects in India. SIDBI has a successful track record of running EE projects and
                         guarantee operations, including under World Bank-funded projects. As a part of SIDBI’s broader
                         strategic vision, it intends to develop and provide end-to-end solutions for delivering EE services in
                         India.

                         SIDBI will provide upfront project preparation support and market development and facilitation
                         support to help the implementation of the risk-sharing facility itself. In addition, it will provide
                         assistance to the PFIs, ESCOs and host entities by bringing them together and facilitating match-
                         making and disseminating information about the PRSF. The SIDBI team operating PRSF will make
                         consultants, standardized tools and templates available to PFIs, ESCOs and beneficiary sectors
                         directly involved in PRSF or working in EE market. It will also provide capacity building and
                         training.

                         EESL will deliver technical support to address broader EE market barriers in India. Its support will
                         be on a broader scale and reach out to a larger set of EE market stakeholders than SIDBI’s. BEE
Public Disclosure Copy




                         works closely with EESL in the latter’s role as a financial and implementing agency to facilitate the
                         enabling environment for scaling up EE investments in India, particularly through ESCOs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project beneficiaries will be across India.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Mridula Singh (GSURR)
                         Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project facility will support brown field
                          BP 4.01                                              entities leading to energy efficiency benefits, as
                                                                               well as environmental co-benefits. However, the
                                                                               environmental impacts of proposed technology
                                                                               upgradation in target sectors cannot be ruled out,
                                                                               though the proposed EE interventions are
                                                                               relatively small in nature do not lead to any


                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                                                                           significant environmental impacts. Also, the
                                                                           current status of target sectors (except sub-
                                                                           projects relating to Street Lighting) vis-à-vis
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           environmental compliance would be of
                                                                           importance from the regulatory and reputational
                                                                           risks point of view. The safeguard issues related
                                                                           to the project are proposed to be addressed
                                                                           through a risk based environmental due diligence
                                                                           and management approach. In line with this
                                                                           approach, an Environmental Risk Management
                                                                           Frame work (ERMF) has been integrated in to the
                                                                           project design and implementation arrangements.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No           The project interventions will in the existing units
                                                                           which are located in the designated land uses such
                                                                           as industrial estates. None of the entities
                                                                           benefiting from the project will be located and or
                                                                           would impact the Natural Habitats. Also the
                                                                           project activities do not impact Natural Habitats
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No           Not applicable as the project activities and/or
                                                                           entities benefiting from the project do not impact
                                                                           forests.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No           Not applicable as the project activities do not
                                                                           involve use of pesticides and/or require pest
                                                                           management.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No           The project activities relate to improving the
                            BP 4.11                                        energy efficiency at existing industries,
                                                                           commercial buildings and street lighting. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           interventions relate to improving already existing
                                                                           facilities, no impacts are envisaged on Physical
                                                                           Cultural Resources. Hence OP/BP 4.11 is not
                                                                           triggered.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No           Not applicable as the interventions are retrofits in
                                                                           nature within the existing facilities and do not
                                                                           affect any indigenous people or relate to
                                                                           indigenous peoples.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No           Not applicable as the project activities do not lead
                            4.12                                           to any involuntary resettlement
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No           Not applicable as the activities do not relate to
                                                                           provisions under OP/BP 4.37
                            Projects on International        No            Not applicable as the activities do not relate to
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                           provisions under OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No            Entities (SME units, buildings, etc..) benefiting
                            7.60                                           from the project are not located in disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management



                                                                   Page 4 of 7
                         A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           The risk sharing facility will be used for energy efficiency (EE) achievement through technology
                           upgradation in existing target sectors – limited large industries, MSMEs, Commercial buildings,
                           and street lighting. Thus, the project facility will support brown field entities leading to EE
                           benefits, as well environmental co-benefits. However, the current status of target sectors (except
                           sub-projects relating to Street Lighting) vis-à-vis environmental compliance would be of
                           importance from the regulatory and reputational risks point of view. In addition, the environmental
                           impacts of proposed technology upgradation in target sectors also cannot be ruled out, though the
                           proposed EE interventions are relatively small investments and do not lead to any significant
                           environmental impacts.

                           Considering the target sectors under the project, the environmental issues/risks could vary from
                           low to moderate intensity. These are not amenable for upfront identification for designing a
                           particular or set of environmental mitigation measures. Also, there could be practical limitations
                           (in some sectors) in retrofitting the environmental performance complying with the EHS
                           guidelines of the World Bank Group, especially in case of industrial sector investments as: (a) the
                           project facility supports marginal investments, in the context of overall size and turnover of
                           industrial units and hence limited leverage; (b) the industrial units expected to be covered under
                           the project are brown-field in nature and any environmental retrofits, in case if required, could be
                           time consuming and need not necessarily be part of the expected EE measures. In view of this, a
                           risk based approach with necessary Environmental Risk Management Framework is proposed for
                           addressing the safeguard issues.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           None
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The project alternatives are specific to each of the sub-investments under the project. Such
                           alternatives will be ascertained as part of detailed energy audits which also will include
                           environmental due diligence
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The safeguard issues related to the project are proposed to be addressed through a risk based
                           environmental due diligence and management approach. In line with this approach, an
                           Environmental Risk Management Frame work (ERMF) has been prepared. The ERMF defines the
                           roles and responsibilities of all stakeholders under PRSF to screen the issues such as compliance
                           of the host entities with the environmental regulations relating, environmental legacy issues,
                           ongoing environmental litigations, location of beneficiary units in critically polluted and/or
                           ecologically sensitive areas. In addition, under the provisions of ERMF, it would be mandatory to
                           address potential environmental impacts resulting from technology upgrades relating to EE
                           measures, if any. The ERMF also define the environmental safeguard due diligence requirements
                           to be followed during the preparation of EE projects as well as during the appraisal process and
                           identify environmental risk profile of each transaction to ensure safeguard risk mitigated
                           disbursement mechanisms. Third party checks on appraisal procedures to ensure the fiduciary and


                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                           environmental safeguard management framework are also included under ERMF.

                           SIDBI, the project execution agency (PEA) over the past 8 years under the Bank financed “SME
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Finance and Development Project” has developed necessary institutional capacity for safeguards
                           management for MSME investments. As part of corporate policies, SIDBI has mainstreamed
                           environmental risk management in to their corporate credit risk management systems. With the
                           current capacity as well as through TA component under the project, SIDBI will facilitate
                           supervision, capacity building of PFIs to streamline environmental risk management in to PRSF
                           transactions.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders include: SIDBI – Project Execution Agency; EESL – Technical Support
                           Agency; PFIs; host entities/beneficiaries; and ESCOs. As part of the project preparation, series of
                           focus group discussions, and two consultation work shops were held to conceive the project
                           components, implementation structure, and environmental risk management among other aspects
                           of project design (the consultations details and outcomes are presented as part of the ERMF).
                           While the project would not affect people, there could be low to moderate risk and such risks are
                           proposed to be addressed through a well-structured environmental risk management mechanism.
                           The drafts ERMF is disclosed during February, 2014 to facilitate follow up on consultations and
                           the final ERMF is also disclosed before end of April, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        15-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     01-May-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?




                                                                      Page 6 of 7
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Ashok Sarkar
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name:                                                Date:
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name:                                                Date:
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
