INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12284
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Mar-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Madagascar                  Project ID:  P149323
Project Name: Social Safety Net Project (P149323)
Task Team       Andrea Vermehren
Leader(s):
Estimated        11-Mar-2015                Estimated    28-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSPDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Primary education (20%), Other non-bank financial intermediaries (10%), Health
(10%), Other social services (60%)
Theme(s):       Natural disaster management (15%), Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance &
Social Care Services (50%), Social Inclusion (10%), Education for all (15%),
Nutrition and food security (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      40.00             Total Bank Financing:    40.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                  40.00
Total                                                                        40.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Development Objective of the Project is to support the Government in increasing extreme poor
households' access to safety net services, and lay the foundation for a social protection system.
Page 1 of 10


﻿3. Project Description
The project will be implemented over a 4.5 year period from August 2015 - December 2019. A
Project Preparation Advance (PPA) is prepared to ensure that first payments for the expansion of the
HDCT pilot can be made in September 2015, just prior to the new school year.
Component 1: Building a safety net for the poor in selected rural areas (US$ 30.2 million).
o        The objective of this component is to build an effective safety for extreme poor households in
selected areas. The component will include three safety net modalities to address different
vulnerabilities and risks faced by extreme poor households in Madagascar: i) a Productive Safety Net
(PSN) will provide cash for work (CfW) activities for targeted poor communities in areas of the
country where there is a potential to address environmental and soil degradation, and increase local
agriculture production; ii) a Human Development Cash Transfer (HDCT) expanded pilot will provide
conditional cash transfers (CCT) to support extreme poor households in areas that have particularly
low human development outcomes; and iii) a post-disaster window will support poor households and
communities in areas affected by disasters as a result of natural hazards. It is noteworthy that all
safety net beneficiary households included in the HDCT or PSN programs will receive a similar cash
amount per year, regardless of the safety net program that they participate in. The component will be
implemented by the FID.
Subcomponent 1.1: Establishment of a Productive Safety Net (PSN) (US$14.7 million)
This subcomponent would offer regular cash for work opportunities during the lean season to the
poorest families of the selected communities over a three-year period, with the aim of smoothing
their consumption and supporting them in developing productive activities. Around 28.500
households would participate in the program for three years. The PSN would adopt a community-
based landscape approach. Planning of PSN activities would be done at the level of small landscapes
composed of several villages, and activities would be planned and implemented sequentially over a
period of three years in order to address soil conservation, water harvesting, reforestation and
terracing in a durable manner. PSN activities would be labor-intensive and at least 70 percent of the
funding for the subprojects would be used to pay cash to beneficiaries. The remaining financing
would cover non-wage costs, such as small equipment and material inputs, as well as supervision
costs. Beneficiary households would be selected through a combination of community-based pre-
selection and a Proxy Means Test (PMT) survey whose combined result would be validated by the
communities. Around 30 percent of the households of each selected village would be able to join the
program. Extreme poor and labor-constrained households would participate in the program through
direct cash transfers with no obligation to work. The daily wage rate would be kept below the market
rate for unskilled labor (Malagasy Ariary (MGA) 3000 per day) to ensure that only the poorest
households have an incentive to join the program. Participating households would work 80 days a
year each year for three years. The cash-for-work activities will be implemented based on a five year
landscape development plan that will be developed jointly by the FID, the Ministry of Agriculture,
the Ministry of Social Protection and other relevant government representatives and stakeholders, in
partnership with communities. The methodology for this joint planning is spelled out in a detailed
operational manual developed with technical assistance from the World Bank. The five year plans
are updated annually taking into consideration the activities implemented during the previous year
and ensuring that past sub-projects are properly maintained and used. This methodology will ensure a
combination of a long term productive development vision of the selected area with immediate
improvements of household's living conditions in the short term.
Page 2 of 10


﻿Subcomponent 1.2: Expansion of the Human Development Cash Transfer pilot (US$11.5 million)
This component would provide cash transfers of about US$12 MGA 20,000 per month (over a three
)         year period) to selected, extremely poor families with children 0-12 years of age, in selected regions
of Madagascar. The geographic areas of intervention are determined based on human development
indicators, on the availability of schools, the national nutrition program and demographic criteria.
The cash transfers would consist of two elements: Each selected family would receive a base
payment of Ar. 10,000 per month to support the family's income, and caregivers would be
encouraged to enroll in the national nutrition program, attend parenting workshops and adopt good
practice parenting behaviors. In addition, families with children of primary school age would
receive for each child enrolled and attending school regularly (80 percent of school days) MGA
5,000, for up to two children in primary school. Thus, the highest amount possible for any family to
receive is MGA 20,000 per month. In addition, families with primary school children will receive a
one-time payment of MGA 20.000 in September of the first year they enroll their children in primary
schools to ensure that they can enroll their children. Payments would be made bimestrial through
financial intermediaries (such as micro-finance institutions, mobile payment providers, etc.) where
possible, to promote financial inclusion. FID has already successfully piloted the HDCT program
whose first transfer took place in September 2014 (just prior to the start of the new school year). The
pilot included the main elements of a safety net including (i) targeting, (ii) enrolment (for
information about co-responsibilities of beneficiaries), (iii) transfer (through financial intermediary
institutions), (iv) co-responsibility monitoring (through social organizers and "lead mothers"), and
(v) case management (which includes complaints, family updates, etc). The pilot is accompanied by
a public information campaign that informs key stakeholders about the program as well as the
specific roles and responsibilities. The FID also contracted a firm to evaluate the effectiveness of the
combined geographic, community and proxy-means-test based targeting process. The evaluation
revealed that the inclusion and exclusion errors of the HDCT and the CfW programs are only
between 5% and 10%. For the HDCT, the inclusion error was 5.1% while it was slightly higher for
the Cash for Work program at 7.1%. The difference might stem from the fact that the self-
registration of potential beneficiary households which may lack information and awareness of the
program. However, the households selected as beneficiaries: 88% of the cash for work beneficiaries
and 92% sites of the HDCT beneficiaries were found to be the poorest and most vulnerable
households in their communities with their average consumption per capita lower than the
a         consumption per capita of non-beneficiary households. The evaluation also pointed to some areas of
improvement in the targeting process, particularly related to communication and the clarity of the
community pre-selection criteria. In addition, the FID has contracted a firm to carry out a process
evaluation of the HDCT pilot to inform management of any implementation issues in a timely
manner. The results of this process evaluation are expected in June 2015. The scalable effectiveness
trial for the HDCT program will include a robust impact evaluation using a cluster randomized trial
to test not only the effectiveness of the cash transfer program, but also the value-added of a set of
behavioral nudges delivered primarily through the elected leader mothers. Results would be assess
among mothers to assess the impacts on ONN and parenting workshops and the adoption of
improved parenting practices. Child level outcomes would also be assessed to assess impacts on
child development outcomes related to school readiness - including nutritional and cognitive
outcomes-as well as on school enrollment and attendance. The impact evaluation will include not
only a review of short-term and intermediate outcomes across villages with and without the HDCT
program, but will also test the effectiveness of a small set of behavioral 'nudges' designed to
improve take up and outcomes.
Page 3 of 10


﻿Subcomponent 1.3: Early recovery response to natural disasters (US$4 million)
The subcomponent would enable the Government of Madagascar to provide financing for disaster
response through CfW activities and the rehabilitation and reconstruction of damaged infrastructure
in affected community. Funding of up to US$2 million will be made available for the rehabilitation
of basic infrastructure (e.g. schools) that will be rebuilt in a cyclone proof way, with designs
developed by the Ministry of Education. In addition, quick income earning opportunities will be
offered to the poorest members of the affected communities through CfW activities for clean-up and
rehabilitation activities, at a daily rate of MGA 3,000 of up to 45 days of work. 75 percent of the
project cost will be used towards wage costs, while the remaining 25 percent would be used towards
non-wage costs (small equipment and capital inputs, and supervision costs). FID will budget US$1
million for overall disaster response each year. In case that there are only minor disasters during one
year, the remaining funds can be used to rehabilitate the backlog of damaged community
infrastructure from previous disasters. Activities will be selected and coordinated by the National
Bureau for Disaster Risk Management (Bureau National de Gestion des Risques et Catastrophes,
BNGRC). FID has been the main government institution providing fast income and reconstruction
support to affected communities. As s uch, FID is a member of the Coordination Unit for the Disaster
Interventions (Cellule de R6flexion pour les Interventions en post Catastrophes, CRIC) which brings
together fast intervention institutions such as the World Food Program, the Red Cross, UNICEF,
Local Governments etc.
Component 2: Strengthening the safety net administration, monitoring and social accountability (US
$6.5 million).
This component would provide the financing for improved safety net administration. It will include
(i) establishing the targeting system including the roll out of the Proxy Means Test as an objective
instrument for beneficiary identification, (ii) creating a beneficiary registry for the PSN and the
HDCT, (iii) rolling out electronic payment systems for safety net beneficiaries, (iv) strengthening of
FID's management information systems to be able to process the safety net program data on an
ongoing basis, (v) control and social accountability mechanisms, as well as (vi) safety net program
administration, and financial audits. The component would be implemented by the FID.
Component 3: Building the institutional capacity for monitoring and evaluation of the Social
o        Protection System (US$3.3 million).
This component aims at strengthening the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Population, Social
Protection and Promotion of Women (MPSPPW) to manage the coordination, monitoring and
evaluation of social protection system. The Ministry is responsible for the coordination, monitoring
and evaluation of the social protection system including policy, programs and projects. The overall
objective of this component is to strengthen the Ministry's capacity for laying the foundation of a
social protection system. The main expected results of this component include the enhanced
coordination of social protection sector through (i) the creation of a social protection committee; (ii)
annual report of main social protection program (iii) the harmonized approach to social safety net
(targeting, registry, etc.), and (iv) the evaluation of selected social protection programs. The activities
are designed to support the Ministry in coordinating the implementation of national social protection
policy. The component will be implemented by the MPSPPW. To achieve the goals, this component
will support coordination and monitoring of activities of the implementing agencies of main social
protection programs and projects. The main activities of this subcomponent are: for coordination: (i)
harmonization of the design of social safety net, especially public work (targeting, wage, registry,
Page 4 of 10


﻿complaints, etc.); (ii) elaboration of convention between stakeholders; (iii) creation of social
protection committee. To improve the monitoring of the sector, the component would support, inter
alia, (i) the creation of a database with the main social programs and projects including objectives,
type of transfer, beneficiaries, performance indicators, etc.; (ii) the mapping of the main programs,
O
U         and (iii) the establishment of a beneficiary registry of the programs implemented by Ministry.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
O
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented nation-wide precisely in selected poor geographic regions of
Madagascar's south and east. The selection of geographic areas of intervention was determined based
on the following criteria, namely: poverty status, availability of functioning schools and the national
nutrition program, as well as the productive potential.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSURR)
Marie Diop (GSURR)
Paul-Jean Feno (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The policy is triggered because of the project intended
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               activities foreseen in component 2, which will rehabilitate
or rebuilt school infrastructure in a cyclone proof way,
with designs developed by FID and the Ministry of
Education, as well as rehabilitate the back log of damaged
community infrastructure that has been accumulated from
past disasters. Because of the site specific nature of the
project, and its intended localized impacts, the Borrower
has prepared an ESMF, built from similar active projects
conducted by FID before in Madagascar. Once ready, the
ESMF will be consulted upon and cleared by the Bank
prior to its public disclosure both in country and at the
InfoShop before appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          The project is not being implemented in natural habitats
4.04                                and does not affect them.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          The project does not involve forests or forestry and does
not affect them.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          The project does not involve pest management. The
Project will promote organic fertilizers (manure and
composts) without using chemical fertilizers and
pesticides (which would in any case be very expensive,
inaccessible to the poor beneficiaries and not available in
all project areas)
Physical Cultural       Yes         It is unlikely that there are physical cultural resources in
Resources OP/BP 4.11                the project area, nevertheless, in the likelihood that such
an encounter occurs during project implementation,
provision of chance finds approach is been embedded in
the ESMF that the borrower will apply as mitigation
Page 5 of 10


﻿measures to avoid any potential adverse impacts on these
physical cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No           The Policy is not triggered due to the fact that, although
BP 4.10                               the project has a national coverage, given the budget
constraint, the identified project activities in component 2
(rehabilitation and/or rebuilding of school and other local
infrastructures affected by the cyclones) will be rather
implemented in the following geographycal regions,
namely, center-south, extreme-south and south-east
located far away from the South-West where the Mikea
community live.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes          The Policy is triggered due to the civil works activities to
OP/BP 4.12                            be carried out under the rehabilitation and reconstruction
of damaged infrastructure after disasters and Productive
Safety Net. Although up until now FID has been
genuinely dealing with such small scales issues, the
matter fact is that under this project, the volume of
activities likely to lead to issues of land acquisition
remains yet unknown. Given the unknown footprint of the
project, the Borrower has prepared an RPF to set forth the
basic principles and prerogatives to be followed once
details characteristics of the project sites are known. Like
the ESMF, the RPF has been consulted upon and cleared
by the Bank prior to its public disclosure both in-country
and at the InfoShop before appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No           N/A
4.37
Projects on International  No         N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed     No           N/A
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Parts of the activities financed under the Project are expected to have no environmental and social
safeguard aspect as they focus on cash transfers, capacity building & training, as well as the
provision of technical assistance, materials, equipment and operational costs.
The proposed project will finance the Productive Safety Net (PSN) activities and some civil works
activities, namely reconstruction/rehabilitation of small scale rural infrastructure damaged by
natural disasters. In the aftermath of a disaster, existing community infrastructure like classrooms/
schools, health centers, market places and feeder roads could be rehabilitated. This part of the
project activities could produce some adverse negative impacts. Likely adverse impacts include
air, soil and water pollution, loss of vegetation, soil erosion, traffic accidents, and potential loss of
Page 6 of 10


﻿livelihoods and/or land required for future infrastructure investments.
In contrast, the cash for works activities meant to provide cash to targeted poor families in
exchange for their participation in small group community work activities may not expose them to
O
significant risks of HIV/AIDS, or cause damage to the existing physical and social environment.
These Productive Safety Net (PSN) activities will be carried out at the level of small landscape
areas composed of several villages. The activities will be planned through a participatory process,
and implemented sequentially over a period of three years with the objective of fostering soil
conservation, water harvesting, reforestation and terracing in a sustainable manner. The Project
will promote organic fertilizers (manure and composts) without using chemical fertilizers and
pesticides (which would in any case be very expensive, inaccessible to the poor beneficiaries and
not available in all project areas). The activities will include training and capacity building of
beneficiaries in soil conservation, terracing) for which the beneficiaries will be provide with small
equipment. The reforestation activities will adopt an approach of mixing arboriculture and cassava
or corn in the existing parcels of the beneficiary households to increase productivity and soil
fertility in identified areas. The areas for the reforestation activities will be zones surrounding the
villages with existing local species and small density of less of 500 plants per subproject which are
grown in small community nurseries. The reforestation aims to reduce soil erosion and, in the
longer term, also contribute to the local economy. The proposed activities/subprojects will be
undertaken through a consultative and participatory process meant to foster ownership and social
accountability.
Overall, the potential adverse environmental and social risks and impacts of the proposed sub-
projects are expected to be small in scale and site specific, albeit minor, typical of category B
projects. Three safeguard policies are triggered: OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP
4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) and OP/BP 4.11 (Physical cultural Resources), of which two
standalone safeguards instruments are prepared to mitigate the potential environmental and social
risks and impacts of the project, namely Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to be public disclosed both in-country and at
the Infoshop prior to appraisal, once cleared and approved by both the Country and the World
Bank.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The planned sub-projects are not expected to incur any potential indirect and/or long term impacts
resulting from the reconstruction/rehabilitation of small scale sub-projects. It is not expected to
have long term adverse environmental and social impacts on future activities in the potential
project areas. Overall project impacts are considered modest and will be site specific and easily
manageable. The implementing agency FID has experience and has implemented sub-projects in
the past in a satisfactory manner, including under the ongoing Madagascar Emergency
Infrastructure Preservation and Vulnerability Reduction Project (P132101) financed by IDA.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Given that this project is somewhat a continuation or extension of an ongoing Madagascar
Emergency Infrastructure Preservation and Vulnerability Reduction Project (P132101) financed by
IDA, project alternatives are not considered since most of the activities are identical or of the same
nature and/or scale.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Page 7 of 10


﻿assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Since the exact physical locations of future civil works activities, namely reconstruction/
rehabilitation of small scale rural sub-projects as well as their potential localized adverse
environmental and social impacts and risks could not be identified prior to the appraisal of the
proposed project, the Borrower has prepared two standalone safeguards instruments: (i) an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); and (ii) a Resettlement Policy
O
Framework (RPF).
The ESMF outlines an environmental and social screening process for future sub-projects to
ensure that they are environmentally and socially sound and sustainable. The ESMF also includes:
(i) a basic
description of the natural and physical environment of the targeted project intervention zones in
the country; (ii) a clear and coherent process to assess environmental and social impacts of
subprojects to be financed which were improved with the lesson learned and the best practices
developed by the current IDA financing; (iii) guidelines to adequately mitigate (avoid, minimize
or reduce) any environmental and social impacts from financed subprojects; (iv) an environmental
and social management Plan (ESMP) with an estimated budget and timeline; (v) public
consultations and stakeholder participation with women, youth and vulnerable groups,
municipalities and members of the local communities; (vi) a grievance redress mechanism that
provides clearer guidance on how potential grievances will be handled throughout the project
cycle; (vii) a monitoring and evaluation mechanism; (viii) a set of Social and Environmental
Clauses (SEC) for private construction firms' compliance with safeguards measures outlined in
these instruments and (ix) clear instructions on how possible findings of physical cultural
resources will be managed and will be dealt with during Project implementation using chance-
fmds approaches in compliance with OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources. The RPF outlines
the policies and procedures to be followed in the event that resettlement action/compensation plans
will need to be prepared to mitigate potential adverse social impacts due to land acquisition.
At the project level, the FID has extensive experience in implementing IDA operations as noted
with the ongoing Madagascar Emergency Infrastructure Preservation and Vulnerability Reduction
Project (P132101) financed by IDA. FID Social and Environmental safeguards focal points is
O
therefore tasked with ensuring compliance with environmental and social safeguards policies for
all activities financed under the Project. This arrangement will be maintained but scaled up under
the new Social Safety Net Project with the additional hiring/nomination of one person to oversee
the social aspects, including gender during project implementation. The Two World Bank
safeguards specialists will provide the 2 focal points with the needed support by strengthening
their social and environmental technical capacity.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include: women, youth and vulnerable groups, the beneficiary municipalities and
local communities, including possible private firms to be procured to undertake some of the
activities. The proposed Social Safety Net Project preparation process included a participatory
consultative process. Extensive public consultations have been conducted during the preparation
of ESMF and RPF to take into account the views and perceptions of communities and various
stakeholders regarding the design and scope of the project. FID has extensive experience engaging
public consultations and also in the Bank's disclosure policy. During the implementation of the
proposed project, the FID will initiate the public consultations as early as possible and will provide
all relevant materials in a form and language (s) acceptable and accessible to all beneficiaries
involved. Once cleared by the Bank, the ESMF and RPF, will be publicly disclosed both in-
country and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal.
Page 8 of 10


﻿B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              23-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           06-Mar-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Madagascar                                               27-Feb-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              23-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           06-Mar-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Madagascar                                               27-Feb-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [X] No [ ]  NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes[X] No[  ]  NA
World Bank's Infoshop?
Page 9 of 10


﻿Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
a          measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Andrea Vermehren
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name:                                      Date:
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


