                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA12159
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Mar-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Mar-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Ecuador                              Project ID:    P151439
                            Project Name:     EC Guayaquil Wastewater Management Project (P151439)
                            Task Team         Patricia Lopez Martinez
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         23-Feb-2015                          Estimated   22-Apr-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GWADR                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (70%), Wastewater Collection and
                                              Transportation (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Pollution management and environmental health (50%), City-wide Infrastructure
                                              and Service Delivery (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     247.82           Total Bank Financing:                  102.50
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 42.82
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   102.50
                              EC European Investment Bank                                                             102.50
                              Total                                                                                   247.82
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to improved sanitation services and
                           to reduce wastewater pollution in selected areas of the City of Guayaquil.


                                                                        Page 1 of 14
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed Project will achieve the above-mentioned objectives through the implementation of
                         four components. The pre-investment cost, including the preparation and development of feasibility
Public Disclosure Copy




                         studies, environmental impact assessment, and final designs, as well as acquisition of the land
                         required for the construction of the new WWTP is being financed by the municipality of Guayaquil
                         through EMAPAG EP for a total amount of US$6.5 million.

                         Component 1: Installation of household connections (US$18 million, with US$2.8 million of IBRD
                         loan financing). This component will finance the installation and rehabilitation of household
                         connections in specific areas within the southern districts of the city of Guayaquil. These districts are
                         equipped with a dense sewerage collection network which, although requiring rehabilitation of main
                         collectors to reduce infiltration, reaches and could serve almost all inhabited areas. Nonetheless,
                         despite a broad network coverage, just 82 percent of the households in the area are currently actually
                         connected to the system. Most of the remaining 18 percent (around 30,000 families) are poor
                         households located in Suburbio Oeste, Isla Trinitaria, Sector Guasmo and Casco Central sectors,
                         which are riparian areas of the Estero Salado estuary, where household toilets discharge directly to
                         the estuary or to reportedly poorly constructed and maintained pits or septic tanks, which contributes
                         to the degradation of the Estero Salado. Although many houses have a sewer passing in front, these
                         households have not been connected—despite a legal mandate to do so—mainly because of the cost
                         of the connection fee. Other reasons are technical issues (toilets mostly located at the back of their
                         houses or at a lower level than the condominial sewer branch) and lack of information about the
                         households’ entitlement to enjoy a social tariff and/or about the benefits that getting connected would
                         bring them in terms of improvement in living conditions.

                         Component 2: Rehabilitation of sewerage network (US$37 million, 100 percent financed by IBRD).
                         This component will finance the rehabilitation of the sewerage network (including sections of the
                         primary, secondary and tertiary network) in La Chala basin (Suburbio Oeste area), which, as stated
                         above, is riparian to the Estero Salado estuary. These main collectors in this area require urgent
Public Disclosure Copy




                         rehabilitation to reduce wastewater losses and enable their effective collection function. This
                         component of the Project aims at reducing infiltrations into the south sewerage subsystem, thus
                         contributing to reduction in contamination of the Estero Salado estuary from domestic wastewater. It
                         is estimated that of the total volume of wastewater collected and pumped in the pumping station of
                         La Chala, approximately 25 percent corresponds to ground water infiltration, which increases
                         wastewater pumping and treatment costs. Also, some segments of the Suburbio Oeste sewer network
                         that are meant to function as gravity mains get pressurized during periods of high tide, which again
                         suggests a high infiltration rate.

                         Component 3: Wastewater treatment and disposal facilities (US$161 million, with US$58.5 million
                         of IBRD loan financing). This component will finance the construction of a new WWTP, called Las
                         Esclusas WWTP, and associated pumping and transmission facilities to treat 100 percent of the
                         wastewater collected in the southern districts of the city of Guayaquil within the design year of 2045.
                         Wastewater generated in the south subsystem is currently collected in two sewer mains: (a) the
                         Guasmo sewer main, which conducts an average flow in dry weather of 0.60 m3/s into the Guasmo
                         H pumping station from where wastewater is pumped directly into the Guayas River through a 180 m
                         long pipeline and an underwater outfall diffuser, and (b) the Parson’s Sur sewer main, which
                         conducts 2.10 m3/s in dry weather into the La Pradera pretreatment station (equipped with a
                         mechanized pretreatment, a disinfection system that is presently out of service and an underwater
                         outfall diffuser). Therefore, wastewater is currently discharged into the Guayas River with very little


                                                                       Page 2 of 14
                         or no treatment, failing to comply with the contaminants concentration thresholds established in the
                         National Norm on Environmental Quality and Effluent Discharges (NCADE in its Spanish acronym).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sludge-to-energy process. The primary sludge generated from the wastewater treatment process
                         would be pressed, dewatered, and then stabilized through an anaerobic digestion process. Depending
                         on working conditions and on actual contaminant concentrations of the raw wastewater, the treatment
                         process may generate up to 94 tons of primary sludge. The WWTP feasibility study and design
                         includes the construction of a cogeneration facility using the digester gas from the anaerobic
                         digestion to produce electrical power (up to 1.3 MW) and heat. Electricity will be used to offset
                         power demands within the treatment facility (the cogeneration represents around 20 percent of the
                         energy consumption by the plant). This will reduce operating costs, which will reduce the pressure to
                         increase tariffs. Specifications for a minimum amount of electricity generation are being included in
                         the bidding documents for the WWTP. The process will require two co-generators in operation and a
                         third one as standby.

                         Disposal of bio-solids. The sludge management process described above may generate up to 80 tons
                         per day of bio-solids that will be transported and disposed in the municipal landfill. The standard that
                         has to be met for the sludge to be received at the landfill is a maximum humidity of 70 percent. The
                         landfill is currently receiving and managing over 4,500 tons of bio-solids per day, so the volume
                         arriving from the WWTP represents a minimal addition to the existing capacity. The municipal
                         landfill has all the required environmental permits to receive this type of waste. The Municipality is
                         issuing a certification with the commitment to receive the bio-solids from the Las Esclusas WWTP in
                         the current landfill for at least the first 10 years of operation. A master plan study for the future
                         management of bio-solids generated from Las Esclusas and other future WWTPs will be financed
                         under Component 4. This study will also look at options for reuse of sludge th rough the production
                         of compost (using secondary dewatering and structuring mix processes).

                         Component 4: Project management and administration, including communication plan and
                         management of social, environmental, and safety issues (US$5.4 million with US$4.2 million of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IBRD loan financing). This component will finance activities associated with overall project
                         management by EMAPAG EP, including Project-related audits, monitoring and evaluation,
                         equipment and training to strengthen the implementing entity, as well as individual consultants. It
                         will include support to EMAPAG EP related to the management of environmental and social issues
                         and safeguards. Specifically, this component will fund: (a) a study to set up a system for the
                         physiochemical, bacteriological, and limnologic monitoring of the Guayas River water quality; (b) a
                         study to set up a system for the physic-chemical, bacteriological, and limnologic monitoring of the
                         Estero Salado estuary water quality in relation with Project Components 1 and 2; (c) a master plan
                         for the management and final disposal or reuse of the bio-solids which will be produced at the Las
                         Esclusas WWTP and other planned WWTPs (Los Merinos, Asuncion City, and others); (d)
                         communication campaigns and technical assistance for community development and training; (e) a
                         Project impact evaluation (IE) assessment; and (f) an integrated urban water management study for
                         the planning of development and infrastructure in a growing flood-prone area of the city of
                         Guayaquil (Sistema Tres) which requires interventions in urban drainage and wastewater
                         management.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project Component One will finance the installation and rehabilitation of household connections
                         within the southern districts of the City of Guayaquil, including poor households located in Suburbio


                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                         Oeste, Trinitaria, Sector Guasmo and Casco Central neighborhoods. These are riparian districts of the
                         Estero Salado estuary, where household toilets discharge directly to the estuary or to reportedly
                         poorly constructed and maintained pits or septic tanks, which contributes to the degradation of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Estero Salado. Component Two will finance the rehabilitation of the sewerage network in La Chala
                         basin within the Suburbio Oeste area, which as stated above, is riparian to the Salado estuary.
                         Component Three involves the construction of a WWTP that will directly benefit the central and
                         southern districts of Guayaquil, located within La Pradera and Guasmo wastewater sewer
                         watersheds. The proposed Las Esclusas WWTP will be constructed on the southern shore of the
                         Cobina estuary, in the proximity of its intersection with the Guayas River.

                         The wastewater collection and transportation network of Guayaquil serves 1,705,000 people
                         (representing around 80% of the population of the city) through a sewer network composed of 3,926
                         km of sewer mains and 61 pump stations that drains into the Daule and Guayas Rivers. Rain waters
                         are collected by a separate sewer system that drains into the Estero Salado. There is an existing
                         WWTP (lagoon system) presently operating and serving the northern part of the city.

                         The City of Guayaquil is surrounded by the Daule and Guayas Rivers on the East and by the Estero
                         Salado Estuary on the West. The Guayas River and its tributaries form the largest watershed in South
                         America draining into the Pacific Ocean, with an extension of 32,130 km2 partially covering eight
                         provinces of the country. The Guayas River rises at the intersection of the Daule and the Babahoyo,
                         located 5km north of the city, and has a flow that varies from 230 m3/s in the dry season (60 percent
                         coming from Babahoyo) to 1500 m3/s during the rainy season (66 percent from Babahoyo). Due to
                         its proximity to the ocean, at the vicinity of Guayaquil, the Guayas presents the characteristics of an
                         estuary: its water is saline (with a salinity range of 5,000 -10,000 mg/l) and its actual flow,
                         influenced by the tides ebb and flow patterns, varies from -15,000 to +15,000 m3/s during the cycle.
                         The Guayas River is affected by several wastewater discharges and other pollution sources (e.g.,
                         storm water runoff) upstream of the Project location with none or very limited treatment.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Carlos Vargas Bejarano (GENDR)
                         Martin Henry Lenihan (GSURR)
                         Robert H. Montgomery (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental               Yes            The proposed Project has been classified as an
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      Environmental Category A due to the type and size of the
                                                                    Project Component Three, the construction of a 3.6 m3/s
                                                                    WWTP. The overall Project impact is expected to be
                                                                    positive due to the improved effluent quality that will be
                                                                    discharged into the Guayas River and the reduction of
                                                                    untreated wastewater that is presently leaking from the
                                                                    existing sewer system and affecting shallow ground and
                                                                    surrounding surface water bodies, like the "Salado"
                                                                    Estuary.

                                                                    For Component Three (Las Esclusas WWTP and works),
                                                                    an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)



                                                                      Page 4 of 14
                         has been developed by an international consulting firm
                         (Hazen Sawyer) with the support of a local environmental
                         consulting firm. The Terms of Reference for the ESIA
Public Disclosure Copy




                         were approved by the Ministry of Environment in
                         Ecuador (MAE). The ESIA includes an assessment of
                         impacts, including mathematical modeling of potential
                         downstream impacts during plant operation, and an
                         Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP).
                         The WWTP will treat wastewater from the central and
                         southern districts of Guayaquil located within the “La
                         Pradera” and “Guasmo” wastewater sewer watersheds and
                         will be constructed on the southern shore of the Cobina
                         estuary, in the proximity of its intersection with the
                         Guayas River.

                         The Guayas River is one of the largest watersheds in
                         South America draining into the Pacific Ocean, with an
                         extension of 32,130 km2 partially covering eight
                         provinces of the country. The Guayas River, is near the
                         intersection of the Daule and the Babahoyo, located 5km
                         north of the city, and has a flow that varies from 230 m3/s
                         in the dry season to 1,500 m3/s during the rainy season.
                         The river water is saline and its water quality is affected
                         by several wastewater discharges and other pollution
                         sources (e.g., storm water runoff) upstream of the Project
                         location with none or very limited treatment.

                         The WWTP is part of the Municipality of Guayaquil’s
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Municipal Plan for the Universalization of Wastewater
                         Management Services. The Plan includes the expansion of
                         the sewer network, installation of household connections,
                         and the rehabilitation and construction of five wastewater
                         treatment facilities –Las Esclusas, Los Merinos (existing
                         lagoon system), Mucho Lote, Puerto Azul and Mi Lote- to
                         treat all the wastewaters generated in the city. Project
                         Component Three includes a WWTP (mechanized
                         pretreatment, chemically enhanced primary treatment
                         (CEPT), disinfection system, underwater outfall diffuser,
                         hypochlorite production, sludge digester, diffuser outfall
                         in Guyas River), adaptation of the Guasmo H pump
                         station and the construction of a new pipeline to drive
                         pumped water to the new WWTP, and decommissioning
                         of La Pradera pre-treatment station and closing existing
                         discharge and construction of a new pump station and
                         pipeline to drive pumped water to the new Las Esclusas
                         WWTP. The design will allow compliance with current
                         environmental regulations in Ecuador. EMAPAG EP has



                          Page 5 of 14
                         planned for the future expansion of the WWTP to enable
                         secondary treatment, if it was required by Ecuadorean
                         environmental regulations in the future. Alternative
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analyses in terms of WWTP technological and design
                         options and site locations were conducted as part of the
                         regional water planning work (Water Supply and
                         Sewerage Master Plan from 2004 and updated in 2011)
                         and the WWTP feasibility study and design and also in
                         the ESIA. The potential risk of flooding at the WWTP has
                         been addressed in the project design. The main potential
                         negative impacts include: (a) removal of topsoil and
                         changes in terrain and topography; (b) contamination by
                         solid or liquid wastes; (c) generation of dust, combustion
                         gases, noise and vibrations; (d) odor generation; (e)
                         inconveniences caused by urban and traffic congestion; (f)
                         impact on shallow ground quality and groundwater level;
                         (g) impacts on Guayas River water quality; (h) alteration
                         of landscape; (i) worker health and safety; (j) disposal of
                         sludge, and (k) expropriations of land for WWTP.
                         Potential positive impacts identified include: (a) reduction
                         of odors in La Pradera pump station due to its closure; (b)
                         reduction/elimination of overflows of wastewater in the
                         streets; (c) improvement in Guayas River water quality;
                         and (d) local job creation. The ESMP includes the
                         following ten programs (that include 36 environmental
                         measures and 122 activities): Plan for Prevention and
                         Mitigation of Impacts; Handling and Management Plan of
                         Wastes; Monitoring and Measurement Plan; Plan for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Restoration of Degraded Areas; Occupational Health and
                         Security Plan; Community Relationship Plan; Training
                         Plan; Contingency Plan; Abandonment Plan; and
                         Environmental Monitoring Plan. Depending on actual
                         operating conditions in the raw wastewater, the treatment
                         and sludge management process may generate up to 80 to
                         94 tons per day of bio-solids that would be disposed of in
                         the municipal landfill. The primary sludge generated from
                         the wastewater treatment process would be pressed,
                         dewatered and stabilized before transportation and final
                         disposal at the sanitary landfill. The municipal landfill has
                         all the required environmental permits to receive this
                         waste. The landfill has the capacity to receive municipal
                         waste, including the expected volume of sludge during at
                         least the first ten years of operation of the wastewater
                         treatment facility, based on its current rate of exploitation.
                         Plans for the future expansion or the construction of a
                         new municipal sanitary landfill are under discussion
                         between municipal and environmental authorities which



                          Page 6 of 14
                         will allow the continuation of the sludge disposal in this
                         manner. A Master Plan study for the management of bio-
                         solids generated from Las Esclusas and other future
Public Disclosure Copy




                         WWTPs will be financed under Component Four. This
                         study will look at options for the reutilization of sludge
                         through the production of compost (using secondary
                         dewatering and structuring mix processes).

                         The draft ESIA was disseminated and consulted locally in
                         September and October 2014 and included a formal
                         Public Audience, several permanent Public Information
                         Centers, and informal informative meetings. Public
                         consultations were coordinated and approved by an
                         independent Facilitator appointed by the MAE. Main
                         comments received focused on: (a) requests for proper
                         maintenance of the sewerage collection and transportation
                         systems to avoid blockages and overflows, (b) statements
                         expressing acceptance and support for the Project, (c)
                         concerns about proper odor control from the wastewater
                         treatment plant, (d) concerns over ensuring timely
                         completion of the works, and (e) concerns about
                         inconveniences that could be caused by rupture of street
                         pavement, amongst others. The draft ESIA was also
                         reviewed by 3 independent experts. Comments were
                         addressed in an updated final ESIA. The ESIA is pending
                         approved by the MAE.

                         For Components One and Two, an ESMP was developed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for each component and includes an assessment of
                         potential impacts and proposed mitigation and monitoring
                         measures. Component One will finance the installation
                         and rehabilitation of household connections in specific
                         areas within the southern districts of the City of
                         Guayaquil, where household toilets discharge directly into
                         the estuary or to reportedly poorly constructed and
                         maintained pits or septic tanks, which contributes to the
                         degradation of the Estero Salado. The works involve
                         establishing a connection from an existing sewer line in
                         the street to a house and the potential environmental
                         impacts are relatively minor. Component Two involves
                         the rehabilitation of the sewerage network in La Chala
                         basin within the “Suburbio Oeste” area and will improve
                         sewer efficiency by reducing infiltrations and contribute
                         to the reduction of the contamination of the Salado
                         estuary from domestic wastewater. The works should
                         have relatively minor to moderate potential negative
                         environmental impacts during construction (e.g.,



                          Page 7 of 14
                                                        generation of noise and dust, minor traffic disruption,
                                                        disposal of waste) and can be readily mitigated with
                                                        standard measures established in the ESMP. Even less
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        impacts are associated with works in Component One.
                                                        The ESMPs include a chance find procedure applicable to
                                                        natural habitat protection measures, as needed, given the
                                                        proximity to the works and the Guayas River and the
                                                        Salado Estuary. The draft ESMPs for Components One
                                                        and Two were disclosed and consulted in January 2015,
                                                        and revised ESMPs have been prepared by EMAPAG EP
                                                        prior to Bank Appraisal and disclosed in country and in
                                                        the Bank’s website. Compliance with the ESMP will be
                                                        included as part of the construction contracts.

                                                        The ESMPs for Components One and Two include a
                                                        description of the Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM)
                                                        put in place by EMAPAG EP for the Project. The system
                                                        includes three tiers for addressing and resolving grievance
                                                        and complaints: 1) the contractor’s appointed focal points
                                                        for redress solving (who will be present in the project
                                                        intervention area); 2) EMAPG EP’s Directorate for Social
                                                        Communication and Community Management; and 3)
                                                        external mediation. A description of the GRM and contact
                                                        details for addressing any queries before the contractor
                                                        has started the works has been posted in EMAPAG EP
                                                        website in the following link: http://www.emapag-ep.gob.
                                                        ec/emapag/?page_id=731
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   No potential significant impacts on natural habitats were
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.04                           identified for Components One, Two or Three; and while
                                                        the project works should have a positive environmental
                                                        impact on the Guayas River and the Salado Estuary, the
                                                        Natural Habitats Policy (OP/BP 4.04) hasbeen triggered
                                                        on a precautionary basis due to Components 1 and 2 and
                                                        their proximity to the Salado Estuary. Applicable
                                                        measures have been included in the ESMPs for each
                                                        component as needed under OP/BP 4.01.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    The Project works to be performed will be located in
                                                        urbanized and/or in industrial areas. There are no forests
                                                        or mangrove swamps located within or in the immediate
                                                        proximity of the project intervention area. The project will
                                                        not affect forests or forest dependent communities, nor
                                                        will it involve changes in the management of forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     The Project does not involve the purchase or use of any
                                                        significant quantities of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   While no potential significant impacts on physical cultural
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           resources were identified for Components One, Two or



                                                         Page 8 of 14
                                                        Three, this is policy is triggered and an archeological
                                                        monitoring program and chance find procedure are
                                                        included in the ESMPs as a preventive measure.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    There are no indigenous peoples present that meet the
                         BP 4.10                        criteria defined by OP 4.10 in the Project area. According
                                                        to the 2010 census, less than 1.4% of the population of
                                                        Guayaquil identify themselves as indigenous. This
                                                        population is not concentrated in the Project area, nor
                                                        does it have a collective attachment to land in that area,
                                                        which is used for modern urban residential or industrial
                                                        purposes.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   The water treatment plant will be located on a site of
                         OP/BP 4.12                     40.74 has, which has been the property of 6 different
                                                        private owners. Expropriation has been ongoing since
                                                        2011, with two property owners contesting the original
                                                        valuations in court (two other cases went to court because
                                                        the owners were not available due to liquidation or legal
                                                        presence in another country). In one of the contested
                                                        cases, the site hosts a radio antenna for a local radio
                                                        station along with the house of an employee of that
                                                        station. The value of the structure and need to resettle the
                                                        occupant was not taken into account in the original
                                                        assessment of the site, but were subsequently the subject
                                                        of remedial measures agreed between the owner and the
                                                        client, which is documented in the remedial RAP.
                                                        Another site belongs to an aquaculture business, where
                                                        the commercial value of the land was fully taken into
                                                        account as part of the valuation. The remaining sites are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        unoccupied and have not been used for either economic or
                                                        residential purposes. In the case of one of these vacant
                                                        sites, the owners also contested the original municipal
                                                        valuation, which was subsequently validated by an
                                                        independent court appointed expert (the valuation is now
                                                        being appealed by the owners, with a final court sentence
                                                        expected in April 2015). Despite the court cases, judicial
                                                        orders allow the client to occupy the sites as the owners
                                                        only contested the price, rather than the declaration of
                                                        public good. In the meantime, the funds to pay the owners
                                                        have been transferred to the judges responsible for
                                                        adjudicating the sentences.

                                                        The client has prepared a Remedial Resettlement Action
                                                        Plan explaining the extent to which the expropriation
                                                        process conforms to the World Bank Policy on
                                                        Involuntary Resettlement, and the additional measures
                                                        required to address gaps identified. The RAP
                                                        demonstrates how for the most part, the client offered


                                                         Page 9 of 14
                                                                       replacement cost as compensation for the land to be
                                                                       acquired by using market comparators as a basis for
                                                                       valuation. The only exception was the site of the radio
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       antenna which was the subject of remedial measures
                                                                       documented in the RAP.

                                                                       In the case of Component 2, no resettlement impacts are
                                                                       anticipated as the works will be taking place in residential
                                                                       neighborhoods with little or no encroachment on the
                                                                       sidewalks, and using trenchless technology in order to
                                                                       minimize impacts. In terms of associated facilities, the
                                                                       landfill for the WWTP has sufficient capacity, and the
                                                                       land necessary for the expansion is vacant land that was
                                                                       expropriated by the municipality at full market value.
                                                                       Aggregate material for construction will be sourced from
                                                                       pre-identified private suppliers, and as such will not
                                                                       require temporary land acquisition. The Remedial
                                                                       Resettlement Action Plan has been reviewed and
                                                                       approved by the Bank and publicly disclosed prior to
                                                                       Appraisal. The remedial measures agreed as part of the
                                                                       Remedial Resettlement Action Plan were consulted on
                                                                       through a series of four meetings between EMAPAG and
                                                                       the affected people (the owner and the resident). The
                                                                       funds necessary for finalizing the pending expropriations
                                                                       are held in trust by the Judge responsible for adjudicating
                                                                       the individual cases and will be available to be paid to the
                                                                       PAPs once these cases have been finalized.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             The Project will neither support the construction or
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4.37                                       rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
                                                                       investments which rely on services of existing dams.
                            Projects on International   No             The Project will not finance activities involving the use or
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       potential pollution of international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed        No             The Project will not finance activities in disputed areas as
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                           defined in the policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The overall Project impact is expected to be positive due to the improved effluent quality that will
                              be discharged into the Guayas River and the reduction of untreated wastewater that is presently
                              leaking from the existing sewer system and affecting shallow ground and surrounding surface
                              water bodies, like the "Salado" Estuary.

                              There are no anticipated negative large scale, significant or irreversible environmental impacts
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities


                                                                        Page 10 of 14
                           in the project area:
                           There are no anticipated negative indirect or long term environmental impacts.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.
                           The construction of the Las Esclusas WWTP is part of the Municipality of Guayaquil's Program
                           for the Universalization of Sewerage and Wastewater Treatment Services in the Southern part of
                           the City. The analysis of alternatives and selection of site locations for the treatment plant was
                           conducted in 2004 as part of the Master Plan for Water Supply and Sewerage Services of
                           Guayaquil, which was updated in 2011. The Master Plan considers the expansion of the sewer
                           network and the installation of household connections to reach an effective access rate of close to
                           100%; the rehabilitation of the oldest and most degraded segments of the existing networks to
                           reduce infiltration; and the rehabilitation and construction of five wastewater treatment facilities,
                           including Las Esclusas, to treat all the wastewater generated in the city.

                           As part of the Feasibility Study for the Treatment of Wastewater in the City of Guayaquil which
                           started in 2012, an analysis of alternative technologies was undertaken for the treatment of the
                           wastewater flows collected in the four wastewater catchment basins that compose the main sewer
                           system of the city: the Guasmo H, Las Praderas, Los Merinos and Progreso subsystems. The
                           selection of the treatment technology to be employed in the different subsystems was undertaken
                           using multi-criteria decision making methods. Each of the prescreened technologies was modelled
                           and a simulation was run to evaluate its performance and undertake a pre-dimensioning of the
                           different phases and elements of the treatment process using different criteria (including
                           environmental). The CEPT option was retained since it allows to consistently meet the authorized
                           regulatory limits set for the Total Suspended Solids (TSS), Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD)
                           and all other pollutant concentrations, and eases the implementation of effective odor control.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For Component Three (Las Esclusas WWTP and works), an Environmental and Social Impact
                           Assessment (ESIA) has been developed by an international consulting firm with the support of a
                           local environmental consulting firm. The ESIA includes an assessment of impacts, including
                           mathematical modeling of potential downstream impacts during plant operation, and an
                           Environmental Management Plan (ESMP). For Components One and Two, an ESMP was
                           developed for each component and includes an assessment of potential impacts and proposed
                           mitigation and monitoring measures. See OP/BP 4.01 for details.

                           A Project Implementation Unit (PIU) established under EMAPAG's General Manager, will be
                           responsible for day-to-day Project implementation, including environmental aspects. The PIU has
                           been staffed with a dedicated qualified environmental safeguards specialist who will be
                           responsible for the supervision of environmental safeguard requirements. Any additional
                           environmental safeguards support required by the Project would be assessed during Project
                           implementation.
                           The operation and maintenance of the Project, once constructed, will be the responsibility of
                           INTERAGUA, which is the private consortium to which EMAPAG EP has delegated the
                           management of Guayaquil’s drinking water, wastewater and drainage systems. EMAPAG EP has
                           experience managing environmental safeguards associated to multilateral financing institutions,
                           particularly with Corporacion Andina de Fomento (CAF) and Inter-American Development Bank
                           (IADB) loans. INTERAGUA has environmental staff, experience managing wastewater treatment


                                                                     Page 11 of 14
                           facilities and its management system is ISO 14001, ISO 18001 and ISO 9001 certified. Specific
                           details on environmental and social safeguards responsibilities and supervision has been
                           established in the Project’s Operational Manual.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           A Remedial Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been prepared for Component Three related to
                           the WWTP site which has been the property of six different private owners. Expropriation has
                           been ongoing since 2011.The main remedial measures necessary involved additional
                           compensation to the owner of the site of a radio antenna, which was also host to a residential
                           structure occupied by an employee of the owner. These compensations covered the cost of re-
                           locating the antenna without the interruption of the signal, and the cost of replacing the residential
                           structure of the employee. There was also an agreement that the employee would maintain
                           employment with the owner. As a contingency, the client further outlined an agreement to monitor
                           the situation of the employee, and to provide an alternative residence and employment should, for
                           any reason, these not materialize following relocation. In addition to the RAP, the client completed
                           a beneficiary assessment which served as the basis for the design of the Social Management
                           Chapter of the Project Operational Manual.

                           The implementation capacity of EMAPAG and the Municipality of Guayaquil, for the social
                           management of this operation is considered high. EMAPAG has a dedicated and qualified social
                           management team within the Directorate for Social Communication and Community Management
                           (Dirección de Comunicación Social - Gestión Comunitaria) made up of a director, two analysts
                           and three assistants. This Directorate will be responsible for social safeguards management and
                           supervision and for the management of the Grievance Redress Mechanism for the Project, in close
                           coordination with the PIU. This group of professionals has experience in successfully managing
                           the roll out of communication campaigns and community consultation processes, facilitating
                           conflict resolution and grievance redress, building the capacity of community based organizations,
                           as well as the resettlement of households affected by the works of EMAPAG. In order to support
                           the implementation of the social management of this project, it has been agreed that two additional
                           social specialists will be recruited. In terms of land acquisition, the municipality of Guayaquil has
Public Disclosure Copy




                           decades of experience, having established a dedicated area within its legal department in 2002 to
                           work alongside the Valuation and Cadaster Department. The majority of expropriation cases
                           (80%) are settled through agreement with the owner, rather than recourse to the judicial system.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The draft ESIA was disseminated and consulted locally in September and October 2014 and
                           included a formal Public Audience, several permanent Public Information Centers, and informal
                           informative meetings. Public consultations were coordinated and approved by an independent
                           Facilitator appointed by the MAE. The main comments received focused on: (a) requests for
                           proper maintenance of the sewerage collection and transportation systems to avoid blockages and
                           overflows, (b) statements expressing acceptance and support for the Project, (c) concerns about
                           proper odor control from the wastewater treatment plant, (d) concerns over ensuring timely
                           completion of the works, and (e) concerns about inconveniences that could be caused by rupture of
                           street pavement amongst others. The draft ESIA was also reviewed by three independent experts.
                           Comments were addressed in an updated final ESIA. The draft ESMPs for Components One and
                           Two were disclosed and consulted in January 2015, and revised ESMPs have been prepared by
                           EMAPAG EP prior to Bank appraisal. Compliance with the ESMPs will be included as part of the
                           construction contracts.



                                                                     Page 12 of 14
                           The remedial measures agreed as part of the remedial resettlement action were consulted on
                           through a series of four meetings between EMAPAG and the affected people (the owner and the
                           resident). The other land acquisition cases involved a minimum of two meetings between the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           affected people and the municipality – one meeting to discuss their rights, followed by another to
                           discuss the terms of expropriation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Dec-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      11-Mar-2015
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ecuador                                                          16-Dec-2014
                           Comments: http://www.emapag-ep.gob.ec/emapag/?page_id=731
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06-Feb-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Feb-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ecuador                                                          20-Feb-2015
                           Comments: http://www.emapag-ep.gob.ec/emapag/?page_id=731
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated    Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          property?

                                                                    Page 13 of 14
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Patricia Lopez Martinez
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Glenn S. Morgan (SA)                              Date: 02-Mar-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Wambui G. Gichuri (PMGR)                         Date: 02-Mar-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 14 of 14
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
