                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC2587

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Guatemala                        Project ID:       P143495
                            Project Name:       GT Urban Infrastructure (P143495)
                            Task Team           Angelica Nunez del Campo
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           01-Apr-2014                      Estimated         28-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      LCSDU                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Sub-national government administration (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Urban services and housing for the poor (70%), Other social development (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        40.00                Total Bank Financing:         40.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                          40.00
                              Total                                                                          40.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           9.       The proposed Project PDO is to improve the quality of life of citizens in selected, vulnerable
                           urban communities located in the Mancomunidad del Sur (MS) through increased access to basic
                           infrastructure and interventions targeted to reduce vulnerability to natural disasters and crime and
                           violence.
                           C. Project Description
                           11. Description: To address the interrelated challenges that characterize the economically and
                         socially vulnerable communities rapidly expanding on the outskirts of the metropolitan area, in the
                         Mancomunidad del Sur (MS), the Project proposes a multi-layered approach that combines:
                         interventions targeted towards mitigating crime and violence, upgrades to quality of and access to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         basic infrastructure, and interventions to address the vulnerability of these areas to natural disasters.
                         The Project envisages investing both in 'hard' infrastructure upgrades and ‘soft’ activities (e.g.,
                         training in conflict resolution) that would reduce crime and violence and risk of natural hazards, as
                         well as improve quality of services accessible to citizens.

                         12. The Project offers an innovative and needed framework for improving conditions in crime and
                         violence-afflicted, poor urban communities. The Bank is well placed to support an integrated
                         approach to urban upgrading that addresses social vulnerability given its previous experience
                         supporting the implementation of similar projects in Latin America. These projects include the
                         Honduras Barrio Ciudad Project (P088319), the Honduras Safer Municipalities Project (P130819),
                         the Jamaica Inner City Basic Services for the Poor Project (P091299), and the Bolivia Urban
                         Infrastructure Project (P083979). One key difference between these previous experiences and the
                         proposed Project is the intended supra-municipal approach of the proposed operation. Working with
                         an integral MS vision rather than only at municipal level is expected to enhance the Project’s ability
                         to find synergies between the neighborhoods (notably in economic development and crime and
                         violence prevention) and improve the spatial organization of the Guatemala City Metropolitan Area.
                         Such an exercise would constitute a first attempt towards integrated planning between the
                         municipalities in the outskirts of Guatemala City. If successful, this Project could serve as a 'pilot'
                         which could be replicated and expanded to other municipalities in Guatemala.

                         13. To achieve the PDO, the Project would screen candidate neighborhoods to be targeted by the
                         Project on the basis of 'eligibility criteria' that include: demographics (economic and social
                         indicators), crime and violence statistics, and access to infrastructure. The Project would leverage
                         information from the urban spatial plan, comprised of geo-referenced cartography that will integrate
                         information on land use (including informal settlements), natural hazards, key infrastructure (streets,
                         water and sanitation networks, public transport routes) densities, and GIS-based data on crime and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         violence for the municipalities within the MS. The team anticipates that the data will show that the
                         most vulnerable communities are characterized by a statistically significant correlation between high
                         crime and low access to public infrastructure/ services.

                         14. Selected neighborhoods will prepare proposals for financing on the basis of community-driven
                         diagnosis to identify infrastructure needs and priorities as well as the main drivers of vulnerability.
                         Proposals will be further discussed and developed with the MS and the relevant municipality to
                         ensure consistency with the municipal and regional development plans. The agreed neighborhood
                         proposals – or neighborhood plans – which will include a combination of infrastructure works and
                         social interventions for project financing will be the main unit of analysis for costing and for
                         safeguards assessment. The list of infrastructure works in each neighborhood plan will be packaged
                         to be procured under one contract to simplify implementation, which should occur with community
                         supervision and monitoring. Social and capacity building interventions would be provided in
                         coordination with the infrastructure works and other agencies and/or ministries.

                         15. The proposed Project is expected to have three components:

                         16. Component 1: Integrated Urban and Social Interventions. This component would finance
                         comprehensive packages including infrastructure improvements as well as social interventions to
                         respond to vulnerability to crime and violence and natural disasters. The interventions could include,
                           inter alia, street and sidewalk paving, installation of public lighting, drainage connections,
                           stabilization walls, improvement of public spaces, community infrastructure, reforestation, skills-
                           training programs, community-driven maintenance, and gender-based violence prevention activities,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           among others.

                           17. Component 2: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building. The proposed component would
                           finance technical assistance and capacity building to municipalities and the MS to strengthen
                           regional and municipal planning processes and urban management, and to design crime and violence
                           prevention strategies and community-driven approaches for disaster risk reduction and asset
                           maintenance.

                           18. Component 3: Project Management Monitoring and Reporting. This component would finance
                           the set-up and staffing of a Project Implementation Unit (“PIU”) in INFOM, plus the necessary
                           technical assistance, capacity building and equipment necessary for project implementation,
                           monitoring, evaluation and reporting.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Because the Project will develop a spatial urban plan and eligibility criteria for neighborhood
                           eligibility, the exact location of sub-projects will not be known at the time of appraisal. However,
                           because the Project will focus on rehabilitating infrastructure inpoor urban areas, the communities
                           targeted by the Project will likely be characterized by the informal occupation of public land and
                           encroachment of private structures on the right of way of infrastructure subject to rehabilitation.
                           Similarly there are risks of potential environmental and social impacts related to location of targeted
                           neighborhoods in areas that can be prone to natural disasters (landslides, flooding, erosion, etc),
                           protected areas, or not suitable to subproject development due to slopes, geological characteristics of
                           the area, etc. Safeguard management will be reassessed during preparation of the proposed project.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Currently there is limited experience in applying the World Bank’s Safeguard Policies among
                           potential implementing agencies. Therefore, capacity building will be required during preparation
                           and implementation. During preparation this would involve training and mentoring agency officials,
                           along the recruitment of a specialist consultant to prepare and disclose the ESMF and RPF. During
                           implementation, the implementing agency will need to recruit environmental and social specialists
                           dedicated to the ensuring compliance with the ESMF and RPF. Also, it may be necessary to recruit
                           community based social specialists to ensure implementation of the social section of the ESMF.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (LCSEN)
                           Martin Henry Lenihan (LCSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              This policy is triggered given that the type of
                           BP 4.01                                               works to be financed and the magnitude of their
                                                                                 impact are limited and easily identifiable, with
                                                                                 mitigation measures readily available.
                                                                                 Following the Operational Policy the project
                                                             would be “Category B”.

                                                             An Environmental and Social Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Framework (ESMF) will be developed during
                                                             project preparation in order to ensure adequate
                                                             environmental and social management during
                                                             the project implementation. The unit of analysis
                                                             for environmental assessment during
                                                             implementation will be the community specific
                                                             investments plans (or neighborhood plans)
                                                             which will identify the types of specific
                                                             investments prioritized by the community.

                                                             Also, during project preparation the client will
                                                             need to consider broader social issues
                                                             surrounding sub-project investments. These
                                                             issues include community consultation,
                                                             communicating with non-literate and non-
                                                             Spanish speaking groups, ensuring vulnerable
                                                             groups (women, youth, and ethnic minorities)
                                                             are engaged in community consultation, and
                                                             resolving complaints and conflicts surrounding
                                                             sub-project selection and implementation. It is
                                                             proposed that the social section of the ESMF
                                                             deals comprehensively with these issues.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   The team does not expect negative impacts on
                                                             natural habitats as the sub-projects will be
                                                             implemented in consolidated urban areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Whether or not the policy is triggered will
                                                             depend on the type of activities (to be identified
                                                             during preparation) that might be supported
                                                             under community investment plans. If the policy
                                                             is triggered, the ESMF will include appropriate
                                                             screening provisions and management measures.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            TBD   Due to the potential location of the sub-projects
                                                             in consolidated urban areas the team does not
                                                             expect negative environmental impacts on forest
                                                             areas, but the sub-projects could potentially
                                                             support municipal forest reserves in order to
                                                             improve the quality of life of the surrounding
                                                             community.

                                                             Whether or not the policy is triggered will
                                                             depend on the type of activities (to be identified
                                                             during preparation) that might be supported
                                                             under community investment plans. If the policy
                                                                 is triggered, the ESMF will include appropriate
                                                                 screening provisions and management measures.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    This policy is not triggered because the Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 will not finance any agricultural investments
                                                                 that may result in the use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   This Policy is triggered given Guatemala’s rich
                         BP 4.11                                 archaeological and cultural resources and the
                                                                 likelihood of the Project to support works
                                                                 requiring excavations. The ESMF will include
                                                                 Chance Find Procedures (CFP) as well as
                                                                 measures to screen for and manage potential
                                                                 impacts on cultural heritage or property that
                                                                 could be affected by neighborhood development
                                                                 plans.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   It is possible that the Bank’s Policy on
                                                                 Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) will be triggered
                                                                 due to the ethnically diverse nature of the
                                                                 communities that will benefit from the project.
                                                                 The project can provide an opportunity to
                                                                 engage with indigenous peoples organizations
                                                                 within these communities as part of the
                                                                 participatory planning process, and to design
                                                                 culturally appropriate interventions.

                                                                 The need to trigger this policy will be
                                                                 determined during the course of project
                                                                 preparation based on: (i) the identification of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 indigenous peoples living collectively within the
                                                                 beneficiary neighborhoods, and (ii) if
                                                                 indigenous communities are identified that
                                                                 could meet OP 4.10’s definition of “forced
                                                                 severance”, i.e., their urban migration was
                                                                 caused by violent conflict, natural calamities,
                                                                 land dispossession, government resettlement or
                                                                 integration of their lands within urban areas (iii)
                                                                 the existence of customary cultural, economic,
                                                                 social, or political institutions that are separate
                                                                 from those of the dominant society.

                                                                 The need to trigger this policy will be
                                                                 determined during project preparation. If the
                                                                 policy is triggered, the social section of the
                                                                 ESMF will serve as the Indigenous Peoples
                                                                 Policy Framework, and would include measures
                                                                 to ensure indigenous peoples communities
                                                                 benefit from the design of culturally appropriate
                                                                 investments and access to culturally appropriate
                                                                                                                                 decision making mechanisms. An indigenous
                                                                                                                                 peoples policy framework is appropriate as the
                                                                                                                                 exact communities for intervention will not be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 defined during preparation.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           For resettlement, infrastructure sub-projects will
                                 4.12                                                                                            be small scale investments implemented on
                                                                                                                                 public land. In participating Municipalities
                                                                                                                                 target communities are likely to be informally
                                                                                                                                 planned with unclear property boundaries and
                                                                                                                                 possible encroachment on infrastructure rights
                                                                                                                                 of way. Therefore, even if the project does not
                                                                                                                                 require land acquisition or the displacement of
                                                                                                                                 residential households, it is possible that civil
                                                                                                                                 works will impact private structures
                                                                                                                                 encroaching or occupying public land.
                                                                                                                                 Disaster risk reduction measures will be limited
                                                                                                                                 to small-scale structural and non-structural
                                                                                                                                 measures, but will not include any significant
                                                                                                                                 collective resettlement. Also, the Resettlement
                                                                                                                                 Policy Framework will include robust criteria to
                                                                                                                                 screen for and manage voluntary land donations.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not finance the construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of Dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            The project will not finance activities that will
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            result in the extraction or addition of water or
                                                                                                                                 waste products to international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project will not finance any activities in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 7.60                                                                                            areas subject to international disputes.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Nov-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             Because the project will develop a spatial urban plan and criteria for neighborhood eligibility, the
                             exact location of sub-projects will not be known during project preparation. In this regard, an
                             Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) should be developed by the client
Public Disclosure Copy




                             during project preparation and before appraisal. The team is expecting to start with the preparation
                             of this instrument during June 2013 and aims to disclose it by October 2013. During this time the
                             team will conduct the necessary analysis to determine whether or not the indigenous peoples
                             policy is triggered through analyzing census data and social research conducted in the target
                             municipalities, discussions with planners and community workers working at the municipal level,
                             and discussions with expert social scientists.
                             The ESMF will include a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) detailing how the client will
                             comply with OP/BP 4.12, the steps they will take to screen sub-projects for resettlement impacts,
                             and to prepare site-specific resettlement plans as needed. The ESMF should also include a social
                             management section dealing with key social concerns such as communication, consultation,
                             conflict resolution and complaints handling). This social management framework will be based on
                             municipal level social analysis that will include consultation with key stakeholders (including civil
                             society and community based organizations), analysis of secondary data, and focus group
                             meetings with groups of potential beneficiaries. If the indigenous peoples policy is triggered, the
                             framework will also include mechanisms to engage with indigenous organizations and groups in
                             the community planning process and the design of culturally sensitive investments. This section of
                             the ESMF will serve as the Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (IPPF). An IPPF is appropriate
                             because the communities which will benefit from the project will not be identified prior to
                             appraisal.
                             Currently, the client has limited experience in the application of the Bank environmental and
                             social safeguards. In order to prepare the ESMF the client will need to hire consultants with
                             experience in social and environmental management during preparation, who will also be
                             responsible for training client representatives and municipal officials in the implementation of the
                             framework. Also, during implementation the client will need hire dedicated environmental and
                             social development specialists to oversee the application of the ESMF in the field.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:       Name: Angelica Nunez del Campo

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                               Date: 06-Aug-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Anna Wellenstein (SM)                               Date: 05-Mar-2014
