                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA5999
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Congo, Republic of                  Project ID:    P143849
                            Project Name:      Health Sector Project (P143849)
                            Task Team          Hadia Nazem Samaha
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          28-Oct-2013                         Estimated   16-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTHW                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Child health (25%), Health system performance (40%), Population and
                                              reproductive health (35%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     120.00           Total Bank Financing:                   10.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          100.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                  10.00
                              Health Results-based Financing                                                               10.00
                              Total                                                                                       120.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to increase utilization and quality of maternal and child health
                           services in targeted areas.
                            3. Project Description

                                                                        Page 1 of 11
                         Component 1: Improvement of utilization and quality of health services at health facilities through
                         Performance-Based Financing (PBF)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.       This component would be supported by the Government's own funds, IDA resources and a
                         grant from the Health Results Innovation Trust Fund (HRITF). A PBF approach will be introduced
                         throughout the entire health system covering health facilities, first level referral hospitals, and health
                         administration at district (CSS), departmental (DDS) and select departments at central Ministry of
                         Health (MOH) level. Local civil society organizations will be selected and trained to become
                         contract management and verification agents. Grassroots organizations will be engaged to measure
                         service use and client satisfaction and community health committees (COSAs) will be strengthened.
                         As there is a considerable and growing private sector in ROC, Component 1 will also strengthen
                         public-private engagements in the health sector via PBF by introducing regulation mechanisms such
                         as ensuring that private health care providers are licensed or certified by the Government as a pre-
                         requisite to the awarding of a PBF contract.

                         2.      Component 1 will help set the foundation for Universal Health Coverage (UHC) by
                         promoting the adoption of benefit packages at the ambulatory and hospital levels, developing a
                         system of exemptions and waivers for health services, and adopting a provider payment system that
                         promotes a greater number and better quality of services, and empowers communities to influence
                         the performance of the health system.

                         Subcomponent 1.1: Performance payments to health facilities

                         3.       Two health service packages have been designed for use in the PBF approach. They are the
                         Minimum Package of Activities (MPA), which contains 23 preventive and curative health services
                         for the community and health center level, and the Complementary Package of Activities (CPA),
                         with 18 services for the first level hospitals. These benefit packages were designed during a technical
                         meeting in Brazzaville 24th July 2013 and are based on international best practice. About 60-70% of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         all resources are allocated to pay for health services for women and children. Hence, the services
                         selected provide good potential for accelerating ROC’s achievements for the health related MDGs 4
                         and 5 (see the list of services in Annex 7). However, considering the burden of disease in ROC.
                         (Global Burden of Disease Study 2010), the project will also focus on MDG 1 (which targets
                         nutrition) and MDG 6 (which targets infectious conditions such as HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis.

                         4.       A quantified quality checklist will be designed for each level of the service package
                         incorporating lessons learned during the pilot and taking into account international best practice. For
                         each level, for health centers and hospitals, a quantified quality checklist will be designed. The
                         checklists used in the PBF pilot will provide the foundation for these checklists, while incorporating
                         experience from other contexts on process oriented quality of care measures with increased weights
                         for these process measures. They will also introduce measures related to rational prescribing of
                         generic drugs, essential drug management and tracer drugs.

                         5.        Intersectoral collaboration with a new Social Protection Program: the social protection
                         sector is planning the LISUNGI social safety net project in ROC (P145263). This project will pilot
                         active targeting of the poor using existing community mechanisms to identify beneficiaries for
                         project subsidies and to stimulate access to health services. The LISUNGI project is planned to have
                         a national poverty registration system (known as the Unified Registry) for enrollment into
                         conditional cash transfer (CCT) programs linked to health and education behavior. As there will be


                                                                       Page 2 of 11
                         substantial geographical overlap between the two projects, the health and social protection teams are
                         working closely on the design of both projects, in order to enhance synergies between the two
                         projects. There is large potential for complementarity, and for economies of scale. For example, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         health project will benefit from LISUNGI’s Unified Registry system for identification of the poor
                         and those identified will in turn benefit from fee-exemptions for essential health services targeted by
                         PBF.

                         6.      PBF output budget, costing and PBF approach: a costing of the variable costs (excluding
                         human resources) of the basic and complementary package of health services is planned as part of the
                         preparatory phase of the project. Also, human resources studies will be conducted that will inform
                         the project on the actual take home income, expense patterns of health workers and will shed light on
                         their coping strategies. These costing and human resources studies will help to inform the fee setting
                         and the overall PBF budget. Looking at similar contexts, and taking into account the salary structure,
                         and the objective to finance fee-exemptions for the poorest of the poor, an output budget of about US
                         $5 per capita per year would be necessary.

                         a)      The PBF approach could also rewards quality improvements by providing a 25% top up
                         earnings based on the quality measure.
                         b)Geographic equity adjustments are also planned to take into account rural hardship criteria.
                         Subcomponent 1.2: Governance, purchasing, coaching and strengthening health administration
                         through Performance-Based Financing - US$20 million

                         7.      Contract management and verification: a purchasing arrangement will be created covering
                         batches of 500,000 persons. An innovative strategy will be followed to build local capacity in PBF
                         contract management and verification functions. Local civil society organizations (ACV - Agence de
                         Contractualisation et Verification) will be selected through a contracting process. Their capacity for
                         PBF contract management, verification, counter-verification and coaching will be built through PBF
                         experts housed in the PBF unit (Cellule Technique du PBF – CT-PBF) in the MOHP. These local
                         organizations will be under a performance contract in which the timely and correct execution of their
Public Disclosure Copy




                         tasks will be measured and rewarded through a quarterly performance framework applied by the CT-
                         PBF.

                         8.       In Performance-Based Financing approaches, performance contracting is done throughout
                         the health system. Based on experience gained in two-scaled up health systems (Rwanda and
                         Burundi), the PBF approach involves a re-definition of tasks throughout the health system and hold
                         organizations accountable for these tasks through incentive mechanisms. Internal contracts with
                         performance frameworks clearly outline the expected performance of the different institutions vis-à-
                         vis their roles in the health system and lead to successfully scaled up PBF approaches. Performance
                         frameworks are assessed quarterly through a mix of internal and external verifications before
                         payment is made (ex-ante), and are randomly counter-verified (ex-post; after payment) using a third
                         party agent to ensure reliability of the ex-ante performance assessments. A system of sound/reliable
                         penalties will be instituted to discourage gaming.

                         9.      Performance frameworks will be introduced at all levels for the health administration and the
                         central medical stores. Performance frameworks linked to performance contracts will be designed for
                         the CSS, the DDS, the CT-PBF/MOHP; the Pharmaceutical department/MOHP, the health
                         management information system (HMIS) department/MOHP and the COMEG.

                         10. The PBF unit will manage the project and will be staffed by a mix of government staff and

                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                         international and national consultants recruited through a merit-based process. Each quarter, the PBF
                         unit will be assessed through a performance-framework by a designated committee consisting of
                         development partners. This performance framework will contain indicators related to (i) timely
Public Disclosure Copy




                         processing and execution of the PBF payment orders for health facilities and health administration;
                         (ii) timeliness and management of the national PBF steering committee meetings; (iii) maintenance
                         of the PBF web-application front and back-end; (iv) technical support to the ACV related to contract
                         management and verification activities and related to strategic purchasing; (v) timely and correct
                         application of the performance framework of the COMEG and the DDS; and (vi) capacity building
                         and coordination of the overall PDSS II.

                         11.     Verification and counter-verification of the DDS, ACV, CSS, Pharmaceutical department/
                         MOHP and the HMIS/MOHP department performance will occur each quarter. An external
                         evaluation agency (ACVE - Agence de Contre-Verification Externe) will assess the performance of
                         the ACV, DDS, CSS, HMIS department/MOHP and the Pharmaceutical department/MOHP. This
                         agency will be recruited under component 2. This ACVE will carry out each quarter:

                         a)       verification of the performance of the HMIS and Pharmaceutical departments/MOHP;
                         b) counter-verification of the quantity of services through a lot quality assurance sampling protocol
                         with intense use of mobile phone technology and a community client satisfaction survey component;
                         c)       counter-verification of a random sample of CSS and DDS performance assessments;
                         d) counter-verify a random sample of health center quality checklists; and
                         e)       counter-verification of a random sample of hospital quality checklists. In the case of
                         discrepancies surpassing 5% score in any of the verified samples (whether quantity, quality or
                         performance frameworks for the CSS), a significant penalty will be applied to the performance
                         earnings of the institution that reported this performance. The penalties for fraud will be clearly
                         outlined in the various contracts and procedures and will be detailed in the PBF manual.

                         12.     Communities will be empowered in their roles as co-managers of health services. This will
                         be a two-way process with both PDSS II (supply side) and community (demand side) perspectives.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         13. Health-seeking behavior studies will inform the design, monitoring, and evaluation of the above
                         mentioned community based strategies. These studies will have two modules: the first one will be
                         knowledge, attitudes, and practices (KAP) of the Congolese towards health and health care seeking.
                         The second module will be an ethnographic illness narrative study aimed at understanding the
                         psychological rationale and anthropological beliefs underlying the most notable findings of the KAP.
                         Component 2: Strengthening Health Financing and Health Policy Capabilities

                         14. This component would be supported by the Government’s own funds, IDA resources and a grant
                         from the Health Results Innovation Trust Fund (HRITF). Its aim is to strengthen health care
                         financing policy and practice in ROC both to improve equity and efficiency in health financing and
                         to pave the way for UHC. Accordingly, the component includes the provision of technical assistance
                         to the MOPH, Ministry of Finance and other key ministries in order improve budget formulation and
                         allocation practices and, more generally, to strengthen health policy capacity; and the support to
                         these institutions in their efforts to formulate a health insurance policy.

                         Sub-component 2.1: Introducing fee-waivers for the poor and fee exemptions for selected services

                         15. This sub-component will draw on the experience of the LISUNGI project under preparation, to
                         promote the adoption of fee waivers and fee exemptions (as a general rule fee waivers or discounts

                                                                     Page 4 of 11
                         are granted to qualifying individuals for all services, whereas fee exemptions are applied to some
                         services, for all qualifying individuals). Project activities will seek to identify households that will
                         benefit from fee waivers using in some cases the strategies or criteria proposed by LISUNGI.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         However, the project may consider alternative definitions of target groups to address observed
                         differences in health status and more effective access to health services. For example, as is shown in
                         Tables 5 access to some key maternal and child health services is bi-modal, with those in the two or
                         three bottom quintiles exhibiting rather similar and lower access to services, and the top two quintiles
                         exhibiting similar but higher access.

                         16.      Furthermore, the high prevalence of poverty in some regions (most departments outside of
                         Brazzaville and Pointe Noire) may justify geographic (or group) targeting, where the group might be
                         the population of an entire department or a subset of districts and communes in a department, where
                         poverty rates are very high. In such areas, individual targeting may not be advisable given the high
                         administrative costs of individual identification. By providing a waiver to all inhabitants in such
                         areas, the leakage of subsidies may be low enough to avoid the cumbersome process of individual
                         identification. This sub-component will also promote the adoption of fee exemptions for selected
                         health services with high externalities and those which tend to be under-valued by the population.
                         These exemptions will apply to all patients, not just the poor. For example, some preventive services
                         for mothers (including some obstetric services) and children may be included in the list of exempted
                         services.

                         17. This sub-component will include the following activities:

                         a)      The project will collaborate with experts from the Social Protection Program to develop and
                         implement instruments and procedures for the identification of the poor (through community-based
                         targeting). These citizens will benefit from improved financial access to health services through
                         enrollment into a fee-waiver program for PBF-targeted services.
                         b) The project will also support the government in the development of criteria to determine which
                         health services will be free for all citizens irrespective of socioeconomic status. Currently, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         government has adopted exemptions for some medicines to treat high-prevalence infectious diseases,
                         such as malaria and HIV/AIDS. The project will review the feasibility of this policy and may include
                         other medicines and services such as preventive services for mothers and children. Finally, the
                         project will also support the development and evaluation of pilot programs to test alternative waiver
                         and exemption mechanisms (for example, via the impact evaluation).
                         18. Budget formulation. As already noted above, a preliminary review of budget allocations by the
                         MOHP to the departments suggests that certain inequalities would be overcome if the MOHP
                         adopted an explicit budget allocation formula. An allocation formula or criterion could consider the
                         department's population, the per capita cost of the minimum and complementary benefit packages,
                         the degree of remoteness, poverty, and other variables. The project will support the assessment of
                         resource allocation, and carry out a fiscal space analysis. To this effect, project activities will include:

                         a.      The development of formulas or explicit criteria for the allocation of government budgets
                         across departments to bridge gaps in resources and in access to quality health services. These
                         formulas or criteria will be constructed in close collaboration with those responsible for the
                         development of the PBF component of the project, to ensure consistency in allocation rules;

                         b.       The drafting and implementation of a plan for the progressive adoption of these new budget
                         allocation formula or criteria; and support to the MOHP and the Ministry of Finance for the
                         incorporation of these new methods into the formulation of the national government budget for

                                                                        Page 5 of 11
                         health; and

                         c.       The development of a mechanism for a technical exchange with government officials and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         other stakeholders regarding the suitability of the government’s current budget allocation to the
                         health sector, the adoption of alternative criteria, the potential need to expand the current budget
                         amount, and the sources of any such expansion (the question of fiscal space will arise in this context).

                         Sub-Component 2.2: Capacity building in health policy and management

                         19.      Technical support in the area of health insurance policy. The government of ROC has
                         embarked on the path to reach UHC through health insurance. The Project will provide technical
                         assistance to the government of ROC to further refine the draft law while discussing the feasibility of
                         such a reform and looking at different options and developing a timeline for implementation. Project
                         activities in this sub-component will include:

                         a)       Providing technical assistance to the government of ROC to discuss the feasibility, content,
                         and timing of a UHC law. With this aim, the project will commission a document that will
                         summarize the experience of other developing countries with similar income and development levels
                         as those of ROC and identify the indispensable institutional, financial and other prerequisites for the
                         development of a UHC law. The document will outline the prerequisites needed to enact such a law
                         in ROC and it will identify a way forward including a list of enabling factors necessary to move
                         forward with UHC. The starting point for this review will be the work already carried out by
                         government on the health insurance initiatives of Ghana and Rwanda.
                         b) Conducting policy workshops with government to discuss the findings and recommendations from
                         the above review, with the aim of formulating a national consensus about the path to UHC.
                         Participants in these workshops will include staff from the MOHP, Ministry of Finance, national
                         experts, experts from reference countries, and members from the parliament dealing with health laws.
                         c)       Carrying out a feasibility study of health insurance schemes which would present the
                         Government with a series of options which can be piloted at a later stage.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         20.Capacity building in health policy and m anagement. The pervasive lack of knowledge about
                         health policy concepts, management skills, best practices and policy developments limits
                         government’s ability to further strengthen its health system. The project will:

                         a)       In consultation with the MOHP, develop or adapt training materials in health policy, using as
                         a starting point those currently available from the World Bank Institute’s Flagship Program for
                         Health System Strengthening on priority topics such as: Setting priorities in health; development and
                         costing of health benefits packages; methods for the targeting of government health subsidies;
                         provider payment methods; results-based financing; and/or other topics that government may
                         consider relevant.
                         b) Along with Ministry of Health-designated counterparts, write national case studies based on actual
                         circumstances and data from the ROC to use as complementary training materials.
                         c) In collaboration with the MOHP, develop and implement a five-year training program for
                         policymakers, and also one for health managers, both from the central and regional levels.
                         d) Furthermore capacity building to support research, analytical work, institutional strengthening of
                         national institutions such as the Statistic Bureau, the Planning Department and other government
                         entities will be developed and executed during the project time.

                         Sub-component 2.3: Health Sector Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Strengthening



                                                                      Page 6 of 11
                         21.      Inadequacies in ROCs health information system do not allow for proper monitoring and
                         evaluation (M&E) of health sector performance. Inaccurate and incomplete Health Management
                         Information System (HMIS) data combined with infrequent household surveys and the absence of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         health facility survey data to assess quality of care mean that policy makers do not have the
                         information they need to make evidence based decisions. This sub-component will strengthen the
                         HMIS system, support a number of population based surveys as well health facility surveys (some of
                         which will be done thru the Impact evaluation) and other relevant surveys as the need emerges.
                         Furthermore capacity building of the National HMIS unit at Central and district level will be done to
                         ensure the skills needed for data collection, recording, and analysis is reinforced during the project

                         22.       Information and Communication Technology (ICT): the project will use a web-application
                         (Open RBF: http://openrbf.org/) to manage the public front-end, and the back-end strategic
                         purchasing. These open-source based solutions are driving the current two scaled-up PBF approaches
                         (Rwanda; Burundi) and are used in an increasing number of PBF pilots in Africa and Central and
                         South-East Asia. These ICT solutions also enable conditional cash transfer or voucher programs to
                         be managed in an integrated manner, alongside the PBF program. The project will work together
                         closely with the HMIS department, and assist in the introduction of the new DHIS-2 software. The
                         PBF web-enabled application will be linked to the DHIS-2 software and it will be managed through
                         the HMIS unit. The ICT solution is part of the system of intense monitoring and evaluation for PBF
                         results. Verified and paid-for results including the results for the health administration will be visible
                         on the public website whereas the raw data will be downloadable from the website. Benchmarking
                         health facilities and the public health administration both quantity and quality wise, will lead to a
                         powerful tool to further results monitoring and governance for results. Introducing an ICT sub-
                         component to the project will benefit the MOHP tremendously by building the capacity of the health
                         facilities to systematically record the data, funding, payment, and hence allow health planner at the
                         Central level have quality data they can use to develop interventions and make adequate policies to
                         improve the health system in ROC.

                         23.     An impact evaluation will be embedded in the phased scaling-up of PBF: the HRITF will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         fund an impact evaluation (US$1.5 million), which will naturally fit into the phased scaling-up of
                         PBF. The impact evaluation (see Annex 10) has a specific focus on the role of PBF, in combination
                         with various demand-side interventions such as households visits for improved health-seeking
                         behavior and targeting of the poor for improved financial access to a package of esse ntial health
                         services (links will be made with the World Bank LISUNGI Social Protection project ‘FY 2014).
                         The impact evaluation design will be finalized during the project appraisal mission in October 2013.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         No civil works will be undertaken and no adverse environmental or social impacts are expected. The
                         project does not require any land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of
                         access to resources and livelihood. Thus, the project is expected to have a positive impact for all
                         direct and indirect beneficiaries, including vulnerable groups such as children, women and the poor
                         who are the main target beneficiaries of the project.

                         However, this will be a nationwide project and hence part of the population targeted will include
                         Indigenous Peoples (IPs). The expected impacts are positive as the IPs do not have access to quality
                         care and hence the project will ensure that quality free care is provided to them to ensure better
                         health outcomes. It was the project team’s understanding that an Indigenous Peoples Planning
                         Framework (including a Health Needs Assessment) was conducted as part of the current PDSS


                                                                       Page 7 of 11
                           (P106851) project; this is not the case. Given that the Republic of Congo is a fragile state, OP 10.00
                           allows the task team more time to finalize most safeguard instruments. An IPPF is being prepared; it
                           will be consulted upon and will be disclosed by negotiations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)

                            6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project has minimal environmental impacts
                            BP 4.01                                             that shall be governed by national and local laws
                                                                                and procedures. However, the increased use of
                                                                                medical clinics may generate more medical
                                                                                waste.

                                                                                A National Waste Management Plan does exist
                                                                                and will be updated during project
                                                                                implementation and disclosed in due time. It has
                                                                                been disclosed in the Infoshop on October 9,
                                                                                2013 and in country on November 7, 2013.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               The project will not affect natural habitats.

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No                The project does not involve forests or forestry.

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No                The project does not involve pest management.

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No                The project does not involve physical cultural
                            BP 4.11                                             resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes               An IPPF has been prepared, consulted upon, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                disclosed in country and at the InfoShop
                                                                                consultation has taken place on November 11,
                                                                                2013. Since ROC is considered a fragile state,
                                                                                OP 10.00 applies and allows the project team
                                                                                more time to prepare some safeguard documents.
                                                                                Thus, the IPPF will be disclosed before
                                                                                negotiations.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No                The project does not involve land acquisition
                            4.12                                                leading to involuntary resettlement and/or
                                                                                restrictions of access to resources and livelihoods.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No                The project does not involve dams.

                            Projects on International        No                   N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management



                                                                        Page 8 of 11
                         A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           The project will not support any investment (including civil works) that is likely to harm natural
                           environment. The subsidies and other incentives in Component1 will certainly increase the number
                           of healthcare beneficiaries, thus inducing an increase in medical waste production by health
                           facilities. However the associated risks may be prevented through the implementation of an
                           updated National Medical Waste Management Plan, including training of health workers and
                           investments in equipment such as incinerators.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           N/A
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The country has continued to build its capacities on safeguards management during the
                           implementation of several World Bank financed projects. The Ministry of Health and Population
                           will be in charge of implementing the project; the MOHP is familiar with World Bank safeguards
                           policies since they have collaborated on several World Bank projects including the current health
                           project, PDSS, which is still active.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project is a national level program that will involve and affect Indigenous Peoples. Given that
                           the Republic of Congo is a fragile state, OP 10.00 allows the task team more time to finalize most
Public Disclosure Copy




                           safeguard instruments. An IPPF has been prepared; it will be consulted upon the week of
                           November 4th, and will be disclosed by negotiations. The IPPF will enable the MOHP to better
                           address the needs of the Indigenous people and will identify their needs based on a survey that is
                           being conducted under the current PDSS so the response can be designed around the identified
                           needs.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       02-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    09-Oct-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Congo, Republic of                                                23-Oct-2013
                           Comments: The disclosure in the country is an estimated date.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       23-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    11-Nov-2013

                                                                    Page 9 of 11
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Congo, Republic of                                               11-Nov-2013
                              Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Hadia Nazem Samaha
                            Approved By

                                                                       Page 10 of 11
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 12-Nov-2013
                         Advisor:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Trina S. Haque (SM)           Date: 20-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Page 11 of 11
