                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA7955
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Jamaica                            Project ID:    P148013
                            Project Name:     JM Youth Employment in Digital and Creative Industries (P148013)
                            Task Team         Fabio Pittaluga
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         21-Mar-2014                        Estimated   22-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    LCSSO                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Education (25%), Information technology (25%), Other
                                              social services (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Other social development (50%), Social Inclusion (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        20.00           Total Bank Financing:  20.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     20.00
                              Total                                                                                     20.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Proposed Development Objective for this operation is support youth employment in the digital
                           and animation industries in Jamaica.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project will finance five components to be implemented over a period of 5 years :

                                                                       Page 1 of 5
                         Component 1: Skills and capacity to enhance employability and entrepreneurship (US$ 10 million).
                         This component will build capacity and skills of Jamaican youths to improve employability in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         growing animation industry and in the global online labor market, and provide critical skills to young
                         tech entrepreneurs to bring ideas to market. In particular, the following activities will be financed: 1)
                         expansion of existing 2D animation training programs and/or establishment of new programs at
                         selected secondary and tertiary educational institutions including: training of at least 2000 animators
                         over the course of the project; provision of specialized hardware and software to expand existing lab
                         facilities; and training of trainers programs for 2D animation instructors; 2) establishment of new
                         training programs for 3D animation at selected Jamaican educational institutions including: training
                         of at least 300 3D animators over the course of the project life; provision of specialized hardware and
                         software to expand existing or the establishment of new 3D-enabled labs; training of trainers
                         programs to strengthen the capacity of instructors; and in-depth external training at world-class
                         institutions; 3) establishment of the first 2-year university degree program for professional animators;
                         4) establishment of a training program for tech startup acceleration including: design of a
                         methodology for bringing startups from “ideas to market”; design of a mentorship program for young
                         tech startups; and world-class training sessions with international experts to prepare young startups
                         for investment preparedness; 5) training programs to allow young people to access online work
                         opportunities using various platforms for e-lancing and microwork; 6) business acceleration training
                         for existing and/or newly established animation studios; 7) intensive coding training programs and
                         product design training; 8) organization of competitions to identify best talents in the digital and
                         animation fields; 9) the establishment of a need-based scholarship fund to allow youths from lower-
                         income brackets and vulnerable communities to participate in the activities of the project; and 10) the
                         development of a policy framework for the development of the animation industry in Jamaica.

                         Component 2: Establishment of Startup Jamaica Hub (US$ 5.6 million). This component makes
                         provisions for the establishment of a physical hub to strengthen a viable tech entrepreneurship
                         ecosystem. The physical structure and the connectivity aspects of the hub will be provided by
                         private sector companies that have offered such contributions free of charge for the life of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project. MOUs will be signed with the Jamaica National Bank (JNBS) and LIME respectively. In
                         addition, this component will be implemented in partnership with OASIS500 - an accelerator based
                         in Amman, Jordan – that will provide seed funds for startups accepted into the accelerator program.
                         An MOU will be signed with OASIS500 to that effect. This component will finance: a) maintenance
                         costs related to running the facilities; b) cost of management for the overall hub; c) cost of
                         management for the seed-fund administration; d) recruitment of service providers (legal, accounting,
                         IP, tax, etc.) to support selected teams participating in the accelerator; e) training for the hub
                         management team; f) operational costs for running hub initiatives such as bootcamps, pitching
                         events, demo-days, and the overall acceleration program; and g) communication and outreach
                         campaign.

                         Component 3. Early stage investment for tech startups (US$ 1.6 million). This component will
                         double the annual amount of private sector investment in early stage growth companies by: 1)
                         establishing and supporting the growth of a vibrant angel investor network; 2) studying and
                         promoting the use of royalty-based equity loans; 3) studying and supporting the establishment of pre-
                         purchase and equity crowdfunding platforms; 4) establishing a government sidecar fund to co-invest
                         with private sector early stage investors; 5) a public awareness campaign on early stage investments;
                         and 6) a targeted program to build trust networks among investors and early stage companies.

                         Component 4. Support to Science, Technology and Innovation (US$ 0.8 million). Activities under

                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                         Component 4 focus on supporting researchers with entrepreneurial aspirations who have developed
                         an R&D+I applications that have a commercial potential. This support will be provided by
                         identifying the potential entrepreneurs through calls for innovations and by incorporating the selected
Public Disclosure Copy




                         applicants into the incubation and acceleration services (Stages 2& 3) of the hub.

                         Component 5: Project Administration (US$ 2.0 million). This component will support program
                         management through inter alia: a) carrying out the financial management and procurement
                         requirements under the project; b) monitoring and evaluation of project activities; c) providing
                         equipment and training for the Project Implementation Unit (PIU); d) hiring a dedicated management
                         team that includes a project manager, and two technical specialists (animation and tech
                         entrepreneurship); and e) financing operating costs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Because of the nature of the project, most of the activities will have no foreseeable relevant social or
                         environmental risks. All physical infrastructures for the project will be either made available for free
                         to the Government of Jamaica or is already the property of the Government of Jamaica. No
                         additional structural works will be needed, nor acquisition or requisition of land or property. No
                         involuntary resettlement will be generated through this operation.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Fabio Pittaluga (LCSSO)
                         Michael J. Darr (LCSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No               Safeguard policy is no longer being triggered at
                          BP 4.01                                              appraisal stage. All physical infrastructures for
                                                                               the project will be either made available for free
                                                                               to the Government of Jamaica or is already the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               property of the Government of Jamaica. Scope
                                                                               has evolved such thatno building refurbishment
                                                                               will be required. No additional structural works
                                                                               will be needed, nor acquisition or requisition of
                                                                               land or property.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               No involuntary resettlement will be generated
                          4.12                                                 through this operation. No additional structural



                                                                       Page 3 of 5
                                                                                works will be needed, nor acquisition or
                                                                                requisition of land or property.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              There are no safeguard issues or impacts foreseen as a result of this operation.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              There are no potential safeguard concerns ( through direct and long term impacts) foreseen as a
                              result of this operation.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Not Applicable.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              No safeguard policies were triggered for the preparation and implementation of this project.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              Not applicable. No safeguard policies have been triggered through this operation.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            Not Applicable.
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                             Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                             be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                             issue, been prepared
                             Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to Yes [         ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the OP?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information

                                                                        Page 4 of 5
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Fabio Pittaluga
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Markus Kostner (SM)                         Date: 30-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 5 of 5
