                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                      Report No.: ISDSA8279

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Apr-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Apr-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Yemen, Republic of                Project ID:    P148474
                                                        Parent         P117949
                                                        Project ID:
   Project Name:      Additional Financing II for SFD IV (P148474)
   Parent Project     RY:Social Fund for Development IV (P117949)
   Name:
   Task Team          Mira Hong
   Leader:
   Estimated          07-Apr-2014                       Estimated   31-Jul-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
   Managing Unit:     MNSSP                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                        Instrument:
   Sector(s):         Other social services (90%), Sub-national government administration (10%)
   Theme(s):         Social safety nets (30%), Social Inclusion (20%), Education for all (30%), Water
                     resource management (10%), Other human development (10%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      50.00           Total Bank Financing:                 50.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                       Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
     IDA Grant                                                                                50.00
     Total                                                                                    50.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a          No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                              Page 1 of 6
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The Project Development Objectives are to: (i) improve access to basic services; (ii) enhance
   economic opportunities; and (iii) reduce the vulnerability of the poor.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


 3. Project Description
The Second Additional Financing (AF 2) would support the ongoing Yemen SFD IV (P117949, US
$60 million) and AF 1 (P133699, US$25.0 million). The purpose of the AF 2 is to help fill a
financing gap for activities under the Component 1. Community and Local Development Program
(CLDP):

The objective of the CLDP is to improve access to basic social services. Under this program, SFD
will continue to implement community-based subprojects in various sectors, while building the
capacity of local authorities and engaging select districts in implementing development projects.
Specifically, this component will do this through:

(i)      Provision of Sub-grants for the carrying out, by communities and local authorities, of
Subprojects consisting of infrastructure and other services in various sectors including: education,
health, special needs groups, water and sanitation, cultural heritage, agriculture, and rural roads; and
(ii) Carrying out, through the provision of goods, training and consultants’ services, activities to
develop SFD’s annual operational plans as well as the capacity of select local authorities and
communities in participatory planning and management of development activities.

The component’s activities include a wide range of infrastructure subprojects, targeted to poor
communities and responding to priorities defined by the community: school construction and
rehabilitation; water and sanitation; health; roads; environment, agriculture and rural development.

The closing date for the proposed AF 2 would be the same as the parent project (December 31,
2016), and the project objectives would be unchanged.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
This is a national program. Beneficiary communities will be approximately 30 percent in urban and
70 percent in rural areas across the country. Selection criteria will be based on evidence of need:
poverty index; malnutrition rates; population density; and enrollment gaps and illiteracy rates.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Banu Setlur (MNSEE)
Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)

 6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The policy is triggered due to the small scale
 BP 4.01                                              physical interventions that will be financed by the



                                              Page 2 of 6
                                                project, for example, in education, health, roads,
                                                agriculture and rural development sectors. While
                                                the current Environmental Management Plan
                                                (EMP) disclosed under the parent project is still
                                                applicable, the SFD has updated this document by
                                                reflecting lessons learnt from the previous
                                                operations, and has prepared an Environmental
                                                and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The
                                                ESMF was disclosed in-country and at the Bank’s
                                                Infoshop on April 15, 2014. The ESMF includes
                                                methodology and procedures for screening
                                                subproject proposals for potential environmental
                                                and social impacts and accordingly, subproject
                                                specific EMPs will be prepared and approved
                                                before implementation as required. The ESMF
                                                will be included in the project’s Operations
                                                Manual.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

Pest Management OP 4.09           No

Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The policy is triggered due to the positive efforts
BP 4.11                                         envisaged under the project towards cultural
                                                heritage sites, and will be covered within the
                                                scope of the ESMF. Project will continue
                                                implementing activities relating to the
                                                preservation and conservation of cultural assets
                                                and cultural heritage sites in Yemen.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No            The small scale nature of infrastructure works
4.12                                            combined with a community participatory
                                                approach makes it possible for the CLDP to
                                                obtain land needed through voluntary land
                                                donation. Any subprojects which involve
                                                involuntary taking of land will not be eligible for
                                                funding under this project. Therefore the Bank
                                                Policy on Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12 will
                                                not be applied to this project. The guidelines for
                                                safeguards screening, voluntary land donation and
                                                negative project list will be developed and
                                                included in the Operational Manual.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No




                                        Page 3 of 6
   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The proposed AF 2 will continue to be classified as environmental category B and will not result
     in the triggering of any additional safeguard policies. The World Bank Safeguard Policies on
     Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) and Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11) will continue to
     be triggered. The CLDP under the AF 2 will continue to implement subprojects in various sectors
     including education, health, special needs groups (disabled persons, orphans, women at risk,
     among others), water and sanitation, cultural heritage, agriculture, and rural roads. Project
     activities will not result in any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

     Social impacts of the project are expected to be positive. The small scale nature of infrastructure
     works combined with a community participatory approach makes it possible for the CLDP to
     obtain land needed through voluntary land donation. Any subprojects which involve involuntary
     taking of land will not be eligible for funding under this project. Therefore the Bank Policy on
     Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12 will not be applied to this project. Any subprojects that could be
     of potential environmental category A in nature will be rejected at the stage of screening the
     subproject proposals. Screening of subprojects will be undertaken by applying the environmental
     and social screening checklist contained in the ESMF (as well as SFD’s own screening procedures
     and methodology that it has been using for the previous projects), and as specified in the SFD’s
     Operations Manual.

     The AF 2 will continue to implement subprojects to document/preserve/conserve cultural heritage
     sites in Yemen, in compliance with the “Preservation of the Historic Cities and Sites Law No.
     16” (endorsed by Cabinet on August 13, 2013), for protecting Yemen’s cultural heritage. For this
     positive effort to preserve cultural assets, SFD will continue to benefit from qualified national and
     international expertise to secure quality interventions, trying at the same time to enhance and
     expand national technical capacity. According to a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) signed
     between SFD and the Ministry of Culture, both parties will: (i) work with the Ministry of Higher
     Education to adopt standard conservation as a mandatory subject in the curricula of Architecture
     and Engineering faculties in public and private universities, and (ii) explore and demonstrate
     income generation opportunities out of different cultural heritage assets. This will serve both the
     sustainable preservation and poverty alleviation objectives.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     No long-term or indirect negative impacts are expected as a result of project activities.
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.
     N/A



                                                Page 4 of 6
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  While the existing January 2010 EMP is still applicable to the AF 2, SFD has now prepared an
  Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) as an update, by reflecting lessons
  learnt from the previous operations. The ESMF was disclosed both in-country and at the Bank’s
  InfoShop on April 15, 2014.

  The ESMF will include an environmental and social screening form which will be applied, in
  addition to SFD’s own screening methodology. According to their procedures, SFD also classifies
  projects as List A, B and C, comparable to the Bank’s environmental categories A, B, and C. Any
  category A subprojects (including category A type sub-projects relating to cultural heritage) will
  be excluded from IDA funding as identified during the subproject screening process. Site specific
  EMPs will be prepared for subprojects as required before they are approved for implementation.

  Safeguards compliance has been rated Satisfactory since the beginning of the SFD IV operations.
  The recently completed Phase I of the Yemen Third Party Monitoring concluded that SFD did not
  have any major environmental deviations and it maintains its own, well run quality control
  department. In terms of reporting on compliance with the EMPs, SFD will continue to recruit an
  independent consultant to undertake an annual environmental compliance and performance audit.
  In addition to sharing this report with the Bank, SFD will include a separate annex on compliance
  with the ESMF and EMPs, in the progress reports that are submitted to the Bank.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Beneficiary communities are in both urban and rural areas across the country. By nature of the
  project design, consultations with stakeholders and community members will continue to be
  undertaken before implementation of subprojects as part of subproject cycle. Subprojects will be
  selected on a demand basis. SFD undertook consultations with stakeholders and beneficiaries on
  the AF II including the environmental and social implications, and a summary of results from the
  consultations is included as an annex in the ESMF.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      11-Apr-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Apr-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Yemen, Republic of                                               15-Apr-2014
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level


                                            Page 5 of 6
   OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    report?
   OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
    Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    property?
    Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Mira Hong
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                      Date: 16-Apr-2014
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Yasser Aabdel-Aleem Awny El-                   Date: 16-Apr-2014
                                  Gammal (SM)




                                             Page 6 of 6
