                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA6944
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Jamaica                            Project ID:    P146460
                            Project Name:      Jamaica Second Inner Cities Basic Services for the Poor Project (P146460)
                            Task Team          Eric Dickson
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          13-Jan-2014                        Estimated   14-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSDU                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (40%), Water supply (30%), Sanitation (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Other social development (20%), Other urban development (80%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         42.00               Total Bank Financing:         42.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      42.00
                              Total                                                                                      42.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Development Objective of the operation is to enhance access to basic urban infrastructure and
                           services, and contribute towards increased community safety in selected economically vulnerable and
                           socially volatile inner city communities of Jamaica. The objective will be achieved by (i) improving
                           basic infrastructure and access to services through increases in the level of urban investments, (ii)
                           enhancing public safety and building community capacity through the implementation of a package


                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         of interventions responsive to the needs of targeted communities, and (iii) strengthening institutional
                         capacities for urban management and approaches to promote public safety within selected
                         government agencies.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed project builds on the successful implementation of the first Inner Cities Basic Services
                         Project (ICBSP). The first ICBSP was approved by the World Bank in 2006 to respond to an
                         accelerating urban decay and declining citizen security. The project sought to upgrade the physical
                         infrastructure and enhance citizen security in 12 communities within the five Parishes which faced
                         limited social amenities, inadequate access to basic services and high levels of poverty and incidence
                         of crime. Specifically the project encompassed activities aimed at improving the quality of life of
                         community residents through improving access to services such as water, sanitation, solid waste
                         collection, and drainage, and undertaking electricity regularization, road paving, and measures to
                         enhance perceptions of safety. In parallel the project undertook activities to promote security of
                         tenure and the provision of financial services for community members. Importantly the project
                         supported the improvement in the integrity of crime data at the community level through a Japan
                         Social Development Fund (JSDF) Grant for the development of the Jamaica Crime Observatory. The
                         Observatory is a surveillance system established to collect data on crime related activities throughout
                         Jamaica. Project indicators show increased access to urban infrastructure in target communities, in
                         particular water and sanitation, improved urban roads and enhanced public safety. The total number
                         of beneficiaries with improved access to urban services (PDO indicator) surpassed the 60,000 end
                         target (61,953 in total to September 30, 2013).

                         While homicide rates have declined from a peak rate of 62 per 100,000 inhabitants in 2005, to 40.4
                         per 100,000 in 2012 , Jamaican homicide rates and other violent crime rates remain among the
                         highest rates in the region. The reasons for the decline in the national homicide rate are not yet well
                         understood. Recent evaluations of security programs in high risk communities in Jamaica, supported
                         by the Bank and government institutions, suggest the success of multi-sectoral and multi-leveled
                         approaches. These implemented approaches combine a portfolio of social and situational prevention,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         slum upgrading interventions, civic engagement and community policing interventions, with focused
                         attention to high risk and vulnerable youth, families and communities.

                         There have also been significant developments in the GoJ’s approach to crime and violence
                         prevention, and advances in the field that are reflected in the new project design. In the past four
                         years, GoJ has begun to establish coordinating mechanisms to develop an integrated action agenda
                         on crime and violence at all levels of government. Notable recent initiatives include the development
                         of the National Crime Prevention and Community Safety Strategy (NCPCSS), one of the few in the
                         LAC region, the Community Renewal Program (CRP, and the Planning Institute of Jamaica (PIOJ)
                         sponsored assessment of community safety programs in Jamaica.

                         An independent assessment of projects in Jamaica that focused on community security and
                         transformation found that the ICBSP was unique in its focus on community basic infrastructure as a
                         means to community security and transformation. The comprehensive approach to community
                         development that the ICBSP has undertaken has been central to the results seen. Infrastructure is a
                         key component in community transformation; improvements to infrastructure increase societal
                         inclusion, job creation, access of state security forces to communities and access of community
                         members to economic services outside their communities. In addition to increasing access to
                         improved basic services, the ICBSP has enhanced public safety through mediation services,
                         community capacity building, skills training and related social services. Given the gains of the


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         ICBSP, and the demonstrable need for future programs that follow in the ICBSP’s footsteps, a
                         second phase of the ICBSP is deemed necessary, to capture the momentum of the good work done
                         under the current project and to replicate it in other inner city communities across Jamaica.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will benefit from the existing practice of the GoJ to carry out extensive social
                         participation and consultation processes which are directly linked to well-established beneficiary
                         feedback mechanisms. This process includes a review of the demographic and social characteristics
                         of the beneficiaries, the capacity and status of the community based organization responsible for the
                         project, participation by community members in needs identification, potential emp loyment impact,
                         and the accessibility of the project to people with disabilities. This methodology will be followed
                         under the Project as part of the selection of sub-projects.

                         The framework for the selection of the 18 ICBSP II Communities was generated from the
                         Community Renewal Programme’s (CRP) assessment volatile and vulnerable communities in the
                         five most crime-affected parishes in Kingston and St. Andrew, St. Catherine, St. James, and
                         Clarendon. Across Jamaica, severe inequality across urban communities is particularly notable,
                         above all in Kingston where pockets of poverty will be targeted by the project. The main criteria
                         utilized in the selection process were indicators of poverty and crime in urban and peri-urban
                         communities. The 18 communities to be supported by the proposed project were prioritized if they
                         were: (i) contiguous to ICBSP peripheral areas; (ii) proposed by the Ministry of Local Government/
                         the Ministry of National Security; (iii) proposed by the Social Development Commission; (iv)
                         proposed by the Jamaica Social Investment Fund (JSIF); (v) part of the CRP pilot; or (vi) proposed
                         by MNS under the Citizens Security and Justice Program (CSJP). The main socio-economic data
                         used in selecting these communities included a combination of factors, and each communities was
                         categorized by their “volatility” (defined by levels of crime, violence related injuries, presence of
                         gangs), and “vulnerability” (defined by levels of poverty, teenage pregnancy, literacy, ex-convicts,
                         accessibility of communities, child abuse, and presence of squatters). For all the communities
                         selected, additional considerations included levels of access to basic services, formality of the
                         settlement (government land), readiness for intervention (both for works and crime and violence
Public Disclosure Copy




                         prevention), relative risk to surrounding communities, levels of intervention by community or
                         national organizations/programs, and political representation. The communities either maintained a
                         high ranking on the CRP’s assessment, or were proposed by one of the implementing agencies.

                         On the basis of results of the first project, it is estimated that the ICBSP II will directly and indirectly
                         benefit approximately 90,000 people across the project communities through the provision of basic
                         infrastructure, improved access to services, and targeted crime and violence reduction programs.
                         Within the selected communities the new project will target the following groups: (i) at risk males
                         and unattached children, youth and young adults (males and females) with a particular focus on
                         15-29 year olds; (ii) in-school youth ages 12-18; (iii) female single headed households; (iv) gang
                         members; (v) teenage parents; (vi) unemployed or irregularly employed community members; and
                         (vii) families requiring counseling and civil support to access basic social services.

                         The proposed project will strengthen and further expand the objectives of the successful Jamaica
                         Inner Cities Basic Services Project. The related activities encompassed under each component are
                         hinged on the basic tenets of enhancing the quality of access to services for communities,
                         transforming the physical environment within these communities, enhancing citizen security and
                         strengthening institutional capacities for urban management and crime and violence reduction.
                         Broadly, the ICBSP II is consistent in providing an equal amount of investments per community as
                         under the first phase of the operation. Furthermore it is recognized that the needs for physical

                                                                        Page 3 of 10
                         upgrading and targeted crime and violence reduction programs will outmatch the available funding.
                         Nonetheless, and with a view to maximizing the number of project beneficiaries, the investments are
                         deemed to be critically important to initiating a process of community transformation. The proposed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project will finance four components, described below.

                         1.       Component 1: Basic Infrastructure and Access to Services (US$28million). This component
                         will support specific infrastructure investments across project communities according to identified
                         community priority plans for civil works. The options include: (i) secondary and tertiary roads, (ii)
                         drainage, (iii) water supply and sanitation connections, (iv) formalization of household electrical
                         connections, (v) rehabilitation of educational facilities/physical improvements to schools, (vi) zinc
                         fence removal and substitution with permanent fencing structures, (vii) construction of community
                         centers, and (viii) community cleanliness and beautification.

                         2.        Component 2: Public Safety Enhancement (US$7.2 million). As outlined in the National
                         Crime Prevention and Community Safety Strategy, a priority area of intervention for GoJ is the
                         development and strengthening of programs that focus on high risk groups (particularly youth). This
                         component would focus on supporting the development and roll-out of key programs in the following
                         areas: (i) “Violence Interrupter” programs with a focus on mediation, using community-based
                         approaches, (ii) a series of education programs with a focus on strengthening and supporting the roll-
                         out of a set of ongoing school-based violence prevention interventions in targeted communities
                         drawing on the School-Based Violence prevention tool-kit developed with World Bank support, and
                         (iii) livelihood programs for landscaping, public cleansing and recycling that target at-risk youth.

                         3.      Component 3: Institutional Strengthening for Urban Management and Public Safety (US$2.8
                         million). This component will support institutional strengthening activities for selected GoJ entities
                         responsible for issues relating to urban management and crime and violence prevention programs.
                         The capacity building activities related to elements of urban management under ICBSP II will focus
                         on the following elements: (i) options for affordable housing, (ii) improving land surveying tools and
                         techniques, (iii) planning for urban renewal of Downtown Kingston, (iv) training for operations and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         maintenance of infrastructure, and (v) legal support and training for community cleanliness and
                         beautification. The capacity building activities related to the public safety elements include: (i)
                         improving the coverage and range of data collected by the Crime Observatory (for policy/decision
                         making purposes); (ii) strengthening capacity of key stakeholders in evidence-based crime and
                         violence prevention delivery and impact evaluation; and (iii) training of community mobilizers and
                         para-professionals to implement new components of the crime and violence prevention approach.

                         4.       Component 4: Project Administration (US$4 million). This component will finance costs
                         associated with program management, including project-related audits, monitoring and evaluation,
                         equipment and training to strengthen the project implementation unit, as well as individual
                         consultants. It will also include staff support related to financial management. This component will
                         also finance workshops to promote positive environmental and social impacts such as a public
                         communications campaign on sustainable water usage, sanitation, solid waste management, and
                         public safety. The subcomponent will also finance JSIF core professional and technical staff for
                         project management, including a Program Manager, Supervision Engineers and specialists in the
                         areas of crime and violence prevention, safeguards compliance, finance, procurement and related
                         project management areas. Core staff will be recruited on time-bound basis.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                                                                     Page 4 of 10
                         While the exact project location is currently unknown, the Government of Jamaica Community
                         Renewal Program has prioritized the most vulnerable inner city communities. In-line with the GoJ’s
                         thrust towards Community Renewal and the experience of the ICBSP, the proposed project would be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implemented in a further set of 17 communities for a concentrated set of interventions. One of the
                         criteria used in the definition of community vulnerability is the presence of squatters, suggesting that
                         informal occupation of public land and the right of way for infrastructure could pose a challenge.

                         All communities that have been pre-identified are located within urbanized areas, which avoids
                         impacts to natural habitats or forests, but which could affect physical cultural resources. An
                         exclusion list within JSIF's Operations Manual and Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
                         prohibits projects of large scale, those with environmentally complex conditions, or which could
                         generate impacts to natural habitats, effects to historical or religious sites, involve dam construction
                         or rehabilitation, or construct new roads more than 5 kilometers long or 5 meters wide. Proposed
                         project activities were verified in a pre-appraisal mission during project preparation.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Martin Henry Lenihan (LCSSO)
                         Michael J. Darr (LCSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes               This Program has been classified as Category B
                         BP 4.01                                               in accordance with World Bank policy on
                                                                               Environmental Assessments (OP/BP 4.01.
                                                                               Construction activities will create minor impacts
                                                                               such as dust, noise, storage and disposal of debris,
                                                                               traffic and utilities disruption, and safety of
                                                                               workers and road users. The existing EMF (for
                                                                               ICBSP Phase 1) will be updated to reflect the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               proposed Phase 2 sub-projects, assess
                                                                               institutional capacity for environmental
                                                                               management and ensure it contains the latest legal
                                                                               environmental provisions.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No                The current JSIF EMS accounts for natural
                                                                               habitats in peri-urban and urban areas, which are
                                                                               screened and protected in accordance with the
                                                                               World Bank safeguards (OP/BP 4.04). Effects on
                                                                               natural habitat are specifically excluded from the
                                                                               list of eligible projects (wetlands, parks),
                                                                               therefore, triggering of the policy is not
                                                                               necessary.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No                During discussions with the JSIF project team, it
                                                                               was confirmed that there will be no projects
                                                                               involving harvesting or management of forest
                                                                               resources, therefore the World Bank Safeguards
                                                                               Policy on Forests (OP/BP 4.36) has not been
                                                                               triggered.




                                                                       Page 5 of 10
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              Termite foundation treatments and other
                                                                         pesticide uses are negligible, and JSIF’s EMP
                                                                         requires these activities to be performed by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         registered, licensed operations in accordance with
                                                                         contract language; therefore, the World Bank
                                                                         policy on pest management (OP 4.09) is not
                                                                         triggered
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             This policy is triggered as a precaution since
                         BP 4.11                                         excavation and construction activities will occur
                                                                         in settled areas.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              Although there are cultural minorities (such as
                                                                         Maroons, Rastafarian and other groups) in
                                                                         Jamaica, there are no groups that could be
                                                                         considered indigenous people as defined in OP
                                                                         4.10.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             There is a possibility that land may be acquired,
                         4.12                                            or private assets affected, due to the
                                                                         implementation of activities planned under the
                                                                         basic infrastructure program. This is especially
                                                                         the case in communities characterized by high
                                                                         number of squatters who may be occupying the
                                                                         right of way for infrastructure, or other public
                                                                         spaces. Under ICSB there were three minor cases
                                                                         of land acquisition which were successfully
                                                                         mitigated using the original resettlement policy
                                                                         framework. Due to the demand driven nature of
                                                                         this project, the exact location of the sub-projects
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         will not be known at the time of appraisal, and it
                                                                         will not be possible to identify the resettlement
                                                                         impacts of the project in advance. Therefore,
                                                                         similar to the first ICSB, a resettlement policy
                                                                         framework remains the appropriate resettlement
                                                                         planning instrument. In some instances, minor
                                                                         land acquisition may be managed through
                                                                         voluntary donations, and the current resettlement
                                                                         policy framework makes provisions for this.
                                                                         During the preparation of this project this
                                                                         resettlement policy framework was updated by
                                                                         JSIF, in order to ensure its continued relevance to
                                                                         JSIF 2. The update of the RPF took into account
                                                                         (i) the types of works, locations, level of land
                                                                         regularization, and range of potentially affected
                                                                         people (land owners, squatters, renters, etc.)
                                                                         within the new communities to be supported, and
                                                                         (ii) new or innovative housing or livelihood
                                                                         restoration practices. The updated RPF has clear



                                                                 Page 6 of 10
                                                                             procedures for resettlement impacts related to
                                                                             easements and partial impacts, as well as
                                                                             screening criteria related to voluntary land
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             acquisition to ensure such transactions are carried
                                                                             out with the informed consent of and free choice
                                                                             of the proprietors

                                                                             Another potential resettlement impact relates to
                                                                             the possible downstream effects of technical
                                                                             assistance provided under component three of the
                                                                             project for the preparation of a land regularization
                                                                             policy. While such policies normally seek to
                                                                             regularize informal users of land, there is a risk
                                                                             that the policy may require the removal of users
                                                                             from land where they cannot be regularized due
                                                                             to safety concerns (e.g. floodplains, seismic
                                                                             zones, hillsides etc) or other public uses (e.g.
                                                                             protected areas). These groups of users would
                                                                             need to be provided with alternative sites of
                                                                             equivalent locational value under the policy.
                                                                             Similarly, the policy would need to pay attention
                                                                             to the unique situation of vulnerable groups who
                                                                             may face discrimination in the land regularization
                                                                             process, the provision of complementary social
                                                                             services and livelihood opportunities to
                                                                             regularized, as well as access to alternative
                                                                             grievance redress and dispute resolution
                                                                             mechanism. In order to mitigate these and other
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             related risks, World Bank advice provided as part
                                                                             this TA will be fully consistent with the
                                                                             provisions of OP 4.12.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No                The policy is not triggered because the project
                                                                             will not support the construction or rehabilitation
                                                                             of dams nor will support investments which rely
                                                                             on the operation of existing dams.
                            Projects on International        No                The policy is not triggered since the project will
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                             not affect any international waterways as defined
                                                                             under the policy.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                The policy is not triggered because the project
                            7.60                                             will not affect disputed areas as defined under the
                                                                             policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:



                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                          In terms of resettlement impacts, none of the sub-projects to be financed are likely to have a large
                          scale, significant, or irreversible impact in terms of land acquisition or the resettlement of
                          households. Possible minor land acquisition and resettlement impacts will be mitigated by
Public Disclosure Copy




                          measures detailed in the updated resettlement policy framework. A resettlement policy framework
                          is the appropriate resettlement instrument, given that the exact locations of the sub-projects to be
                          financed has yet to be identified.

                           In terms of environmental impacts, because new subproject locations have yet to be defined in
                           detail, the appropriate safeguard instrument is an Environmental Management Framework (EMF).
                           Elements of the EMS Procedures Manual will be integrated into the EMF to provide an updated
                           description of JSIF's environmental assessment and management process. Construction activities
                           will create minor environmental impacts such as dust, noise, storage and disposal of debris, traffic
                           and utilities disruption, and safety of workers and road users. Pesticides may be used in small
                           amounts for building treatments, however JSIF has created management procedures within their
                           EMF to require only registered and licensed users for such incidental uses, therefore the Pest
                           Management Policy is not triggered. No projects will involve harvesting of forest resources or
                           change in land use or management of such resources, so the Natural Habitat Policy is not
                           triggered. Natural Habitat is not triggered based on review of the community profiles and pre-
                           appraisal evaluation of potential works, as well as the exclusion policy of JSIF screening
                           mechanisms built into the EMF to avoid damage to peri-urban habitat (e.g. wetlands or parks).
                           Historical or archeological properties may be encountered during excavation in settled areas,
                           therefore the physical cultural resource policy was triggered as a precaution. Impacts during
                           construction will be minimized by the small quantities of construction materials being handled, the
                           limited scale of the works, the involvement of communities in planning and implementation, by
                           contracting conditions, and by supervision and oversight by the contractor, by JSIF, and by the
                           communities themselves. Risk of poor operations management will be mitigated by issuance of
                           completion certificates, and by JSIF’s provisions of guidelines and training to Community
                           Maintenance Committees.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Due to the small footprint of the sub-projects to be financed there are likely to be no negative
                           indirect or long term impacts
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Given the small-scale and demand driven nature of the sub-projects to be financed it was not
                           necessary to consider alternative project designs.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           In terms of involuntary resettlement, the borrower has displayed significant capacity in the
                           implementing the provisions of the resettlement policy framework for the original document. This
                           has included integrated screening mechanisms for voluntary land donation and land acquisition
                           and resettlement into the sub-project selection, as well as the successful preparation, disclosure,
                           and implementation of abbreviated resettlement plans. The implementing agency will continue to
                           build on the systems it has in place during the second project.

                          The implementing agency has abundant experience in utilizing EMF screening procedures to
                          develop site specific EMPs, as was done under ICBSP1 with effective results, in accordance with


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                           the policy on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The EMF for the ICBSP2 project is being
                           updated to reflect current improvements in JSIF practice and the expanded capacity of the
                           organization, including the improvements in the EMS and the application of the ISO 14001
Public Disclosure Copy




                           process for which JSIF has maintained certification for several years.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The implementing agency works with the social development commission to identify key
                           community stakeholders to consult with during project implementation. The implementing agency
                           has a track record of successfully managing community consultations with key stakeholders. This
                           includes site specific consultations with affected people on the content of resettlement plans.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Jamaica                                                          06-Dec-2013
                           Comments: Disclosed on Jamaica Social Investment Fund website
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Jamaica                                                          05-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: Disclosed on Jamaica Social Investment Fund website
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?



                                                                    Page 9 of 10
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Eric Dickson
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Greg J. Browder (SM)                          Date: 30-Dec-2013




                                                                       Page 10 of 10
