                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA5075
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Central Asia                      Project ID:    P132270
                            Project Name:      Central Asia Road Links - Kyrgyz Republic (P132270)
                            Task Team          Cordula Rastogi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          29-Oct-2013                       Estimated   27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSTR                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (90%), Public administration-
                                              Transportation (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Trade facilitation and market access (40%), Rural services and infrastructure
                                              (40%), Regional integration (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      54.00           Total Bank Financing:                 45.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         9.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               45.00
                              Total                                                                                     54.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Central Asia Road Links (CARs) program is the result of a collaborative effort initiated by
                           respective governments in the Central Asia region which has been developed as a regional, multi-
                           phase program considered as a regional transformational project under IDA17. The program has the
                           overall objective to increase transport connectivity between neighboring countries in Central Asia

                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         along priority cross-border road links whilst supporting improvements in road operations and
                         maintenance practices.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project development objective (PDO) of the First Phase of the Central Asia Road Links Program
                         (CARs-1) is to increase transport connectivity between the Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan along
                         priority cross-border road links in Batken Oblast whilst supporting improvements in road operations
                         and maintenance practices. The road sections to be financed under CARs-1 prioritize connectivity
                         between the Osh and Batken Oblast in the Kyrgyz Republic and Sugd Oblast in Tajikistan as they
                         build lateral spurs from the Osh-Isfana axis to the Tajik border.
                         3. Project Description
                         The components of the First Phase of the CARs program (CARs-1) will focus on the Kyrgyz
                         Republic and include the following (a more detailed description of the components is provided in
                         Annex 2):

                         Component 1: Rehabilitation of Priority Road Sections in Batken Oblast (US$50.74 million
                         equivalent). The component will finance the provision of works and consultants’ services for the
                         rehabilitation of about 50 kilometers of road sections in Batken Oblast along and within close
                         vicinity of the road linking Osh-Batken-Isfana. Those road sections will link the Kyrgyz Republic
                         with its neighboring countries and include (a) Isfana – Kairagach/Madaniyat border crossing (34.77
                         kilomaters), (b) Batken- Tortgul (13.00 kilometers), and (c) Batken – Kyzyl Bel/Guliston border
                         crossing (4.12 kilometer). The draft designs for those road sections are expected to be completed by
                         November/December 2013. Those road sections are in poor condition The current geometric
                         characteristics of the road matches the requirement of category III/IV according to SNIP KR
                         32-01:2004 (carriage width up to 12 meters, shoulder width up to 2.5 meters), and therefore it will
                         not be upgraded except for the profile to improve the evenness of the road and thereby reduce road
                         user costs. This component also includes consultants’ services for construction supervision as well as
                         physical and price contingencies. The estimated cost of this component is US$50.74 million
                         equivalent.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Improvement of Road Operations and Maintenance Practices (US$2.26 million
                         equivalent). This component will finance the provision of goods, and consultants’ services for
                         piloting improved operations and maintenance practices, as well as better planning and budgeting of
                         maintenance. Improvement of maintenance practices will include the creation of a unit, using to the
                         extent possible existing staff, within the existing Osh-Batken-Isfana Roads Department that will be
                         responsible for maintenance of recently rehabilitated road sections between Pulgon and Batken in
                         sustainable manner. The unit will benefit from the ongoing implementation of the road asset
                         management system (under NRRP) to define funding needs, prioritize the use of limited resources
                         for staff, equipment and material, both from MoTC and the project, and establish the performance
                         targets to carry out required summer/winter maintenance as well as routine and emergency repairs
                         activities. The project will support the use of a performance-based maintenance agreement between
                         the MoTC and Osh-Batken-Isfana Road Department, where disbursements are fixed and tied to the
                         preservation of some levels of service (targets). Additionally, it will support the exposure to
                         international practices on maintenance techniques, through the hiring of two individual
                         internationally recruited consultants. Improvement of road operations will include a review
                         (consultancy services) of regional standards, norms, and parameters on vehicle (truck) weight and
                         axle load limits and tariffication as well as the development of a strategic plan for the institutional
                         arrangements for transport control, the setting up of an axle-load control system and methods for
                         enforcement of axle load limits. Investments or technical assistance in border crossing is not


                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         envisaged.

                         Component 3: Project Management and Implementation (US$1.00 million). This component will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         finance the provision of goods, consultants’ services, training, and operating costs, including an
                         audit, to support project coordination, implementation, and management. The estimated cost of this
                         component is US$1.00 million equivalent.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project expected locations include:
                         * Isfana to Kairagach/Madaniyat border crossing,
                         * Batken to Tortkul, and
                         * Batken to Kyzyl-Bel/Guliston border crossing.
                         Risks are limited to the typical impacts associated with road construction and rehabilitation projects.
                         The severity of potential impacts is moderate and mostly limited to the construction period: (i) air
                         pollution and noise from trucks and other construction machinery, and asphalt plants, (ii) soil
                         disturbance during earthmoving and material (gravel/sand/soil) extraction, and (iii) tree-cutting and
                         loss of vegetation, (iv) generation and disposal of construction and household (from construction
                         camps) solid waste, and (v) construction camp management (which will be temporary with only
                         minor and localized negative effects).
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexei Slenzak (ECSEN)
                         Asli Gurkan (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes                Road rehabilitation will be undertaken within
                          BP 4.01                                              the existing right of way of the road and
                                                                               environmental impacts can be mitigated by good
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               construction and housekeeping practices. The
                                                                               EIA with EMP has been prepared by the Ministry
                                                                               of Transport and Communications (MOTC) and
                                                                               its IPIG covering the road sections to be financed
                                                                               under the project, disclosed and consulted upon.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No                 The road alignments do not go through natural
                                                                               habitats. Therefore Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04
                                                                               is not triggered.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No                 The road alignments do not go through forests.
                                                                               Therefore Forests OP/BP 4.36 is not triggered.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes               A Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared
                          4.12                                                 by the client to accurately reflect potential


                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                                                                          resettlement impacts along the road links
                                                                          proposed for financing under the project. The
                                                                          RPF has been updated to deal with anticipated
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          resettlement impacts and when necessary enable
                                                                          the preparation of site-specific Resettlement
                                                                          Action Plans when designs are finalized. The
                                                                          RPF is applicable only to the road segments
                                                                          financed by the project; these segments are also
                                                                          those that directly contribute to the achievement
                                                                          of the PDO.

                                                                          The road sections financed under the project
                                                                          include:
                                                                          - Isfana to Kairagach/Madaniyat border crossing;
                                                                          - Batken to Tortkul;
                                                                          - Batken to Kyzyl Bel/Guliston border crossing.

                                                                          Several potential areas of rehabilitation or
                                                                          construction works are expected to have land
                                                                          acquisition and OP 4.12 on Involuntary
                                                                          Resettlement will be followed to mitigate and
                                                                          manage impacts. Possible impacts may involve
                                                                          compensation for assets such as fences, tress and
                                                                          crops as well as the demolition and subsequent
                                                                          compensation for a small number of structures
                                                                          may be required in and around Isfana and Batken
                                                                          city.
                                                                          Some permanent acquisition of small private land
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          parcels may also be needed. At present,
                                                                          resettlement of occupied homes is not anticipated,
                                                                          but this may be verified after alignments and
                                                                          detailed technical designs for the civil works have
                                                                          been finalized.

                                                                          Consultation in project areas was held on July 29
                                                                          and 30, 2012 and the draft RPF was publicly
                                                                          disclosed in country and at the Bank's Infoshop.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37       No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues



                                                                  Page 4 of 7
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           No large scale, significant, and/or irreversible impacts expected.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Potential indirect and/or long term impacts include noise from traffic on the road, accumulation of
                           litter on the roadside, issues of waste management from road-associated infrastructure (kiosks,
                           markets, gas stations, parking lots, etc.).
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Considered alternatives (i.e. road alignment going through cities of Batken and Isfana) were
                           rejected as unacceptable from safeguards perspective. During project preparation, public
                           consultations were held in Isfana and Batken city to discuss social and environmental
                           consideration to be taking into account for the design. Those considerations related mainly to the
                           inclusion of pedestrian crosswalks, side-walks in populated areas, and other safety-related features
                           which will be reviewed once the final draft detailed designs are available.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The recipient and its implementing agency, the Ministry of Transport and Communications and its
                           IPIG has prior experience and adequate capacity to address emerging environmental and social
                           safeguard issues. There is one Safeguards Coordinator, one Environmental Specialist and one
                           Social Safeguards Specialist working within IPIG. Their professional qualification and practical
                           experience in addressing environmental and social safeguards issues, as demonstrated by the on-
                           going Bank-financed National Road Rehabilitation (Osh-Batken-Isfana) Project are considered to
                           be adequate to handle safeguard policy issues under this project. IPIG staff has experience in
                           implementing the Bank's OP/BP 4.12 on the basis of the Resettlement Policy Framework under the
                           ongoing Bank-financed National Road Rehabilitation (Osh-Batken-Isfana) Project, for which a
Public Disclosure Copy




                           site-specific Resettlement Action Plan was prepared to address resettlement impacts. Appropriate
                           specialists on the IPIG staff are trained and experienced in implementing the policy.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders include the population of the project areas, road transport entities and
                           associations, truckers and car drivers, as well as MOTC and its branch offices. The draft RPF was
                           disclosed in country on July 26, 2013 through MOTC's website: www.piumotc.kg and at the
                           Bank's Info Shop on August 9, 2013. The final RPF was disclosed on September 4, 2013 in
                           country and at the Bank's Infoshop. The RPF covers only the specific road segments financed by
                           the Bank; these road segments are also those that directly contribute to the Project Development
                           Objective. Public consultations in Isfana and Batken city have been held on July 29, 2013 and July
                           30, 2013. Site-specific RAPs will be prepared by the MOTC and its IPIG once the final detailed
                           technical designs are available. The site-specific draft Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
                           dated August 9, 2013 was disclosed in country on August 9, 2013 through MOTC website: www.
                           piumotc.org and at the Bank's InfoShop on August 9, 2013. The EMP will be included in the civil
                           works contract and implementation will be monitored by the supervision consultants, MOTC, the
                           IPIG, and the Bank team. The final EIA was disclosed on October 17, 2013 in country and at the
                           Bank's InfoShop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements


                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09-Aug-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Aug-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kyrgyz Republic                                                  09-Aug-2013
                           Comments: The EIA was disclosed in country on August 9, 2013 as a draft. The final EIA was
                                         disclosed on October 17, 2013.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Aug-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kyrgyz Republic                                                  26-Jul-2013
                           Comments: The RPF was disclosed in country on July 26, 2013 as a draft. The final EIA was
                                         disclosed on September 4, 2013.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies



                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Cordula Rastogi
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Benoit Paul Blarel (SM)                     Date: 09-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
