                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC7242

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Vietnam                          Project ID:       P145055
                            Project Name:       Sustainable Agriculture Transformation Project (P145055)
                            Task Team           Christopher Paul Jackson
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           17-Nov-2014                      Estimated         18-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GFADR                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), SME Finance (30%),
                                                Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (20%), Public adminis tration- Financial
                                                Sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):           Rural markets (50%), Rural non-farm income generation (20%), Other Private
                                                Sector Development (20%), Export development and competit iveness (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    300.00                      Total Bank Financing:         275.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              25.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                    275.00
                              Total                                                                          300.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to strengthen the implementation of the agricultural
                           restructuring strategy and to accelerate pace of sustainable transformation in selected sub-sectors and
                           regions.
                           C. Project Description
                         The strategic orientation of the Vietnam Sustainable Agricultural Transformation Project (vnSAT) is
                         to support the implementation of the Government's ARP. It will do so with a combination of
                         assistance to policy and institutional reform that supports the reorientation of the central line ministry
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (MARD) and associated public agencies as well as key private sector stakeholders, and targeted
                         support to two critical sectors where conditions are most suited to the rapid implementation of the
                         new approach embodied in the ARP. A combination of policy and institutional reform and results in
                         two key sectors will deliver real results for beneficiary farmers, and will demonstrate the merits of
                         this new orientation thereby building support for the continued implementation of the strategy.

                         Component 1: Institutional Strengthening to Support Agricultural Transformation

                         This component would strengthen the capacities of various public institutions to design, implement,
                         and monitor agricultural restructuring and sustainability initiatives. It would likely include:

                         a)       Technical assistance/ training to MARD’s Planning Department and agricultural
                         restructuring steering committee and to DARDs in relation to public expenditure management and
                         M&E systems for sector-wide sustainable development;

                         b)       Technical support and training for selected MARD departments to identify and implement
                         strategies for organizational change and improved functionality;

                         c)       Support for policy and institutional studies related to various types of public-private sector
                         partnerships/ collaborations and potential restructuring of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) in the
                         sector; and

                         d)      Technical assistance to banks to increase their capability to lend to the agricultural sector.

                         Component 2: Supporting Sustainable Rice-Based Systems
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The objectives of this component are to increase rice farmer’s incomes, reduce the negative
                         environmental impacts of rice-based production systems, and enhance the competitiveness of the
                         commercial rice sub-sector. This component would support sustainable rice-based systems in the
                         MKD through:

                         e)       Implementing a large-scale extension program on improved agronomic practices and
                         management. Anticipated activities would include farmer training, establishment of demonstration
                         sites, support for establishment of farmer organizations, provision of small matching grants to
                         encourage farmers to adopt good farming practices, crop rotations, improved postharvest equipment
                         and facilities, and better management/use of agricultural wastes and byproducts. The activities aim at
                         reducing the volume of seed, fertilizer, water and pesticide use, and postharvest losses, while
                         improving productivity, quality, and profitability;

                         f)      Supporting and leveraging private sector investments in upgrading rice processing
                         technology and facilities (i.e. storages, dryer machines, processing equipment, etc.) for higher quality
                         and specialty rice. The participating private sector agribusinesses are required to work/collaborate
                         with farmers who are supported by the project to market their produce (i.e. contract farming); and

                         g)      Improving public services delivery to support farmer adoption of improved agronomic
                         practices and management. Anticipated activities would include necessary support for strengthening
                         the capacity of technical departments and concerned agencies of MARD and DARDs in the project
                         provinces (i.e. Departments of Crops, Plant Protection, Cooperatives and Rural Development,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Agricultural Planning, Extension Centers, Seed Centers, etc.) to improve their extension skills,
                         capacity and quality, and enhance capacity for foundation seed production and the certification of
                         seed produced by farmer groups or private companies. At the central level, the project would also
                         support a continued technical collaboration program between MARD and the International Rice
                         Research Institute (IRRI) to provide overall technical support to MARD and the project provinces.
                         The project would also support the on-going program to measure and monitor GHG emissions from
                         rice in the different agro-ecological areas of the MKD.

                         While this component would be geographically targeted (in around 30 key rice districts in 8
                         provinces of the MKD, namely Kien Giang, An Giang, Hau Giang, Dong Thap, Can Tho, Soc Trang,
                         Tien Giang, and Long An), it is expected that it will result in a transformational impact on the rice
                         sector as the selected districts account for more than half of the MKD paddy production and more
                         than three-fourths of its rice exports.

                         Component 3: Supporting Sustainable Coffee Production and Rejuvenation

                         The objectives of this component are to increase coffee farmer’s incomes and reduce negative
                         environmental impacts of coffee production in the Central Highlands Region. This component would
                         support:

                         a)        Implementing a large-scale extension program to promote famers’ adoption of sustainable
                         agronomic and management practices. Anticipated activities would include farmer training,
                         establishment of demonstration sites, establishment of farmer groups, provision of small matching
                         grants to encourage farmers to adopt good farming practices (i.e. water saving technologies,
                         improved fertilizer management, etc.), supporting sustainable coffee rejuvenation where suitable (i.e.
                         providing medium term credits via commercial banks), provision of small-scale public infrastructure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (i.e. rehabilitating water intake canals, feeder road), and better management/use of agricultural
                         wastes and by-products (i.e. using coffee husk for composting). The activities aim at reducing the use
                         of fertilizers, pesticides, and water while improving productivity, quality, and profitability.

                         b)       Supporting upgrades of private sector nurseries (i.e. provision of technical training, quality
                         control, certification processes, etc.).

                         c)      Enhancing quality and delivery of public service delivery. Anticipated activities would
                         include necessary support for strengthening the capacity of technical departments and concerned
                         agencies of MARD and DARDs in the project provinces (i.e. Departments of Crops, Plant Protection,
                         Cooperatives and Rural Development, Agricultural Planning, Extension Centers, Seed Centers,
                         WASI, etc.) to improve their extension skills, capacity and quality, and enhance capacity for seed
                         production and certification. In addition, the project would also support MARD and provinces in
                         improving their master plans for sustainable coffee production and rejuvenation to 2020 and toward
                         2030 and piloting landscape planning approach in selected districts in each participating province.

                         This component would be implemented in three key coffee provinces in the Central Highlands
                         Region, i.e. Dak Lak, Dak Nong, and Lam Dong, and possibly expand to cover Kon Tum and Gia
                         Lai provinces. Success and lessons learned from the project are expected to be scaled up through the
                         government programs, especially the linkages between coffee replanting financing and adoption of
                         sustainable production practices and the landscape approach to natural resources management in a
                         mixed economy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 4: Project Management

                         This component would provide equipment and incremental operating costs for project monitoring,
                         financial management, and procurement activities, support short and long-term technical assistance
                         to the project management team in selected areas, and support analysis and dissemination of findings
                         related to the effectiveness and challenges associated with the different institutional and technical
                         models being applied or piloted under the project.

                         The project would establish and support linkages with ongoing and future interventions by the IFC.
                         For instance, vnSAT partner agribusinesses would be well positioned to ‘graduate’ to more tailored
                         advisory services (provided with a cost-sharing element reflecting the greater private-good element).
                         Similarly, coordination between vnSAT and the IFC would facilitate linkages between sustainable
                         small-holder coffee producers and commercial trading companies.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Component 1 of the project will focus on strengthening the capacities of various public institutions to
                         design, implement, and monitor agricultural restructuring and sustainability initiatives. Most
                         activities under this component include technical assistance, policy studies, training, and study tours
                         at the central level, which aim to support the ministry and its technical departments in strengthening
                         their technical capacity and management for improved functionality. This component is also
                         supporting implementation of Components 2 and 3, which is to improve sustainability of rice and
                         coffee sectors. With proper screening mechanisms incorporated in project design plus with close
                         implementation support of the Bank Task Team during project implementation, this component is
                         expected to yield positive environment and social impacts for Vietnam’s agriculture sector especially
                         in its transformation from the current volume target approach to sustainability, quality, and equality.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2 (Supporting Sustainable Rice-Based Systems) will focus on 30 key rice districts in 8
                         provinces in the Mekong Delta, namely Kien Giang, An Giang, Hau Giang, Dong Thap, Can Tho,
                         Soc Trang, Tien Giang, and Long An. Agricultural land accounts for around 70% of the total land
                         area in these provinces. Fields are currently under highly intensive cultivation (2-3 crops per year),
                         with widespread and often excessive use of agro-chemicals (across the MKD over 500,00ha are now
                         triple-cropped).

                         The successful pilots of good farming practices under the Agricultural Competitiveness Project
                         (ACP) will be scaled up under this project to promote reduced use of seed, pesticides and fertilizers,
                         better water management and reduced methane as a greenhouse gas over a bigger scale at some
                         200,000 ha, involving more than 150,000 farming households. Overall, this component is expected to
                         yield positive impact on environmental and social aspects in the project area. There may be some
                         small scale land acquisition for upgrades of small scale public infrastructure. During project
                         preparation and implementation, the project would explore different options of technical design and
                         construction practices for infrastructure upgrades to avoid land acquisition and minimize socio-
                         environmental impacts.

                         Component 3 (Supporting Sustainable Coffee Production and Rejuvenation) will be implemented in
                         three key coffee provinces in the Central Highlands, namely Dak Lak, Dak Nong and Lam Dong and
                           possibly expand to cover Kon Tum and Gia Lai provinces. The Central Highlands area is the location
                           of several environmentally sensitive areas, including forests and national parks. However, since the
                           project is focused exclusively on the introduction of improved agricultural practices and/ or on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           rejuvenation of existing coffee farms, the project will not support the expansion of coffee in the areas
                           that could result in negative environmental impacts. All rejuvenation areas will be environmentally
                           screened to exclude all irreversible environmental impacts. In the existing coffee areas, the project
                           would support improved agricultural practices, aiming at reducing agro-chemicals and water use.

                           Ethnic minority groups constitute a large proportion of the population in the Central Highlands.
                           Poverty rate in the CH is high compared to the MKD. The socio-economic situation is complex, with
                           indigenous EMs had been displaced historically by a large influx of migrants from northern parts of
                           Vietnam, including a large proportion of EMs from the northern mountainous areas. The project
                           would benefit from the social assessments prepared for the Central Highlands Poverty Reduction
                           Project which was approved by Board last year and up it to incorporate them in project design to
                           target relevant vulnerable groups, both ethnic minorities and other vulnerable households (e.g.
                           women headed) to the extent that they are within the larger cohort of targeted beneficiaries.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           MARD is the project owner, and the project will be implemented primarily at the provincial level by
                           the DARDs. The PCU and the Agriculture Projects Management Board both have prior good
                           experiences of implementing World Bank-financed projects, with a good record of safeguards
                           compliance. Project activities are similar to the former ACP project, which includes the same
                           provinces in the MKD and some geographical overlap in the Central Highlands, which is currently
                           rated ‘satisfactory’ for safeguard compliance. The recently (December, 2012) approved Central
                           Highlands Poverty Reduction Project (CHPov - P128072), covering many of the same provinces
                           demonstrates the commitment of the Government to addressing ethnic minority issues. Although the
                           CHPov project is being implemented by MPI, lessons learned can be shared with MARD in
                           preparation and implementation of vnSAT.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For the credit line components, it is expected that provision of credits to farmers and agribusinesses
                           under vnSAT would be implemented by agencies with good experience under Third Rural Finance
                           Project (RF3 - P100916) and follow similar procedures. BIDV, VBARD and a number of
                           commercial banks were participating financing institutions (PFIs) under the RF3 and effectively
                           adhered to all safeguard requirements (environmental assessment and pest management) in the on-
                           lending procedures. It should be noted that RF3 introduced additional environmental monitoring by
                           the PFIs as part of their loan use monitoring of the activities being funded by the credit facility,
                           thereby bolstering their in-house environmental monitoring capability.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Thu Thi Le Nguyen (GENDR)
                           Nghi Quy Nguyen (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project's overall socio-environmental
                           BP 4.01                                               impacts are expected to be positive as the
                                                                                 objectives and activities promoting the
                                                             reduction of chemicals and resource to be used
                                                             in existing rice and coffee farming practices
                                                             incorporated into components 2 and 3. As
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             project invests in some small-scale
                                                             infrastructures such as storage facilities, dryer
                                                             machines, small-scale irrigation canals, there
                                                             will be relatively minor impacts such as dust,
                                                             noise, waste and wastewater generation during
                                                             construction phase. These impacts are small,
                                                             localised, temporary and manageable through
                                                             Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOPs) to be
                                                             implemented during the construction phase.
                                                             Since there are also physical investments that
                                                             will be identified during project
                                                             implementation, an Environmental and Social
                                                             Management Framework (with EMP/ECOPs)
                                                             will be prepared to guide the screening of
                                                             potential impacts from subprojects. Regarding
                                                             social impacts, the project will do an overall SA
                                                             for the whole project design through secondary
                                                             data review (data collected in recent Bank
                                                             funded projects in the regions such as Central
                                                             Highland Poverty Reduction Project,
                                                             Agriculture Competitiveness Project) as there is
                                                             adequate data on the socio-economic profiles of
                                                             the provinces under the project. This analysis
                                                             will inform overall social impact as well as
                                                             potential mitigation measures. Specific relevant
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             issues will be included and inform the ESMF,
                                                             RPF and EMPF.

                                                             For Component 1 and 3, an analysis of potential
                                                             environmental and social issues will be included
                                                             in the TOR for policy and institutional studies
                                                             and planning supports. The reports will also
                                                             describe how the identified issues will be
                                                             addressed either through existing safeguard
                                                             instruments or provisions in proposed policies
                                                             and planning. Other TA activities under
                                                             Component 2 and 3 are expected to focus on
                                                             sustainable farming practices, therefore unlikely
                                                             cause negative impacts.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   The project will provide support towards good
                                                             farming practices in existing farm land and will
                                                             not acquire new land for farm expansion.
                                                             Therefore, the project is unlikely to result in
                                                             adverse impacts on environmentally sensitive
                                                                 areas such as protected areas, forests or special
                                                                 areas for biodiversity conservation. However, at
                                                                 this stage, the locations of small-scale
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 infrastructure are not yet known.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                TBD   All activities will be screened through the
                                                                 project ESMF to exclude activities that have
                                                                 potential negative impact on existing forest
                                                                 lands. As the project may support some limited
                                                                 forest restorations as part of the landscape
                                                                 approach in Component 3, the project will
                                                                 involve forest expert to screen potential
                                                                 negative impacts of the restoration activities to
                                                                 the forest.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   The project will not finance the procurement of
                                                                 any chemical pesticides or herbicides. The
                                                                 project is designed to promote the reduction in
                                                                 chemical pesticide use by enhancing sustainable
                                                                 farming practices. As national Integrated Pest
                                                                 Management Programs has been being
                                                                 implemented by MARD and DARDs for many
                                                                 years in project provinces, these will substitute a
                                                                 standalone Pest Management Plan for the
                                                                 project. The ESMF will include a detailed
                                                                 description/annex on the national Integrated
                                                                 Pest Management which is proposed to be
                                                                 adopted to comply with OP 4.09 instead of a
                                                                 stand-alone IPM.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The siting of small infrastructure will avoid
                         BP 4.11                                 impacts on any existing known physical cultural
                                                                 resources. However, as subprojects may involve
                                                                 limited earth work, this policy is triggered as a
                                                                 precaution and a “chance finds” clause will be
                                                                 included in ESMF/ECOP and construction
                                                                 contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   This policy is triggered due to the presence of
                                                                 ethnic minorities in the project area. Although
                                                                 project provinces have been identified, specific
                                                                 locations (districts and communes) and detailed
                                                                 design of all project activities are not yet
                                                                 confirmed as the activities will be designed
                                                                 based on demand driven and continuous
                                                                 consultation principles. Hence at this stage it is
                                                                 not possible to know which activities will affect
                                                                 which ethnic groups. Hence, an EMPF will be
                                                                 prepared. During implementation, where there is
                                                                 a presence of ethnic minorities (i.e. districts or
                                                                                                                                 communes), a quick social assessment will be
                                                                                                                                 carried out to identify impacts on specific ethnic
                                                                                                                                 minorities and other vulnerable groups.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Consultations will be conducted to (a) receive
                                                                                                                                 inputs/feedback of local beneficiaries to design
                                                                                                                                 of investment activities, including addressing
                                                                                                                                 their concerns and recommendations; (b) ensure
                                                                                                                                 free prior consultations with ethnic minorities
                                                                                                                                 and provide them with culturally appropriate
                                                                                                                                 benefits; (c) address issues of concern by other
                                                                                                                                 stockholders; (d) identify specific actions to
                                                                                                                                 mitigate negative impacts. Specific impacts and
                                                                                                                                 related actions for specific ethnic groups will be
                                                                                                                                 detailed in an appropriate EMDPs.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           This is triggered due to the need for land for
                                 4.12                                                                                            project activities. Since the exact location of
                                                                                                                                 small scale infrastructure schemes are not
                                                                                                                                 known at project preparation, the project will
                                                                                                                                 develop a RPF in case there is a need for private
                                                                                                                                 land acquisitions. During implementation, a
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Plan will be prepared for each
                                                                                                                                 infrastructure scheme and reviewed by the Bank
                                                                                                                                 prior to implementation. The overall SA for the
                                                                                                                                 whole project design referred to above will
                                                                                                                                 inform the RPF.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         TBD                           None of the project activities will involve
                                                                                                                                 construction or rehabilitation of dams or any
                                                                                                                                 activities dependent on existing or future dams.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 However, this will be confirmed during project
                                                                                                                                 preparation.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            No sub-projects or activities will be
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            implemented in areas of international
                                                                                                                                 waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not located in disputed areas.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Nov-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Following the completion of the technical missions in January and September 2014, the task team
                                      is finalizing the comprehensive list of preparatory studies to be completed prior to appraisal. The
                                      Task Team is assisting MARD team in preparing draft social and environment safeguards
                                      documents to meet the Bank’s requirements. All draft safeguards documents are being revised by
                                      MARD and would be available for the Bank’s final review before appraisal. The appraisal mission
                                      is scheduled for mid-November 2014.



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             -       The ESMF, RPF, EMPF and other safeguards instrument if any, will be prepared and
                             disclosed by appraisal.
                             -       Safeguards instruments for the subproject identified during project implementation will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                             prepared accordance with the project frameworks (i.e. ESMF, RPF, EMPF) of the project.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Christopher Paul Jackson

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Josefo Tuyor (RSA)                                Date: 27-Oct-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Nathan M. Belete (SM)                             Date: 28-Oct-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
