                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC9727

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Dec-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Georgia                          Project ID:      P150696
                            Project Name:      Third Regional Development Project (P150696)
                            Task Team          Ahmed A. R. Eiweida
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          02-Feb-2015                      Estimated        24-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSURR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (35%), Sub-national
                                               government administration (20%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roa ds and Highways
                                               (35%), SME Finance (10%)
                            Theme(s):          City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (35%), Cultural Heritage (20%),
                                               Urban Economic Development (25%), Infrastructure servi ces for private sector
                                               development (10%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (10%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     75.00                     Total Bank Financing:         60.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     15.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        60.00
                              Total                                                                        75.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve infrastructure services and institutional capacity to
                           support increased contribution of tourism in the local economy of the Samtskhe-Javakheti and
                           Mtskheta-Mtianeti regions.
                         C. Project Description
                         The project will finance investment priorities identified under a Tourism Development Strategy of
                         each region. The strategies are currently under final stages of preparation, supported with technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                         assistance from the World Bank. Proposed investments will also be aligned with the regional
                         development strategies; prepared with technical assistance from EU (Mtskheta-Mtianeti) and GiZ
                         (Samtskhe-Javakheti). The design of the Project – a proposed blend of institutions, infrastructure, and
                         targeted interventions – will be informed by both a comprehensive diagnostic and relevant
                         international experience. The Project will aim at supporting the local economy in the regions by
                         carrying out an integrated approach to tourism development, focusing on infrastructure, urban
                         regeneration, cultural heritage restoration, skills development and enabling the environment to attract
                         private sector investments. The Project is expected to support better anchoring of the regions to the
                         Georgia-wide tourism circuits, to tap the hitherto untapped yet potentially significant tourism and
                         hospitality industry potentials. The project is important in the general context of Georgia regional
                         development and spatial planning vision.

                         The Samtskhe-Javakheti region stretches over 6413 km2 and a population of 208,000. The region
                         includes 6 large municipalities and its administrative center is Akhaltsikhe. Main urban areas are
                         Akhalkalaki, Akhaltsikhe, Borjomi, Vale, and Ninotsminda. In 2013, the region was visited by
                         180,273 international tourists. There are 160 accommodation units, including 55% family houses,
                         36% hotels, and 4% guest houses. The total number of beds is 6,137. A SWOT analysis concerning
                         the tourism sector highlighted a number of strengths comprising increasing tourism trends; ski
                         infrastructure in Bakuriani; Borjomi-Kharagauli National Park and its tourism trails; uniqueness of
                         cultural heritage; varied landscape, flora, fauna, and folk craft traditions. However, a number of
                         weaknesses prevent tourism from growing further, including lack of high standard hotels; weak
                         tourism and municipal infrastructure; low level of tourism services and skills; inadequate condition
                         of natural and cultural heritage sites and poor access; lack of high quality food services, souvenirs
                         and craft shops in the regions; and poor marketing, promotion and destination management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Mtskheta-Mtianeti region has an extension of 6.785 km2 and a population of 125,000. The
                         region includes 4 large municipalities and its administrative center is Mtskheta. The main urban areas
                         are Mtskheta and Dusheti. In 2013, the region was visited by 715,155 international tourists. There
                         are 83 accommodation units, including 57% family houses, 39% hotels, and 2% guest houses. The
                         total number of beds is 2,754. From a tourism standpoint, the region offers a variety of products, with
                         potential to offer high-quality tourism, through preserving and enhancing wildlife, ecosystems, and
                         cultural heritage. Harnessing tourism potential of this region might help provide job opportunities
                         and therefore support rural population, balancing migrations to lower plains.

                         Building on the design and lessons learned under the RDP and RDP II, the Project will have two
                         components:

                         Component 1: Infrastructure Investment (US$55 million)

                         Component 1.1: Urban Regeneration and Circuit Development (US$45 million). This component
                         will finance: urban regeneration of old towns and villages, including restoration of building facades,
                         public spaces, museums, roads and water, and enhancement of cultural and natural heritage sites,
                         including access and presentation.

                         Based on product development and marketing potential, infrastructure needs, and employment levels,
                         the project will focus on sites along the circuit connecting the selected heritage, nature and ski sites.
                         The proposed sites/subprojects discussed with the Government for financing under the Project will
                         supplement what the Government has already invested in. These can be grouped into two categories:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Three cities suggested for urban regeneration building on its comparative advantage as
                         cultural heritage and vernacular architecture destinations: Dusheti, Kazbegi and Abastumani. The
                         Project will build on previous investments made by the Government, and may finance small-scale
                         incremental investments needs, in Mtskheta, Gudauri, Bakuriani, Borjomi and Akhalsekhi.
                         Additional investment needs in Akhalkalaki, Ninosminda and Khevsureti will be subject to a great
                         scrutiny during preparation, under the planned Tourism Development Strategy for each region.

                         •       Nine cultural heritage sites are suggested for improved site management and construction of
                         tourism facility and access road: Saphara Monastery, Saro Church and Darbazi houses, Zarzma
                         Monastery, Vani Caves, Khertvisi Fortress, Akhalkalaki Castle, Ananuri Fortress, Gergeti Trinity
                         Church and Shatili.

                         Component 1.2: Provision of Public Infrastructure to Attract Private Investments (US$10 million).
                         To encourage private sector investments in the region, this component will support a selected number
                         of private sector entities in project areas that demonstrate interest and capacity to invest in tourism or
                         agribusiness through investing in complementary public infrastructure that is necessary to ensure the
                         viability of their investments e (e.g. public facilities within vicinity of the investments, road/
                         sidewalk, water/sanitation, communications, connection to main trucks, etc.). The investment
                         proposals would be subject to screening by a selection committee and there will be appropriate
                         conditions tied to that.

                         Component 2: Institutional Development (US$5 million).

                         The component will support institutional capacity and performance of the Georgia National Tourism
                         Administration (GNTA), Agency for Culture Heritage Preservation of Georgia (ACHP), National
                         Museum, Project Implementing Entity (Municipal Development Fund of Georgia, MDF), and other
Public Disclosure Copy




                         local and regional entities in order for them to carry out the following activities: destination
                         management and promotion, including local outreach campaigns; marketing and promotion; skilled
                         workforce development and capacity building; feasibility studies, design, construction supervision
                         and sustainable site management of cultural heritage; and performance monitoring & evaluation
                         activities.

                         In order to stimulate rapidly increased travel to the regions and develop institutional capacity and
                         performance of tourism related local and regional entities establishment of Regional Destination
                         Management Organizations (DMO) should be given a priority. There is not a single institutional unit
                         existing that could work with the government, donors, the international travel trade, and help to
                         define a product development strategy, implement it, and market the destination. In frames of the
                         proposed project the role and importance of DMO experience have been highly addressed.

                         Business development for tourism and agribusiness SMEs is a key alongside improved business
                         access to markets and finance. The Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development (MESD)
                         intends to promote micro businesses in all regions of Georgia. In this regard, TA will be provided
                         under this Component in order to support prospective SMEs with business startup/expansion
                         advisory services so that they can easily access micro finance programs offered by MESD.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Samtskhe-Javakheti and Mtskheta-Mtianeti regions of Georgia.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           MDF will be responsible for all aspects of Project preparation and implementation. The proposed
                           Project will have the same arrangements for procurement, financial management, disbursement, and
                           safeguards application as under the ongoing Bank-financed RDP and RDP II, although the Project's
                           RPF will be updated based on lessons learned from the previous operation. The MDF has been
                           working towards strengthening its institutional capacity for safeguards management. Although MDF
                           is still undergoing some structural and staffing changes resulting from new appointments in its top
                           managerial positions, satisfactory arrangements for good environmental and social performance are
                           currently in place and will be further reinforced. Weaknesses identified in RDP and RDP II will be
                           addressed by the MDF: the new management confirmed their commitment to follow Bank's
                           recommendations pertaining stronger involvement of their safeguards team into all aspects of
                           operation, including activity planning, procurement, supervision of works, and progress reporting.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Darejan Kapanadze (GENDR)
                           Michelle P. Rebosio Calderon (GSURR)
                           Nino Metreveli (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment        Yes            The Project carries investment components in
                           OP/BP 4.01                                     support to infrastructure development and therefore
                                                                          triggers OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          None of the Project-supported activities are expected
                                                                          to have significant, long term, or irreversible impacts
                                                                          on the natural environment, therefore the Project is
                                                                          classified as environmental Category B.

                                                                          Based on the Environmental Management
                                                                          Frameworks (EMFs) used for the implementation of
                                                                          RDP and RDP II, an Environmental and Social
                                                                          Management Framework (ESMF) will be developed
                                                                          for the purposes of RDP III. The ESMF will guide
                                                                          the preparation of subproject-specific Environmental
                                                                          and Social Reviews (ESRs) and/or Environmental
                                                                          Management Plans (EMPs), depending on the risk
                                                                          assessment of these sub-projects.

                                                                          A Strategic Environmental, Cultural Heritage, and
                                                                          Social Assessment (SECHSA) will be carried out in
                                                                          conjunction with the regional development and
                                                                          tourism development strategies developed for the
                                                             beneficiary regions by the client. SECHSA will be
                                                             undertaken at the project preparation stage to identify
                                                             risks and opportunities associated with the overall
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             development program proposed for Samtskhe-
                                                             Javakheti and Mtskheta-Mtianeti regions. SECHSA
                                                             will a) pool baseline information on the target region,
                                                             b) analyze the expected long term, cumulative, and
                                                             induced/indirect impacts of the proposed policy
                                                             approaches, and c) assess institutional capacity of the
                                                             government agencies to manage environmental,
                                                             cultural, and social implications of the regional
                                                             development in Samtskhe-Javakheti and Mtskheta-
                                                             Mtianeti, including gap analysis and
                                                             recommendation for capacity building. The
                                                             participatory process of SECHSA will allow timely
                                                             mobilization of all stakeholders whose involvement
                                                             is critical for successful blending of RDP III
                                                             activities into a broader regional development
                                                             context, best possible targeting of RDP III
                                                             investments at the needs of enhancing tourism in
                                                             Samtskhe-Javakheti and Mtskheta-Mtianeti regions,
                                                             and securing strong ownership of RDP III by the
                                                             client.

                                                             The SECHSA will also be very specific and strategic
                                                             questions-driven, allowing identification of areas for
                                                             better citizen engagement in the project as well as
                                                             specific activities for targeting women. Among those
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             SECHSA should indicate the opportunities of
                                                             maintaining the rehabilitated sites by neighboring
                                                             communities and increasing the benefits from the
                                                             Project to those groups. The SECHSA will assess
                                                             possibe social vulnerability of the targeted
                                                             communities and propose targeted activities of
                                                             addressing those.

                                                             The SECHSA report, ESMF, as well as site-specific
                                                             ESRs and/or EMPs for individual investments, will
                                                             be prepared satisfactory to the Bank, disclosed, and
                                                             discussed with the stakeholders prior to the RDP III
                                                             appraisal and before tendering of works.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   RDP III is designed to invest into capacity building
                                                             and infrastructure development for Javakheti and
                                                             Tbilisi national parks, which will have implications
                                                             for the valuable natural habitats conserved in these
                                                             protected areas. OP/BP 4.04 is triggered to ensure
                                                             that any interventions into the protected areas and the
                                                              areas in their immediate vicinity are fully
                                                              harmonized and supportive of the habitat
                                                              conservation goals. Site-specific ESRs and/or EMPs
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              to be developed for individual sub-projects related to
                                                              protected areas will explain how the above principles
                                                              are integrated into the design and implementation
                                                              arrangements of each sub subproject.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No    While some of the natural areas that could be
                                                              affected directly or indirectly by RDP III are
                                                              forested, OP/BP 4.36 is not being triggered as the
                                                              natural forest areas will be covered within the scope
                                                              of OP/BP 4.04.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No

                         Physical Cultural Resources    Yes   The project aims at attracting increased flow of
                         OP/BP 4.11                           tourists to the natural and cultural heritage sites of
                                                              Samtskhe-Javakheti and Mtskheta-Mtianeti regions.
                                                              This would imply improvement of access to these
                                                              sites and development of tourist infrastructure around
                                                              them. Implementation of civil works in and around
                                                              the historical monuments and other elements of the
                                                              cultural heritage carries a risk of affecting their
                                                              aesthetic value, accidental damage, or gradual
                                                              deterioration. These risks will be specified and their
                                                              mitigation measures laid out in subproject-specific
                                                              ESRs and EMPs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              Also, development of tourist infrastructure and
                                                              improving access to the cultural sites will imply earth
                                                              works carrying high likelihood of chance finds. OP/
                                                              BP 4.11 is triggered to ensure that no element of
                                                              cultural heritage is affected negatively neither during
                                                              construction nor operation of the infrastructure
                                                              provided under the project. Site-specific ESRs and/or
                                                              EMPs will cover the aspect of cultural heritage
                                                              preservation and carry relevant mitigation measures,
                                                              as well as arrangements for monitoring their
                                                              implementation.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No
                         4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   OP/BP 4.12 is triggered in light of temporary
                         BP 4.12                              impacts of anticipated civil works and in case land
                                                              acquisition is required for targeted investments. The
                                                              experience of RDP and RDP II show that triggering
                                                              OP/BP 4.12 is important given that urban upgrading
                                                              leads to permanent and temporary impacts on
                                                                                                                        housing and livelihoods for people living in areas
                                                                                                                        being restored. Because the location and footprint of
                                                                                                                        these investments will not be known until
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        implementation, the Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                                                                        (RPF) prepared for RDP and RDP II will be updated
                                                                                                                        for the purposes of RDP III, incorporating all lessons
                                                                                                                        learned from those two projects.

                                                                                                                        Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for individual
                                                                                                                        subprojects will be prepared as needed in line with
                                                                                                                        the RPF and resettlement measures implemented
                                                                                                                        prior to commencement of civil works at any given
                                                                                                                        subproject site.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No

                                 Projects on International      No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 19-Jan-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      SECHSA report, ESMF and RPF will be developed, disclosed and discussed with the national and
                                      regional stakeholders before appraisal scheduled for November 2014. Subproject-specific ESRs
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      and/or EMPs and RAPs for several investments are likely to be ready by appraisal as well
                                      however sub-projects may be identified and sub-project documentation packages produced during
                                      Project preparation as well as during its implementation phases. Safeguards risk assessment,
                                      development of ESRs and/or EMPs and RAPs, and their review by the Bank will be stringent
                                      conditions for subproject appraisal and approval by the Bank. All subproject-specific EMPs will
                                      be disclosed in-country in Georgian and English languages and consulted with subproject-affected
                                      people prior to commencement of works. RAPs will be disclosed, consulted upon and
                                      implemented prior to commencement of works.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Ahmed A. R. Eiweida

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 04-Dec-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Sumila Gulyani (PMGR)                                                                                                Date: 08-Dec-2014
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
