                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC3193

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Sierra Leone                   Project ID:      P132909
                            Project Name:      SL eTransform Sierra Leone (P132909)
                            Task Team          Mavis A. Ampah
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          16-Sep-2013                    Estimated        12-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     TWICT                          Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General information and communications sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):          e-Government (30%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (30%), e-
                                               Services (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      5.00                    Total Bank Financing:         5.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 5.00
                              Total                                                                       5.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           9.     The project development objective of eTransform Sierra Leone is to improve efficiency and
                           coverage of government services through ICT, and enhance ICT-enabled entrepreneurship.
                           C. Project Description
                           11.      The eTransform Sierra Leone project will help the country benefit from the upcoming
                           international connectivity (via ACE submarine cable) and enable the use of ICT for economic and
                         human development. The project aims to build government’s capacity to leverage ICT towards
                         improving the country’s education and healthcare delivery, and developing entrepreneurial skills to
                         improve employability and create jobs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         12.      The project components are organized in 4 areas: (a) supporting ICT-based entrepreneurial
                         skills development and job creation in Sierra Leone; (b) leveraging ICT to improve education and
                         healthcare service delivery; (c) enabling environment; and (d) project management.

                         Component 1: ICT for Entrepreneurial Skills Development and Job Creation ($1.0 million): The
                         component will, in partnership with the private sector and other development partners, support the
                         development of a cluster of Innovation/Business Incubation Centers in selected areas within and
                         outside of Freetown to provide training in ICT-based business opportunities. There is also potential
                         to use this process to create opportunities for a large number of Sierra Leonean youth to get
                         connected to international platforms which might provide them with enduring opportunities for
                         income and skills development through microwork. Both skilled and semi-skilled work,
                         crowdsourced via popular online facilities (such as Amazon’s Mechanical Turk) or through more
                         structured approaches (such as those of non-profit, Samasource), could link people from these
                         innovation centers to meaningful work and skills development. A related initiative, Naijacloud, has
                         recently been launched in Nigeria and could provide helpful inputs into Sierra Leone’s activities in
                         the area. The incubation centers would be connected to the national e-government network being
                         developed under WARCIP and be assured internet access.

                         Sierra Leone has a young IT industry supported by an active industry association. The project will
                         support growth of local innovation, promotion of local incubators, and development of partnerships
                         and linkages with global organizations and firms. The project’s focus will be on helping identify and
                         create job opportunities, including for the country’s youth and women, and supporting the scale up of
                         promising, sustainable IT-based SMEs and firms.

                         Component 2: Leveraging ICT to Improve Education and Health Service Delivery (US$ 4 million):
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The component will support ICT applications in education and health care. The project will support
                         an assessment of Sierra Leone’s training programs in ICT, caliber of local workforce, and links with
                         job market. It will support training and certification programs in ICT to improve technical skills sets
                         of young graduates. Furthermore, in support of the government’s efforts to improve teaching and
                         learning outcomes in Sierra Leone, the project will support connectivity to selected Tertiary
                         Institutions to improve education and research. The Tertiary Institution Campus Networks would
                         allow for greater collaboration between local schools and international universities and leverage for
                         developing a National Education and Research Network (NRENs). Further technical training in ICT,
                         global linkages with educational institutions, and better harmonization with the domestic job market
                         could create economic opportunities for the country’s poor, including youth and women.

                         To improve health service delivery, the project will help build capacity of Ministry of Health in
                         developing the necessary information systems to manage and track Ministry’s human resources and
                         health care delivery in selected urban and rural centers. The work can enhance health data that is
                         collected and in doing so improve service delivery. The health sector in Sierra Leone currently
                         employs an integrated health information system (HIS) and health data is routinely collected through
                         a network of 1080 peripheral health units and 25 hospitals that are (unevenly) distributed throughout
                         the country. However, the HIS needs to strengthen its capabilities in data collection, analysis and use.
                         Additional applications may be considered. ICT and mobile health applications can help address
                         challenges in the health sector including in the following ways: (a) disease and emergency tracking;
                           (b) point of care diagnostics and remote patient monitoring; (c) remote data collection and
                           surveillance; (d) public health awareness and education using mobile or email broadcast; and (e)
                           telemedicine and ICT-equipped community workers.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Component 3: Enabling Environment (US$ 0.5 million): Supporting programs for enabling
                           environment to help achieve the objectives of eTransform Sierra Leone project.

                           The project will support:
                           a)      Strategy for a coordinated approach to using ICT in country’s development priorities across
                           various line Ministries;
                           b)      Support for reform a nd reorganization of Sierra Tel, including defining business model and
                           turnaround strategy for the incumbent to rapidly return to profitability and further the growth of ICT
                           products and services in Sierra Leone.

                           Component 4: Program Management and Monitoring for Results (US$ 0.5 million): The component
                           will support project management and development and use of a monitoring and evaluation
                           framework for the project. The World Bank will work with the Ministry to assess the requisite
                           expertise for the eTransform project.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Ministry of Information and Communications has received assistance from external consultants on
                           safeguard issues.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Moses Yao Duphey (AFTN3)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The project is likely to have minor and therefore
                           BP 4.01                                              manageable environmental impacts. This may
                                                                                be due to the minor refurbishment of existing
                                                                                buildings most of which are already in use, to
                                                                                create platforms or space for installation of
                                                                                hardware and software equipment. It may also
                                                                                require proper disposal of wastes from these
                                                                                machines/equipment. The WAN connectivity to
                                                                                selected school sites and medical centres
                                                                                involves connecting customer premises to
                                                                                Government’s Network.
                                                                                The process for last mile connectivity solution
                                                                                involves erecting a small pole about 75mm in
                                                                                diameter with a height of about 3-5m at the
                                                                                                                                 highest point of site location. This is not likely
                                                                                                                                 to generate any significant environmental
                                                                                                                                 impact.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 An ESMF will be prepared, consulted upon, and
                                                                                                                                 disclosed before appraisal.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No                            The project will not affect or involve natural
                                                                                                                                 habitats.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            The project does not affect or involve forests.

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            The project does not involve pest management.

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            The project will not affect or involve physical
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         cultural resources.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                                                                                 area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The project activities do not require land
                                 4.12                                                                                            acquisition or any activity that will lead to
                                                                                                                                 relocation or resettlement. All project
                                                                                                                                 installations are to be done in existing public/
                                                                                                                                 government institutions and facilities and no
                                                                                                                                 new construction is envisaged under this
                                                                                                                                 project. Project activities also do not involve
                                                                                                                                 restriction of access or access to assets.
                                                                                                                                 Consequently, the involuntary resettlement
                                                                                                                                 policy is not triggered.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            N/A

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 08-Jul-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Launch May 5, 2013
                                      Complete Draft July 8, 2013
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Mavis A. Ampah

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 26-Sep-2013
                                 Coordinator:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Randeep Sudan (SM)   Date: 04-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
