                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA1506
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Southern Africa                   Project ID:    P133380
                            Project Name:     Zambezi River Basin Development Project (P133380)
                            Task Team         Marcus J. Wishart
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         29-Jul-2013                       Estimated   16-Nov-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTN2                             Lending     Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%), Hydropower (40%),
                                              Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood pr otection (10%), Public
                                              administration- Energy and mining (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (50%), Infrastructure services for private sector
                                              development (40%), Environmental policies and institutio ns (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       6.00           Total Bank Financing:                0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                0.00
                              Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                           6.00
                              Total                                                                                   6.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to advance preparation of the Batoka Gorge Hy-dro-Electric
                           Scheme and strengthen cooperative development within the Zambezi River Basin.



                                                                      Page 1 of 8
                          3. Project Description
                         The Zambezi River Basin Development Project is part of a broader program of support within the
                         Zambezi River basin. The program is facilitated through the multi-donor trust fund for Cooperation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in International Waters in Africa (CIWA MDTF) and intended to providean integrating framework to
                         crowd in and leverage Bank supported programs across various sectors and countries within the
                         Zambezi River basin. The project is intended to advance further development of the Batoka Gorge
                         Hydro-Electric Scheme (HES), along with strategic studies aimed at reducing the economic
                         vulnerability in the event of catastrophic dam failure through a dam break analysis and strengthening
                         the institutional capacity of the Zambezi River Authority (ZRA) to exercise its mandate within the
                         Zambezi River basin.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed Batoka HES is located on the Zambezi River approximately 54km downstream of the
                         world famous Victoria Falls. The project site is located across the boundary between Zambia and
                         Zimbabwe that runs through the mid-point of the Zambezi River. The Batoka Gorge HES was
                         confirmed as the least cost option in respect of average specific energy generation cost for
                         development on the Zambezi River in a feasibility study carried out in 1993. The scheme
                         recommended in this study included a 181 m high Roller Compacted Concrete (RCC) gravity arch
                         dam, radial gated crest type spillway, two underground power stations on each side of the river with
                         four 200 MW Francis turbines installed in each, giving a total capacity of 1600 MW for the scheme.
                         The scheme is designed as a run-of-the river scheme with an estimated average energy generation of
                         8,700 GWh/year. The reservoir would be fully located within the Batoka gorge with a relatively
                         small surface area estimated at 26 Km2.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS)
                         Sanjay Srivastava (AFTN3)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The grant will not finance any civil works but is
                          BP 4.01                                            intended to evaluate the design for the Batoka
                                                                             Gorge HES, any transmission lines required to
                                                                             evacuate the power and other associated
                                                                             infrastructure that would be included in further
                                                                             development of the Batoka GorgeHES. The grant
                                                                             includes preparation of the required
                                                                             Environmental and Social Impact Assessments
                                                                             (ESIA), along with Environmental Management
                                                                             Plans (EMPs), as needed, for each infrastructure
                                                                             investment. These will be carried out separately
                                                                             from the feasibility study to identify issues that
                                                                             need to be addressed in proceeding to the next
                                                                             steps of design, construction and operation, and in
                                                                             sourcing financing for implementation of the
                                                                             project. The project does not in itself extend
                                                                             beyond the undertaking of studies and analysis.



                                                                     Page 2 of 8
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           The grant will not finance any civil works but is
                                                                         intended to evaluate the design for the Batoka
                                                                         Gorge HES, any transmission lines required to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         evacuate the power and other associated
                                                                         infrastructure that would be included in further
                                                                         development of the Batoka GorgeHES. The
                                                                         Zambezi River basin includes a number of
                                                                         important and globally recognized natural habitats
                                                                         and these will be assessed as part of the ESIA.
                                                                         Specific provisions have been included in the
                                                                         ESIA to ensure a review and assessment of
                                                                         existing information and data available to
                                                                         determine any potential cumulative impacts that
                                                                         result from incremental changes caused by other
                                                                         past, present or reasonably foreseeable actions
                                                                         together with the project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            The project does not involve physical
                                                                         interventions in forests, thus the policy is not
                                                                         triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project does not involve the use of pesticides
                                                                         and agro-chemicals, thus the policy is not
                                                                         triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The grant will not finance any civil works but is
                         BP 4.11                                         intended to evaluate the design for the Batoka
                                                                         Gorge HES. Provisions for chance finds will be
                                                                         included in the EMP and the ESIA will determine
                                                                         the potential for any impacts on historically or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         culturally significant physical cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                         area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The grant will not finance any civil works but is
                         4.12                                            intended to evaluate the design for the Batoka
                                                                         Gorge HES, any transmission lines required to
                                                                         evacuate the power and other associated
                                                                         infrastructure that would be included in further
                                                                         development of the Batoka GorgeHES. The grant
                                                                         includes preparation of the required Resettlement
                                                                         Action Plans (RAPs), along with Resettlement
                                                                         Policy Frameworks (RPFs), along with
                                                                         Livelihood Development Plans, as needed, for
                                                                         each infrastructure investment. These will be
                                                                         carried out separately from the feasibility study to
                                                                         identify issues that need to be addressed in
                                                                         proceeding to the next steps of design,
                                                                         construction and operation, and in sourcing
                                                                         financing for implementation of the project. The



                                                                 Page 3 of 8
                                                                                project does not in itself extend beyond the
                                                                                undertaking of studies and analysis.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          Yes              The policy is triggered by the Project’s
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                investment into detailed technical design of the
                                                                                HES, though the Project does not involve the
                                                                                construction of new dams itself. As part of the
                                                                                Technical Design, the Project will finance the
                                                                                updating of Emergency Preparedness Plan,
                                                                                Operation and Maintenance Plan and ToRs for a
                                                                                Panel of Expert which will support future dam
                                                                                safety measures and due diligence. Existing dam
                                                                                safety experts supporting the ZRA will be
                                                                                involved in the studies. In addition training to
                                                                                meet the need of key staff working on dam safety
                                                                                is included in the project.
                            Projects on International          Yes              The project is supporting activities in the Zambezi
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                River basin intended to support the efforts of the
                                                                                riparian states to advance cooperative
                                                                                development in the basin. Notification was made
                                                                                jointly by Ministers from Zambia and Zimbabwe
                                                                                through a letter to the riparian states and SADC
                                                                                on January 22, 2013. The proposed support was
                                                                                also tabled at the first transitional technical
                                                                                committee meeting of ZAMCOM on May 10,
                                                                                2012, the second ZAMTEC meeting in March
                                                                                2013 and to the first meeting of the Council of
                                                                                Ministers held in Luanda, Angola, in May, 2013.
                                                                                No objections were raised.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 The Project is not taking place in disputed areas
                            7.60                                                and the policy is not triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed activities to be financed under the grant do not include any civil works but are aimed
                              at advancing preparation of the 1600MW Batoka Gorge Hydro-Electric Scheme on the mainstem
                              of the Zambezi River. The project will finance a comprehensive environmental impact assessment
                              to identify potential impacts and outline appropriate mitigation measures to be implemented
                              during further development of the proposed Batoka Gorge HES. The assessment will take account
                              of previous impact assessments conducted in 1993 and 1998 and provide an updated baseline
                              assessment. The assessment will predict and assess the potential positive and negative impacts,
                              including direct and indirect impacts, short and long-term duration; along with any potential
                              cumulative impacts. This will be done in quantitative terms, to the extent possible, and will
                              include an economic and financial analysis of alternatives.




                                                                        Page 4 of 8
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Previous impact assessments conducted in 1993 and 1998 concluded that the impacts associated
Public Disclosure Copy




                           with development of the Batoka Gorge HES are likely to result from the inundation and loss of
                           natural habitat in the gorge downstream of Mosi-oa-Tunya / Victoria Falls and impacts related to
                           associated construction of associated community assets, access roads, transmission lines and work
                           camps. This inundation also has the potential to impact on the white-water rafting opportunities
                           below the falls.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The Batoka Gorge hydro-electric scheme was one of a number of potential schemes identified in
                           1972 as part of a study instituted by CAPCO. The aim of the study was to identify possible power
                           sources which the inter-governmental institution could develop to meet the power demands of
                           Zambia and Zimbabwe. In 1981 an update of this study was done, where the dam site was moved
                           12 km upstream. In 1992-93 a feasibility study was commissioned by the ZRA confirming the
                           Batoka Gorge as the least cost option in respect of average specific energy generation cost for
                           development on the Zambezi River. A specific analysis of alternatives will be undertaken as part
                           of the assessment in order to examine the relationship between dam heights, reservoir operating
                           levels and project configurations in order to mitigate or minimizing any potential environmental
                           and social impacts, including those on whitewater rafting or development of future hydro-electric
                           schemes within the Batoka Gorge.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Zambezi River Authority has a dedicated environmental division and carries out regular
                           environmental and compliance monitoring associated with operation and maintenance of the
                           Kariba Dam. The ZRA successfully implemented the Zambezi River Action Plan Project
                           (ZACPRO) program that included development of an integrated water resources strategy for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Zambezi River basin. This provided a strategic assessment of the basin and a solid foundation for
                           further analysis. Additional capacity and training will be supported to address any specific issues
                           relating to compliance with Bank safeguard policies during implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders include those in the immediate vicinity of the project, including local
                           communities, government agencies and institutions, as well as commercial tour operators. The
                           relatively small, confined nature of the Batoka Gorge means that there will be little, if any
                           resettlement from the reservoir area. However, earlier studies have identified the need for
                           Advanced Infrastructure which may have associated social impacts requiring appropriate
                           resettlement instruments.

                          Public Consultation has been established as an important principle guiding implementation of the
                          Batoka Gorge HES. The Terms of Reference for the ESIA have been consulted during preparation
                          with a series of public meetings held in Lusaka (May 14), Harare (May 16), Livingstone (April 29)
                          and Victoria Falls (April 30) with a range of participants from private sector, tour operators,
                          government agencies and international NGOs. During preparation of the ESIA an effective,
                          comprehensive public consultation strategy will be prepared to provide the framework for an
                          iterative consultative process during implementation. The strategy will articulate the specific
                          objectives, a list of stakeholders to be consulted, methods for reaching these stakeholders, the


                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                           scheduling of consultation activities, and how the consultation efforts will be analyzed. Specific
                           provisions have been included to assess the efficacy of the Zambezi Valley Development Fund
                           which was established in 1997 to respond to concerns from key stakeholders downstream and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           enhance the socio-economic status of people displaced during construction of the Kariba Dam in
                           the 1950s.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           28-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        28-Nov-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Zambia and Zimbabwe                                                   29-Apr-2013
                           Comments: Terms of Reference workshopped with stakeholders in Livingstone (April 29),
                                         Victoria Falls (April 30), Lusaka (May 14), and Harare (May 16)
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           28-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        28-Nov-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Zambia and Zimbabwe                                                   29-Apr-2013
                           Comments: Terms of Reference workshopped with stakeholders in Livingstone (April 29),
                                         Victoria Falls (April 30), Lusaka (May 14), and Harare (May 16)
                         Technical Assistance Project
                         For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
Public Disclosure Copy




                         indicate type of document disclosed, if any.
                         The proposed grant will not finance any civil works but is intended to evaluate the design for the
                         Batoka Gorge HES, any transmission lines required to evacuate the power to both coun-tries and
                         other associated infrastructure that would be included in further development of the Batoka Gorge
                         HES. This will inform development of the required Environmental and Social Impact Assessments
                         to be implemented under the grant, along with Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) and
                         Resettlement Action Plans (RAP), as needed, for each infrastructure investment. These will be
                         carried out separately from the feasibility study to identify issues that need to be addressed in
                         proceeding to the next steps of design, construction and operation, and in sourcing financing for
                         implementation of the project. The project does not in itself extend beyond the undertaking of
                         studies and analysis.

                         The Terms of Reference for the ESIA have been consulted during preparation with a series of public
                         meetings held in Lusaka (May 14), Harare (May 16), Livingstone (April 29) and Victoria Falls
                         (April 30) with a range of participants from private sector, tour operators, government agencies and
                         international NGOs. During preparation of the ESIA an effective, comprehensive public consultation
                         strategy will be prepared to provide the framework for an iterative consultative process during
                         implementation.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the



                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or  EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         All documents are expected to be disclosed publically in-country and through the infoShop upon
Public Disclosure Copy




                         completion.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Marcus J. Wishart
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 11-Mar-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (SM)                    Date: 12-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
