                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA1581
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Colombia                          Project ID:    P123879
                            Project Name:     Subnational Institutional Strengthening (P123879)
                            Task Team         Pedro Arizti
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         21-Oct-2013                       Estimated   19-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    LCSPS                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Central government administration (50%), Sub-national government
                                              administration (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (75%), Managing
                                              for development results (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      70.00           Total Bank Financing:               70.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   70.00
                              Total                                                                                   70.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the project is to improve SNGs’ performance in core public management areas and
                           to strengthen the central Government's capacity to manage the fiscal decentralization framework.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 6
                         The proposed project would be implemented over a seven-year period and would comprise five
                         components.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.       Component/Part 1: Institutionalization of DNP’s Territorial Deputy Direction and bases for
                         the articulation of territorial policy (US$10.000 million). The provision of support to DNP, including
                         consultant services, training, and technical assistance to improve territorial strategic planning with a
                         national perspective, toward a better sector coordination and taking regional priorities into account.
                         Activities would include the following:
                         (a)      Strengthening and institutionalizing DNP’s Territorial Deputy Directorate.
                         (b)      Elaborating territorial strategic analysis, assessments, and alternative scenarios for
                         development, policies, and strategies (national Government).
                         (c)      Identifying, collecting, and making available information for regional planning decisions;
                         and generating results information and articulating the sources of regional development financing
                         (national and regional governments).

                         2.       Component/Part 2: Designing and implementing a territorial management performance
                         incentive framework (US$11.560 million). The provision of support to DNP, including operating
                         costs, training, and technical assistance for carrying out activities aimed at the following:
                         (a)      Defining performance indicators and information tools to measure SNGs’ public
                         management capacity development.
                         (b)      Defining standards and good practices in subnational public management performance.
                         (c)      Designing and implementing an incentive framework to reward subnational management
                         performance.

                         3.Component/Part 3: Design and implementation of a Territorial Management Strengthening
                         Strategy (US$32.530 million). The provision of support to DNP and MHCP, including software non-
                         consultant services, operating costs, training, and technical assistance for the design, development,
                         and implementation of a management model for SNGs or territorial entities, and support for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         generation of performance information about municipal management. Activities would include the
                         following:
                         (a)      Strengthening territorial entities’ (or SNGs’) management capacities.
                         (b)      Supporting the design of the Territorial Management Model (TMM) cycle (from planning,
                         administrative management, and financial management, to monitoring and evaluation concepts),
                         identifying and developing methodologies and technological tools to help ensure easy adoption and
                         institutionalization of the model.
                         (c)      Design, development and implementation of a Territorial Management Information System
                         (TMIS)
                         (d)      Strengthening the governing entities (or entes rectores) of the TMM, and
                         (e)      Strengthening citizen participation and social control

                         4.      Component/Part 4: Strengthening the national Government's territorial public management
                         capacities to control, monitor, and evaluate (US$5.720 million). The provision of support to DNP,
                         including operating costs, training, and technical assistance for carrying out activities aimed at the
                         following:
                         (a)     Strengthening Government control capacity for spending carried out by territorial entities.
                         (b)     Improving instruments for territorial management control, such as such as risk maps,
                         standards and benchmarks, and control metrics.




                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                         5.Component/Part 5: Support to Project Management and Administration (US$10.190 million). The
                         provision of support to DNP, specifically the Project Management Team in the Subdirectorate for
                         Territorial and Public Investment (STIP), to implement and execute the project and support services
Public Disclosure Copy




                         via the fiduciary agent FINDETER, including goods, consultant services, non-consulting services,
                         operating costs, and training for carrying out adequate management, monitoring, reporting, auditing,
                         and evaluation of project implementation activities and the Borrower's reform agenda (all should be
                         procured observing the applicable World Bank procurement procedures).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         This is a national project in Colombia.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto (LCSSD)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The proposed project will trigger the
                          BP 4.01                                            Environment Assessment Safeguard Policy (OP/
                                                                             BP 4.01). The activities proposed under this
                                                                             Project are not expected to have any
                                                                             environmental or social impacts. However, there
                                                                             could be potential downstream implications for
                                                                             natural resource planning or investments affecting
                                                                             natural resources from the territorial planning
                                                                             supported by the Project. To the extent that the
                                                                             analytical studies envisaged under Component 1
                                                                             might affect relevant environmental issues, the
                                                                             Government of Colombia will adopt terms of
                                                                             reference for non-consulting services and for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             consultants’ services under the Project in
                                                                             accordance with the requirements of the Bank
                                                                             Safeguards Policies.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No              There are no critical or natural habitats that will
                                                                             be affected by the project.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              The project has no foreseen activities that will
                                                                             impact forests.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No              The project will not involve the purchase or use
                                                                             of pesticides.
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No              There are no physical cultural resources that will
                          BP 4.11                                            be affected by the project.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes             The proposed project will trigger the Indigenous
                                                                             Peoples Safeguards Policy OP/BP 4.10. This
                                                                             policy is triggered based on the consideration that
                                                                             the proposed project will potentially cover the
                                                                             entire territory of Colombia, thus including those
                                                                             areas populated by indigenous peoples and
                                                                             Afrodescendants. During implementation, those


                                                                     Page 3 of 6
                                                                              activities carried out under subcomponent 3.4
                                                                              (strengthen citizen participation and social
                                                                              control) in municipalities with established
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              representative bodies for indigenous populations
                                                                              and/or Afro Colombian communities will adopt a
                                                                              “differential approach?. Thus, the activities will
                                                                              take into account the traditions, language (if
                                                                              necessary), and special jurisdiction of these
                                                                              communities and will include participation
                                                                              mechanisms that allow for the consultation of
                                                                              Afro Colombian and indigenous representative
                                                                              institutions. The activities envisaged will also
                                                                              incorporate a communications strategy that
                                                                              addresses the organizational, territorial,
                                                                              normative and cultural characteristics of Afro
                                                                              Colombian and indigenous groups.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No                The project activities will not result in
                            4.12                                              involuntary resettlement nor require land
                                                                              acquisition.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No                The project will neither support the construction
                                                                              or rehabilitation of dams and it will not support
                                                                              other investments which relay on services of
                                                                              existing dams.
                            Projects on International        No                 The project activities will not affect
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                              international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 The project activities will not take place in
                            7.60                                              disputed areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The project team proposes an environmental category of C per OP/BP 4.01, since the project is
                              likely to have minimal or no adverse impacts.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                The project is not expected to cause significant social or environmental impacts.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                N/A
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

                                                                      Page 4 of 6
                            For those municipalities with a presence of Afro Colombian or indigenous populations
                           represented respectively by community councils and indigenous reservations, under subcomponent
                           3.4., the standard application “kit? that facilitates citizen participation and territorial management
Public Disclosure Copy




                           feedback envisaged, as well as the rest of ICT tools/applications planned, will be developed
                           following a “differential approach" that will guarantee the participation of these groups, as well as
                           the appropriate communication of the activities proposed.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                             01-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                          01-Oct-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Colombia                                                                01-Jan-2014
                           Comments: The BP/OP 4.01 is triggered as a precuation and therefore an Environmental
                                         Assessment is not needed. The activities proposed under Component 1 that are
                                         related to the articulation of a territorial policy are not operational in nature.
                                         However, to the extent that these analytical studies might affect relevant
                                         environmental issues such as the definition of alternative regional development
                                         strategies, the terms of reference for non-consulting services and for consultants’
                                         services will take into account the principles and standards of the Bank’s safeguards
                                         policy and provide advice in ways consistent with such.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                             01-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                          01-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Colombia                                                                01-Jan-2014
                           Comments: The Indigenous Peoples Safeguard (BP/OP 4.10) is triggered preventively, since the
                                         project will be limited to providing technical assistance and will not entail an
                                         operational engagement. Thus, the preparation of an Indigenous Peoples Planning
                                         Framework is not required. Under subcomponent 3.4., a "differential approach" for
                                         engagement with indigenous peoples and Afro descendants will be adopted in those
                                         municipalities with a presence of these populations, through their representative
                                         bodies.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         See comments above.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?


                                                                      Page 5 of 6
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Indigenous Peoples?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Pedro Arizti
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                          Date: 24-Oct-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Arturo Herrera Gutierrez (SM)                  Date: 25-Oct-2013




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
