INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCI 113
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Feb-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Argentina                  Project ID:   P120414
Project Name:    Argentina FCPF REDD Readiness (P120414)
Task Team        Peter Jipp
Leader(s):
Estimated        22-May-2018
Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR
Sector(s):       Forestry (100%)
Theme(s):        Climate change (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       3.80             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          0.00
Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility          3.80
Total                                                             3.80
Environmental
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to support Argentina's REDD+ readiness efforts, in particular
those activities focusing on management arrangements, REDD+ Strategy development, and Strategic
Environmental and Social Assessment.
The key results expected from the proposed REDD+ readiness grant are:
i.     REDD+ Management arrangements have been strengthened through the establishment and
functioning of Executive and Advisory Committees.


﻿ii.    REDD+ strategic options are consulted and designed
iii.   A participatory SESA (Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment) and an ESMF
(Environmental and Social management Framework) are prepared with feedback from key
stakeholders.
o
C. Project Description
Argentina was selected into the FCPF on October 2008, and the Participation Agreement signed on
January 2009. The Argentine Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP) was approved during the sixth
a      meeting of the FCPF Participants Committee on June 2010, pending a series of key issues to be
reflected in a revised version. Such version was submitted and verified for completeness by the FCPF
Facility Management Team (FMT) in January 2014. The R-PP identifies a broad set of activities
aimed at strengthening the technical and institutional capacities for the GoA to participate in a future
REDD+ mechanism. The overall financial envelope for carrying out these activities is estimated at
approximately US$12 million.
Argentina also became a partner country to the UN-REDD Program in October 2009. At its 12th
Policy Board meeting held on July 2014 in Lima, Peru, an allocation for the amount of USD
3,591,000 was approved by the Program to support the country's REDD+ Readiness activities based
on a revised version of the R-PP. The task team is closely coordinating with the UN-REDD and
SAyDS teams to ensure that adequate collaboration mechanisms and synergies are established at the
technical and administrative level. At the same time, the task team is closely coordinating with the
IBRD team of the Forests and Communities project (P 132846) which is in the final stages of
preparation to ensure complementarity and potential synergies with the REDD+ readiness activities.
The FCPF operation will focus on a subset of activities specified in the R-PP, structured around three
components as listed below. These activities have been selected after technical discussions with the
SAyDS, taking into account the following criteria: (i) the priority needs for conducting the REDD+
Readiness process in Argentina, (ii) the World Bank's comparative advantages and (iii) the
complementarity with support provided through ongoing WB initiatives, other financial partners, and
the government.
Component 1 (US$0.55M): REDD+ Management arrangements and Grievance Redress (RPP 1 a 6).
This component will assist the GoA in: (i) strengthening the Project Implementation Unit responsible
for the day-to-day operations of the project by hiring additional human resources dedicated to the
FCPF operation; ii) strengthening the institutional arrangements for REDD+ Readiness by supporting
the establishment and operation of a Steering Committee (SC), functioning as high level decision-
making body for REDD+, and an Advisory Committee for REDD+, composed by civil society
organizations and functioning as a supporting body to the SC; iii) develop and test a Feedback,
Grievance and Redress Mechanism (FGRM) for REDD+; v) support the Monitoring and Evaluation
of the project's implementation.
Component 2 (US$ 2.8M) Support for the development of the REDD+ strategy (RPP 2a, 2b, 2c).
This component will assist the GoA in: (i) strengthening the capacity to implement the Native Forest
Law 26.331 in the context of REDD+; ii) supporting at least 3-6 key provinces in strengthening their
capacity for REDD+; iii) conducting analytical work to explore the linkages and synergies between
the forestry and agriculture sectors in the context of climate change and REDD+; and iv) conducting
technical evaluations and design of REDD+ strategic options.
Component 3 (US$ 0.45M): Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) (RPP 2d). This
component will assist the GoA in: (i) conducting a participatory SESA, in line with the stakeholder


﻿consultation and participation plan developed by SAyDS; ii) carrying out diagnostic studies to assess
key risks and opportunities of strategic options as part of the SESA; and iii) developing an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).
O
U       The activities to be financed by the FCPF will not include any physical investment or the
implementation of any REDD+ program on the ground. The FCPF support is limited to analytical
studies, capacity building, and consultation processes at the national and sub-national levels.
Through the Readiness Program, the GoA is expected to identify priority investments needed to
achieve the goals of REDD+. These investments will be financed by public and private donors and
investors and the Government itself, and not by the FCPF Readiness Grant. Such future REDD+
investments are expected to draw upon the SESA and ESMF prepared under this project but will
undertake site specific assessment and consultations with respect to social and environmental
impacts.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The activities to be financed by the FCPF will not include any physical investment or the
implementation of any REDD+ pilot project on the ground. The FCPF support is limited to analytical
studies, capacity building, and consultation processes at the national and sub-national levels.
While Readiness Preparation is conceived as mostly strategic planning at this stage, key policy and
regulatory precedents are being set at the readiness phase that might have downstream impact at the
national level once the national REDD+ strategy is ready to be implemented. The Grant itself will
finance preparation rather than implementation activities but may lead to recommendations for
actions in the future which could bring risks that will be assessed during the Grant period (e.g.
Through the REDD+ Readiness project, the GoA is expected to identify priority investments needed
to achieve the goals of REDD+. These investments would be financed by public and private donors
and investors and the Government itself, and not by the FCPF Readiness Grant).
The analytical and diagnostic studies as well as the consultation meetings and workshops that will be
financed under this Grant will be used to address any potential risks and/or negative impacts
associated with the actions being considered for the National REDD+ Strategy. In that way, such
future REDD+ investments are expected to draw upon the SESA and ESMF prepared under this
project.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Under previous Bank projects, SAyDS has demonstrated openness to dialogue and a readiness to
embrace innovation. However, experience has also shown that SAyDS's implementation capacity is
rudimentary, that its influence in the Provinces is limited, and that time is needed to build capacity
and change attitudes among the stakeholders. SAyDS's specific capacity for safeguards policies is
not an exception to this general observation. Its experience on safeguards management is rather
limited.
Given the cross-sector and countrywide nature of REDD+, safeguards policies for FCPF funded
activities will apply at more strategic level than in regular World Bank-financed projects. While
SAyDS has previous experience in managing the Bank's safeguards policies in a limited number of
grants and investment lending projects, very few of them (if any, at all) have used a SESA approach.
In addition to that, as in Argentina the constitution grants authority over natural resources to the
individual Provinces, the institutional arrangements that the SAyDS reach with the Provincial
governments would seem to be crucial in order to ensure their buying into the SESA process and its


﻿final results as input for their forests management decisions.
For those reasons, budgetary provisions are being made by the recipient of the grant, in order to
ensure the availability of grant resources to recruit, and eventually train, staff dedicated to the
O
U       development of SESA for REDD+, and the ulterior safeguards management implementation. In
addition, SAyDS has prepared a preliminary SESA Plan that needs to be further strengthened during
the Readiness phase. An initial working session between SAyDS, UN-REDD and the WB team was
held in October 2014 to establish a way forward and coordinate the activities supported between the
two programs related to participation, safeguards, and SESA. It was agreed that the SESA process
will be integrated within the broader stakeholder consultation and participation plan, and that it will
be carefully sequenced and aligned with the analytical work following an eco-regional approach.
Budgetary provisions have been made to ensure the availability of grant resources to recruit staff
exclusively dedicated to the development of SESA for REDD+ and the subsequent development of
safeguards instruments within the Project Implementation Unit, in addition to staff dedicated to
stakeholder engagement, Indigenous Peoples consultation, and communications supported by
UNREDD. The draft SESA Plan is currently under preparation in collaboration between the SAyDS,
UN-REDD and World Bank teams.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Lilian Pedersen (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         Based on the overall assessment of potential impacts
OP/BP 4.01                              of the downstream REDD+ strategy (i.e., not just the
Readiness Preparation activities), a Category B
designation is proposed for the Project based on the
largely positive or neutral project environmental
impacts anticipated. During implementation of the
grant, proposed REDD+ strategies will be assessed in
appropriate detail to confirm or adjust this
designation. Because the final REDD+ strategies are
not known (they will be constructed using both
consultation and technical analysis), but could have
widespread impacts, it is important to take a strategic
approach toward assessing impacts. This will be
done by undertaking a Strategic Environmental and
Social Assessment (SESA). The SESA would then
become the main input into an Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF), which
would be prepared during project preparation, and
which will describe the planning process and the
ways in which environmental and social
considerations will be taken into account. The ESMF
will provide specifics of the mitigation measures,
institutional roles and responsibilities, and measures
for capacity building where needed. These processes


﻿would ensure conformity with Bank safeguard
policies, as eventual subsequent REDD+ investments
would also be subject to a rigorous EA process to
avoid adverse impacts on the local environment, and
appropriate mitigation measures would also be
included in their designs. Approval by the Bank of
the draft ESMF would be one condition for the
eventual signing of an ERPA under the FCPF Carbon
Fund.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes          This initiative is intended to affect natural habitats in
a positive way by reducing deforestation and
degradation of lands including natural habitat. It is
expected that the incentive system established by
future REDD+ activities will provide greater
protection of natural habitats and recognition of their
value. The potential for activities that protect forests
to generate leakage into other habitats (displacement
of economic activities from greater protection or
increased value of forested lands) such as wetlands
and grasslands will also be considered in the SESA
process.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes         This safeguard is triggered given the direct
implications for forests of the future REDD+
activities. It is expected that the technical assistance
activities will result in investments and a process that
will positively protect forests and generate incentives
for their sustainable management consistent with best
practices and Bank standards. Potential impacts of
the National REDD+ Strategy on natural forests will
be assessed through the SESA and included in the
ESMF. The ESMF will consider potential follow-on
activities and investments in sustainable forest
management during the implementation phase and
provide the guidelines for evaluating and carrying-
out activities.
Pest Management OP 4.09      TBD         Pest management is not a part of the activities of the
readiness phase. However this aspect may be
considered within the framework to be prepared for
the next phase, as one of the potential strategic
options pre-identified by the GoA (according to what
was reported during the mission carried out during
March, 2014) has to do with the rehabilitation of
degraded lands for agricultural production, aimed at
reducing the competition for lands (and the pressure
on forests) imposed by these productive activities. In
this way, projects in the implementation phase could
involve policies and investments that may affect


﻿agriculture and reforestation on different scales
which may have pest management implications. The
triggering of this safeguard will be determined once
there is greater defmition of the nature of
investments and the scope of safeguards for the
follow-on investment phase of REDD+. The SESA
will address critical issues related to pest
management if necessary, and if so, these will also
be included in the key elements for the ESMF.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes          Given the nature of the activities of the readiness
OP/BP 4.11                                phase, Physical cultural resources should not be
affected. The policy on Physical Cultural Resources
(OP 4.11) is triggered given the uncertainty
regarding the exact locations of activities to be
carried out under the REDD+ Strategy during its
implementation phase.
Some landscapes, forests, or resources contained by
them, which might be addressed by the REDD+
strategy, can be considered to have historical or
cultural significance, so the SESA process will
address this issue, and the ESMF would include
specific provisions to assess the potential impacts on
such elements, prior to any activities being
undertaken on the ground.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes          This policy is triggered as there are indigenous
4.10                                      peoples in Argentina that meet the four criteria
outlined in the policy. These populations are
especially vulnerable to changes in land use or
restrictions on their use of natural resources due to
insecure land tenure and an economy based on
subsistence agriculture. The potential impacts of a
future National-REDD+ Strategy on indigenous
peoples will be identified during the SESA process
and measures to mitigate any impacts or maximize
the benefits associated with future REDD+
investments will be reflected in an ESMF, which will
contain specific sections addressing the requirements
of OP 4.10. An Indigenous People Planning
Framework will be prepared for use during the
implementation of the REDD+ strategy. Stakeholder
risk will be reduced by developing culturally
appropriate consultations for Indigenous Peoples
located in the selected provincial area where free
prior and informed consultation will be conducted
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         The policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12)
BP 4.12                                   has been triggered as investments under the National
REDD+ Strategy may place restrictions on the use of


﻿natural resources both within and outside of national
protected areas. During REDD+ readiness, an
assessment of the nature of potential impacts will be
carried out as part of the SESA process and
depending upon the geographical focus of REDD+
investments and the strategic options selected for the
final version of the REDD+ strategy. Mitigation
measures including support for improving the
livelihoods of those impacted will be included in the
ESMF; which will contain specific sections
addressing these issues, as Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) and/or a Process Framework (PF).
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No            It is not expected that activities during the
preparation or following phases of REDD+ would
neither imply projects related to the construction or
rehabilitation of dams, nor will it support other
investments which rely on the services of existing
dams.
Projects on International     No           It is not expected that activities during the
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       preparation or following phases of REDD+ would
imply projects on international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No          The project does not involve disputed areas.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Jan-2018
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The main safeguard instrument to be used during the REDD+ readiness project execution is the
SESA that will serve to document the environmental and social benefits and risks of the REDD+
strategy based on a participatory approach. The SESA will be the analytical tool used to identify
and assess the potential social and environmental impacts associated with the REDD+ strategic
options. One of the main products of the SESA process will be an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF), which will be prepared as an operational tool to manage risks
and impacts and maximize the potential benefits of any future REDD+ investments. The ESMF is
intended to be a live document that may evolve and be updated over time when new REDD +
strategy options and projects or activities (including investments), or policies/regulations are
identified during implementation of REDD+. The SESA addresses the key environmental and
social issues associated with the analysis and preparation of REDD+ strategy options as well as
REDD+ projects, activities (including investments), policies and regulations. The SESA will
ensure that a careful assessment is carried out to determine the risks to continued deforestation and
forest degradation as a result of decisions taken outside of the direct control of the forest
administration.
As per the World Bank's safeguard policy on Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), an ESMF
may contain specific sections addressing the requirements of other applicable safeguard policies
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿including, as relevant, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF); a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF); and/or a Process Framework (PF).
IV. APPROVALS
O
U       Task Team Leader(s): Name: Peter Jipp
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards   Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)              Date: 18-Jun-2015
Advisor:
Practice Manager/     Name: Christian Albert Peter (PMGR)         Date: 30-Jun-2015
Manager:


