                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA5378
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Burkina Faso                      Project ID:    P143993
                            Project Name:      FIP - DECENTRALIZED FOREST AND WOODLAND MANAGEMENT
                                               PROJECT (P143993)
                            Task Team          Hocine Chalal
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       21-Oct-2013                          Estimated   22-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTN1                                 Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Forestry (60%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%), Other
                                              Renewable Energy (10%), Public administration- Agricul ture, fishing and
                                              forestry (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (40%), Land administration and management (20%), Other
                                              environment and natural resources management (20%), Micro, Sma ll and
                                              Medium Enterprise support (10%), Other rural development (10%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      26.00           Total Bank Financing:                  0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   0.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                              16.50
                              EC European Commission                                                                     9.50
                              Total                                                                                     26.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)

                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         The project objective is to promote national development policies as well as to support the definition
                         and implementation of community-based natural resource management processes in 32, mostly rural,
                         communes in a way that strengthen sustainable local development practices and contributes to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reducing GHG emissions from deforestation and woodland degradation.

                         Specifically, this project aims to: (i) support climate change governance, particularly through the
                         design of a national REDD+ strategy that is applied to institutional and legislative frameworks in
                         different sectors and results in concrete investments in targeted zones; (ii) improve land use planning
                         and economic activities around forest and woodland resources, with particular emphasis on the
                         participation of women, who are the main actors in the exploitation of non-timber forest resources;
                         and (iii) establish guidance, best practices and a structure of knowledge management around
                         sustainable natural resource management as well as Climate Change mitigation and adaptation
                         particularly through GHG emissions reduction.
                         3. Project Description
                         The Decentralized Forest and Woodland Project is designed to achieve an integrated, inclusive
                         community forest and woodland management regime that is based on improving livelihoods and
                         reducing poverty while simultaneously enhancing carbon sequestration potential. Through a
                         combined approach of tailored local action, developed in close coordination with local stakeholders,
                         and actions on a regulatory and legal framework the project will support activities that contribute to
                         improving livelihoods and mitigating, as well as building resilience to, climate change.

                         The sites considered for intervention will be areas experiencing a dynamic of significant forest
                         degradation, yet holding a high potential for reforestation. These targeted zones will capture some or
                         all of the following dynamics: deforestation linked to the supply fuelwood for major cities;
                         deforestation caused by extensive agricultural practices; afforestation/deforestation caused by
                         anthropogenic pressure (subsistence farming in densely populated area for example) and; areas of
                         high biodiversity and water resource value. The project will implement actions both within the forest
                         sector and outside the sector, focusing on enabling activities such as land use planning and rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development planning.

                         The project will be developed as part of a collaborative initiative between the World Bank and the
                         African Development Bank under the Forest Investment Program that seeks to build synergies to
                         reinforce the impact of investments while avoiding the duplication of effort. The Participatory
                         Management of Protected Forest Areas Project (US $12 million FIP financing) executed by the
                         African Development Bank will focus on areas within classified protected forest areas.

                         The World Bank executed project, the Decentralized Forest and Woodland Management Project, will
                         be developed in partnership with the European Union's CLIM-GDDF project in areas around
                         protected forests through an investment of €8 million (approximately USD 9.23 million) from the
                         European Union. The EU is supporting strategic priorities related to improving climate governance
                         that will lead to sustainable management of forests and woodlands to support socio-economic
                         development and increasing their ability to sequester carbon as well as reducing pressures on forest
                         ecosystems. Through the identified priorities of i) integrating climate change into country sectoral
                         strategies, ii) reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and concerted activities at
                         national and local levels, and iii) adaptation to climate change, the objectives of the EU are integrated
                         into the World Bank executed project.

                         The project supports an innovative approach to sustainable land, forest and woodland management

                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         by making it part of the decentralization process. The project supports the decentralization process
                         that officially plans to transfer natural resource management to the local (commune and village)
                         level, specifically through comprehensive land use mapping as part of a local integrated natural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         resource management plan. The project focuses on the landscape as an integrated, productive, forest
                         and woodland mosaic with the development of a territory rather than just one sector and supports
                         planning and decision-making through local institutions like Village Development Committees
                         (CVD).

                         The project promotes a multi-faceted approach to forest and woodland management to deliver
                         transformational impact by targeting the multi-dimensional drivers of deforestation and forest and
                         woodland degradation this project, in conjunction with initiatives on classified forests in the
                         immediate surroundings (AfDB executed FIP project). The project seeks to deliver a robust approach
                         that will have a transformational impact in the targeted sites. While there have been successful
                         experiences on integrated land use or the development of alternative livelihoods they have often been
                         developed in isolation. The project takes the critical step of moving beyond a focus on forest
                         resources in isolation, towards a broad strategy to both reduce pressures on forests and woodlands
                         and reduce poverty by promoting sustainable land and forest management.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will have interventions at the national as well as sub-national levels. National level
                         interventions will be based predominantly in Ouagadougou while investments at the local level will
                         occur 12 provinces and 32 communes (26 rural and 6 urban) that border classified forest and
                         woodland areas
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
                         Abdoulaye Gadiere (AFTN1)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes               The project activity under sub component 2.2 is
                          BP 4.01                                            expected to support income-generating activities
                                                                             that use forest resources in selected sites. These
                                                                             activities may have environmental impacts on a
                                                                             limited scale. An ESMF has been prepared,
                                                                             consulted upon, and disclosed in the country and
                                                                             at the Infoshop.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        Yes               This policy is not triggered because of the
                                                                             presence of critical ecosystems in the project
                                                                             targeted areas. But, as a project which aims to
                                                                             enhance the quality of the management of forest
                                                                             and woodlands, particular attention may be paid
                                                                             to these particular ecosystems. Then, the
                                                                             conception of the subprojects should take into
                                                                             account this issue. The ESMF elaborated in
                                                                             accordance with OP4.01 will provide guidance on
                                                                             avoiding or mitigating impacts on natural
                                                                             habitats.


                                                                     Page 3 of 8
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes              No activity of the project is expected to promote
                                                                             timber exploitation or to finance activities which
                                                                             will contribute to destroy the forest. As the above
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             policy, OP4.36 is triggered to underscore the
                                                                             attention that must be paid to aspects related to
                                                                             the protection of the forest resources during
                                                                             project preparation and implementation.
                                                                             Improving Forestry management policies is a
                                                                             primary focus of this project. While the project
                                                                             will explore integrated forest management as part
                                                                             of a strategy of increasing carbon sequestration
                                                                             potential the main expected result is improved
                                                                             forest management. The ESMF will include
                                                                             guidance on managing forestry issues.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No               Not relevant

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              This policy could be triggered if the project
                            BP 4.11                                          activities promote actions in areas containing
                                                                             sites deemed physical or cultural resources by
                                                                             local communities (holy/secret sites such as
                                                                             sacred groves, sacred forests etc.). It is not
                                                                             anticipated that the project will have negative
                                                                             impacts on any such sites. During implementation
                                                                             particular attention will be paid to ensure that
                                                                             project activities do not affect such sites.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              Not relevant
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             No involuntary resettlement is anticipated,
                            4.12                                             however because of the possibility for limitation
                                                                             of access (essentially related to the possible
                                                                             impact on traditional transhumance corridors and
                                                                             grazing lands) a Process Framework has also
                                                                             been prepared, reviewed, approved and disclosed
                                                                             in the targeted areas and at the Infoshop.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              The project will not finance dam or dam-related
                                                                             investments.
                            Projects on International         No              The project will not depend on international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                             waterways and will not finance water resources
                                                                             use activities.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No               This project is not being implemented in any
                            7.60                                             disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


                                                                     Page 4 of 8
                           No significant environmental impacts are expected from this project as its intention is to promote
                           sound natural resources management and improve animal and vegetal biodiversity. However it is
                           recognized that despite this virtuous intention it is necessary for the sake of the environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                           integrity of the project to follow a structured assessment process to ensure that no activities will
                           have unintended consequences on the environment.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Land issues are very sensitive in the current context of Burkina Faso and the Bank has reviewed
                           extensively the implication of land based intervention in the context of the FIP. In some instances,
                           there are real tensions between farmers and herders over access of cattle to water holes or grazing
                           fields. In some of the proposed activities it might happen that this question of cattle passage will
                           have to be negotiated between the parties. There exist now a structured approach to reach these
                           agreements and reconcile the points of view; these are the land charters (chartes foncières). The
                           project will use this existing process in order to reach a consensus. In case of irreconcilable
                           disagreement the project will not finance the corresponding activity
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           An analysis of alternatives carried out by the government of Burkina Faso, including the option of
                           not implementing the plan, provided solid evidence that the investments in the project, as part of a
                           broader FIP program, will have a real substantive as well as catalytic impact on sustainable
                           development in the country. Through integrating participatory approaches into the policy and
                           institutional framework and at community level through capacity building, the project will have
                           series of positive impacts which could expand to the broader Sahel region. A consultative and
                           participatory process will be undertaken as part of a CDD approach to developing forest and
                           woodland management strategies specifically to minimize social conflicts, while promoting
                           sustainable land management practices.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Considering the similar objectives and implementation arrangements, the safeguards instruments
                           to be used are based to a great extent on those of the PNGT2-Phase 3 project that was approved in
                           late 2012. Accordingly an Environmental and Social Management Framework has been prepared;
                           On the social side, because of potential limitation to accessing some lands particularly used
                           traditionally as cattle trails or grazing fields, a Process Framework has also been prepared that
                           describes the principles and procedures to follow in such instances.

                           Based on Burkina Faso's past experiences with World Bank projects and safeguard measures
                           including on decentralization, the capacity of the borrower, while limited, is adequate to carry out
                           the proposed safeguard policy measures.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The ESMF and the Process Framework mentioned above have been consulted upon and disclosed
                           before the decision meeting held on October 28 2013.

                           While the project will feed into a national climate change and REDD+ strategy, the key
                           stakeholders will be community members and private sector actors in the targeted project sites of
                           the project (component 2). Commune level officials will play an important role in ensuring that
                           investments are carried out. Women will be specifically targeted for integration into processing

                                                                      Page 5 of 8
                           activities of non-timber forest products.

                           At the national level a Special REDD+/ Sustainable Land Management (SLM) Consultative
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Platform is being created to elaborate the national REDD+ strategy and more generally the
                           implementation of the REDD+ readiness activities. The Consultative Platform will ensure multi-
                           sectoral coordination as reflected in its composition and also ensures the appropriate level of
                           political commitment.

                           A Regional Coordination Committee will act as a local steering committee and monitor FIP
                           program activities for both World Bank and African Development Bank project (PGFC/REDD+)
                           implementation and will provide a sub-national basis for gathering feedback from stakeholders at
                           the commune/village level to feed into national level strategies and deliberations.

                           In addition, as part of a more extended grievance and redress mechanism that will be detailed in
                           the Project Implementation Manual (to be finalized), the project will contract an external
                           independent evaluator over the lifetime of the project, in charge of both analyzing the social
                           dynamics at local level and interacting with the communities as an independent mediator in case of
                           local conflicts. The reviews will be carried out by an independent evaluator and mediator in
                           conjunction with a local team of experts, in close collaboration with a local university of sociology
                           department. Its analysis will allow the project to evaluate the level of ownership and the
                           satisfaction of the population on the field.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Nov-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Burkina Faso                                                     08-Nov-2013
                           Comments: This is the date of the disclosure of the final documets (on MEDD website) -
                                         Consultations on the draft documents happened on Oct. 17th.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Nov-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Burkina Faso                                                     08-Nov-2013
                           Comments: This is the date of the disclosure of the final documets (on MEDD website) -
                                         Consultations on the draft documents happened on Oct. 17th.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level

                                                                       Page 6 of 8
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                             Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of critical natural habitats?
                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Hocine Chalal
                            Approved By


                                                                        Page 7 of 8
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 17-Nov-2013
                         Advisor:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Benoit Bosquet (SM)           Date: 20-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              Page 8 of 8
