                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC7036

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                            Project ID:      P148294
                            Project Name:       Wuhan Integrated Transport Development (P148294)
                            Task Team           Arturo Ardila Gomez
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           05-Jan-2015                      Estimated        23-Jul-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASCS                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Urban Transport (95%), Public administration- Transportation (5%)
                            Theme(s):           City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (90%), Municipal governance and
                                                institution building (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    256.00                      Total Bank Financing:        120.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      136.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         120.00
                              Total                                                                         256.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           21.      The Proposed PDO is: to improve the integration of transport services, improve reliability of
                           the transport system, improve road safety, reduce travel times by public transport, and decrease
                           operational costs of the transport system in Wuhan and Anlu.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project is designed to enhance the integration of Wuhan and Anlu and also to showcase
                         innovative integration solutions within each city. In Wuhan, the project comprises a comprehensive
                         ICT platform to improve the planning, operation, management of the city’s transport system and
                         make it more reliable, convenient, safe and accessible. Here, integration is tackled at a strategic level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to strengthen the foundations for efficient and seamless journeys and to enhance the strategic link to
                         Anlu. In Anlu, the focus is more local with the improvement of railway and bus stations connecting
                         with Wuhan, the development of integrated public transport corridors, improvement of public
                         transport, road safety measures, and road infrastructure improvements focused on the re-functioning
                         of key roads. The proposed project will have the following components:
                         24.      Component 1: Integrated Corridor and Road Safety Improvements for Anlu:
                         (i)      Road Network Re-functioning including road rehabilitation, road pavement improvements,
                         construction of new road sections and public transport priority (where appropriate on around 35km of
                         integrated corridors. The new road sections are in Anlu City. Potential corridors include avenues
                         such as Biyun Road (8.2km), Qu Bu Qu Zongyi Road (7.5km), Yinxing Avenue (3.1km) and Jinqiu
                         Avenue (4.5km). For each of the four avenues, there might be several kilometers of new road
                         construction. (All the physical investment will be in the urban and sub-urban areas which have been
                         heavily influenced by human activities (e.g. farmland). Based on the project proposal, and site visit,
                         natural habitats and forest will not be affected by the project. Physical Cultural Resources will not
                         likely affected by the project. The project influence area is largely limited to the sites subject to
                         physical works, including the ROW of the proposed road/avenues.)
                         (ii)     NMT Improvements on existing roads in the downtown area within the confines of Handan
                         Railway, Jiefang Avenue and Fuhe Avenue.
                         (iii)    Road Safety Measures including a Traffic Command Center, traffic signal control system,
                         CCTV monitoring, E-police enforcement cameras, traffic information collection system, bus lane
                         enforcement, Road Safety Center and Road User Education (RUE) measures.
                         25.      Component 2: Public Transport Improvements for Anlu: purchase of new energy saving
                         public transport vehicles; public transport IC card system; improvement of PT interchanges (PTIs)
                         including High Speed Rail Station, Anlu Station, Long Distance Bus Station, Anlu Bus Station and
                         Central Passenger Station.
                         26.      Component 3: Intelligent Transport System for Wuhan:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (i)      A Transport Information Center, including software and hardware procurement, data center
                         construction, and networking/communications;
                         (ii)     A Comprehensive Intelligent Transport Information Service System, comprising four service
                         platforms and nine information management platforms. The nine information platforms comprise,
                         Three Foundation Platforms: (1) Transport Infrastructure plus planning and social data using a multi-
                         layered GIS; (2) Vehicle Traffic Flows; and (3) Passenger Traffic Flows. Two Progressive Platforms:
                         (4) CCTV traffic monitoring cameras on urban and external roads; and (5) Emergency response
                         system; and Four Complementary Platforms: (6) Parking Information and Guidance; (7) Urban
                         construction information database; (8) Highway management; and (9) Comprehensive transport
                         system including road, rail, air and waterways. The system will also require an interface with
                         citywide urban planning data, in particular the city’s GIS (One Map).
                         (iii)    A field information collection network, including data collecting equipment and DSRC
                         application node equipment in a potential Demonstration Zone (DZ) in order to monitor and
                         measures outcomes before scale-up to the entire city (using the city’s own resources). The DZ would
                         be located within the second ring road and could include a pilot congest ion charging area and
                         parking control area.
                         27.      Component 4: Technical Assistance for Anlu and Wuhan: For Anlu: Technical assistance
                         and capacity building including consulting services for project management and international and
                         domestic training and study tours as well as consulting services for design and supervision of civil
                         works and preparation and implementation of related environmental and social safeguard document
                           from the Bank. For Wuhan: Technical assistance (TA) activities supporting implementation, strategic
                           studies, and institutional capacity building.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will be located in Wuhan and Anlu city. The subproject in Anlu city may require some
                           rural land in the city peri-urban area and the subproject in Wuhan was proposed to urban traffic
                           management without land acquisition and resettlement relocation. The resettlement action plan was
                           required to address the land acquisition and resettlement activities in Anlu city. A resettlement policy
                           framework to guide the land acquisition and resettlement in line to Component 2 Public
                           Improvements for Anlu and TA for the strategic studies for Anlu and Wuhan under Component 4 is
                           to be prepared prior to the project appraisal.

                           Wuhan city is a city with 10 million populations and Anlu is a city with 630,000 populations,
                           including about 54,000 Chinese minority populations scatted in the urban area and accounted in 49
                           Chinese minorities. Based on the collected information, the project areas are predominantly Han
                           Chinese and there is no ethnic minority group as defined by OP4.10; such as Manchu and Mongolian
                           communities present in, or have collective attachment to the project area. The Bank Indigenous
                           Peoples Policy OP 4.10 is not triggered and the Indigenous People Development Plan was not
                           requested.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           This is the first Bank supported project in Anlu city. The staffs in Anlu are getting familiar to the
                           Bank safeguards policies since the task team provided on-job training courses and also local
                           safeguards consulting team provided series of training for the staff. Wuhan PMO is quite familiar to
                           the Bank requirement on safeguards and this project is the third Bank supported project in Wuhan.
                           The staffs in Wuhan PMO are the same as Wuhan second urban transport project.

                           Both PMOs will designate staff to coordinate and manage the safeguards assessments and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           instruments implementation, and receive training on the Bank safeguard policies during project
                           preparation. Initial training was provided during the identification mission to PMO and
                           implementing agency staff, on the Bank safeguard policies. Capacity building for the PMOs and
                           tailored training on related Bank policies and different aspects of project management will be carried
                           out during project preparation. The capacity of the PMOs will be strengthened to meet the Bank’s
                           requirements for project safeguards management. Qualified consulting firms with Bank project
                           experiences will be engaged to carry out the preparation of safeguards documents.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Zhefu Liu (EASCS)
                           Feng Ji (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              It is confirmed that Environmental Assessment
                           BP 4.01                                               (OP 4.01) is triggered. It is expected that the
                                                                                 project will bring about environmental and
                                                                                 social benefits to local people, such as the
                                                                                 improvement of road safety, alleviation of
                         vehicle noise and emission in the downtown
                         area. But there will be adverse impacts
                         associated with the construction of the new
Public Disclosure Copy




                         roads and improvements of existing roads, such
                         as disposal of spoil, nuisance of dust, noise,
                         wastewater, waste generated from demolished
                         buildings, and disturbance to local communities
                         etc. During operation phase, adverse impacts
                         include, among others, road safety and noise
                         impacts from the newly built roads.
                         An Environmental Assessment (EA) will be
                         conducted in accordance with Chinese EA
                         regulation as well as the Bank Safeguards
                         Policies.

                         The assessment will analyze environmental
                         issues associated with the project, identify
                         sensitive receptors, analyze various alternatives,
                         and proposed adequate mitigation measures to
                         avoid, minimize, and compensate negative
                         impacts.
                         The EA will cover necessary social aspects such
                         as avoiding/mitigating disturbance to local
                         communities during construction and operation
                         phases.
                         A stand-alone Environmental Management Plan
                         will be prepared and include.
                         (a)      Environmental Code of Practices
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (ECOPs) to be developed to address general
                         construction related impact.
                         (b)      Specific mitigation measures including
                         o        For new bus depots, measures for
                         construction contractors will be developed, to
                         address issues including solid and wastewater
                         management source and transportation of
                         construction materials, disturbance to local
                         businesses and agricultural activities etc.
                         o        For re-allocation of road space,
                         measures would include requirements for
                         notification of public civil works, restoring local
                         businesses during construction, on-site traffic
                         safety management, and mitigation of other
                         construction related nuisances.
                         o        For the proposed new roads, mitigation
                         measures will be developed for both general
                         impacts from construction and site-specific
                         environmental impacts. Special considerations
                                                                 will be given to the connectivity of rural
                                                                 communities and potential disturbance to
                                                                 irrigation systems.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 o        Measures for the maintenance of the bus
                                                                 depots, and the roads.
                                                                 (c)      An institutional framework for project
                                                                 preparation and implementation;
                                                                 (d)      An institutional strengthening plan
                                                                 covering training and technical assistance(where
                                                                 applicable);
                                                                 (e)      A specific monitoring plan.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    Based on the site visit, the project is located in
                                                                 the urban and sub-urban areas which have been
                                                                 heavily influenced by human activities. The
                                                                 project activities will not affect any protected
                                                                 reserves, natural habitats, or established or
                                                                 proposed critical natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project will not have impacts on forests, the
                                                                 health and quality of forests or the rights and
                                                                 welfare of people and their level of dependence
                                                                 upon or interaction with forests, or aims to bring
                                                                 about changes in its management or protection.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not include procurement of
                                                                 pesticides or pesticide application equipment,
                                                                 nor lead to substantially increased pesticide use
                                                                 and subsequent increase in health and
                                                                 environmental risk, or could maintain or expand
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 present pest management practices that are
                                                                 unsustainable.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Based on the site visit and available
                         BP 4.11                                 information, the project is not likely to cause
                                                                 significant adverse impacts on the Physical
                                                                 Cultural Resources (PCRs) in the project
                                                                 influence area. However, further PCRs survey,
                                                                 as part of the EA, will be undertaken to confirm
                                                                 whether this policy is triggered or not.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    Task Team visited the departments in charge of
                                                                 minority affairs during project identification and
                                                                 social screenings were conducted. It is
                                                                 concluded that the project areas are
                                                                 predominantly Han Chinese and there is no
                                                                 ethnic minority groups as defined by OP4.10;
                                                                 such as Manchu and Mongolian communities
                                                                 present in, or have collective attachment to the
                                                                 project area. The Bank Indigenous Peoples
                                                                 Policy OP 4.10 is not triggered and the
                                                                                                                                 Indigenous People Development Plan was not
                                                                                                                                 requested.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           Peri-urban land acquisition and resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 4.12                                                                                            relocations in Anlu city were anticipated and the
                                                                                                                                 resettlement action plan to address the land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition and resettlement relocations was
                                                                                                                                 required to be prepared. A resettlement policy
                                                                                                                                 framework will also be preparedto guide
                                                                                                                                 resettlement issues that might crop up during
                                                                                                                                 project implementation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                                                                 policy. This polices is not triggered.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project is not on international waterways.
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not in disputed areas.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Oct-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The EA, EMP, resettlement action plan, resettlement policy framework, gender impact analysis
                                      and development will be completed prior to the project appraisal (tentatively in January 2015).
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Arturo Ardila Gomez

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 12-Jun-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 12-Jun-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
