                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA6840
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Jun-2013, 27-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          China                             Project ID:    P127775
                            Project Name:     China-Guangdong Agricultural Pollution Control (P127775)
                            Task Team         Jiang Ru
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         18-Mar-2013                       Estimated   27-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    EASCS                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            GEF Focal         International waters
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Animal production (69%), Agricultural extension and research (11%), Crops
                                              (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Pollution management and environmental health (70%), Climate change (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       213.30           Total Bank Financing:  100.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                    Amount
                              Borrower                                                                             108.20
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                100.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                      5.10
                              Total                                                                                213.30
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)



                                                                     Page 1 of 10
                            A. Project Development Objective(s)
                            The proposed development objective is to reduce water pollutant releases from crop and livestock
                            production in selected areas of Guangdong Province.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                            The proposed development objective is to reduce water pollutant releases from crop and livestock
                            production in selected areas of Guangdong Province.
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed project is designed as a fully blended IBRD and GEF project. The total project cost is
                         expected to be US$213.3 million, of which US$100.0 million will be financed through an IBRD
                         loan, US$5.1 million through a GEF grant, and the remaining US$108.2 million from counterpart
                         funds from the provincial government and project beneficiaries. The GEF project concept was
                         approved by the GEF Council in November 2011 as part of a Regional Program – Scaling Up
                         Partnership Investments for Sustainable Development of the Large Marine Ecosystems of East Asia
                         and their Coasts (GEF ID# 4635). The proposed project has four components: (1) Environmentally
                         Friendly Crop Production; (2) Livestock Waste Management; (3) Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E),
                         Capacity Building and Knowledge Management; and (4) Project Management.

                         Component 1. Environmentally Friendly Crop Production. Four subcomponents of this component
                         are: (a) soil nutrient management; (b) integrated pest management (IPM); (c) conservation
                         agriculture (CA) pilots; and (d) implementation support to project farmers. Subcomponent (a)
                         supports (i) development and dissemination of sound soil nutrient management plans through soil
                         nutrient sampling and analysis; and (ii) promotion, through the provision of subsidies, of use of
                         various technical measures to improve application and utilization efficiencies of fertilizers based on
                         soil nutrient management plans including application of formula fertilizers; application of slow-
                         release fertilizers; development of fertigation facilities in vegetable and orchid farms; and adoption
                         of three control techniques (control of fertilization, crop establishment, and pests) on rice paddies.
                         Subcomponent (b) will support (i) upgrading of pest monitoring and early warning systems; and (ii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         promotion of integrated pest management practices for key cropping systems through the provision
                         of subsidies for professional pest management services, and for the acquisition of pesticides and
                         related equipment for smallholders. Subcomponent (c) will support CA pilots to demonstrate the use
                         of no-till or limited tillage technologies and practices for typical cropping systems in Guangdong.
                         Finally, Subcomponent (d) will provide (i) field technical support to project beneficiaries, in
                         particular smallholders, in crop production practices promoted by the project; (ii) sub-financings to
                         eligible Village Committees to finance part of their incremental operating costs for organizing
                         project beneficiaries in their villages carrying out in project activities; and (iii) sub-financings to
                         project beneficiaries to encourage them to go through the certification process for Safe Agricultural
                         Products or Green Agricultural Products.

                         Component 2. Livestock Waste Management (LWM). This Component provides sub-financing to
                         beneficiary farms to partially finance (a) the construction and operation of livestock waste
                         management facilities to promote the proper collection and treatment of pig manure; and (b) the
                         incremental costs incurred in the construction of pilot high-rise pig production facilities.

                         Component 3. Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), Capacity Building and Knowledge Management
                         (KM). Component 3 will have three subcomponents: (a) M&E; (b) Capacity Building; and (c) KM.
                         Subcomponent (a) will support monitoring and evaluation of project activities, including of
                         monitoring of environmental and social safeguards, and measuring impacts of various Project


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         activities. Subcomponent (b) will finance (i) acquisition of monitoring equipment and monitoring
                         vehicles to enhance the capacity of Guangdong Department of Agriculture (DOA) to monitor
                         agricultural pollution; (ii) carrying out of technical and policy studies to explore policy and technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                         measures to reduce, control and monitor agricultural pollution in Guangdong Province; (iii) provision
                         of training to project stakeholders to improve their technical capacity to properly implement project
                         activities; and (iv) project stakeholders’ attendance in domestic and international learning events on
                         agricultural pollution control. Subcomponent (c) will support knowledge management activities to
                         summarize and disseminate lessons and experiences derived from project implementation.

                         Component 4. Project Management. This component will support activities to strengthen the
                         institutional capacity of the PMO and the PMUs for the implementation of the Project, including the
                         provision of Incremental Operating Costs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Component 1 activities will be carried out at Huiyang District, Huicheng District and Boluo County
                         of Huizhou Municipality and Engping City, Kaiping City and Taishan City of Jiangmen
                         Municipality.
                         Component 2 activities will be carried out in 300 pig farms province-wide. At appraisal, 17 farms
                         from Huizhou, Jiangmen and Heyuan Municipalities are identified.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Songling Yao (EASCS)
                         Yiren Feng (EASCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes                The project is designed to reduce agricultural
                          BP 4.01                                              pollution and improve the environment of the
                                                                               project areas. As such, its successful
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               implementation will generate positive
                                                                               environmental benefits. Specifically, proposed
                                                                               investments under Component 1 will reduce non-
                                                                               point pollution from crop production through
                                                                               adoption of environmental friendly crop
                                                                               production technologies and practices. And the
                                                                               proposed activities under Component 2 will
                                                                               improve rural environmental conditions through
                                                                               financing of on-farm small size pig waste
                                                                               management facilities (mainly based on bio-
                                                                               digestion technologies) to properly collect and
                                                                               treat pig wastes. Therefore, OP 4.01 is triggered.

                                                                               The Project is categorized as a “Category B”
                                                                               project based on types, locations, sensitivity and
                                                                               scales of the proposed activities as well as the
                                                                               nature and magnitude of positive and negative
                                                                               environmental impacts associated with these
                                                                               project activities. For both Components 1 and 2,



                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                                                                     no sensitive locations and environmental issues
                                                                     are expected. The project’s adverse
                                                                     environmental impacts related to the construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     of small-scale biogas facilities will be short-term,
                                                                     temporary and site specific. With mitigation
                                                                     measures implemented, such adverse impacts will
                                                                     be avoided, eliminated entirely or mitigated to an
                                                                     acceptable level.

                                                                     EA instrument: A EMP is prepared with the
                                                                     following EA instruments:
                                                                     For Component 1
                                                                     - ECOP (Environmental Codes of Practice) as
                                                                     standardized mitigation measures for each type of
                                                                     investments activities under Component 1;

                                                                     For Component 2,
                                                                     - Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
                                                                     prepared for the pig farms to be identified during
                                                                     project implementation;
                                                                     - A set of design standards for livestock waste
                                                                     management facilities;
                                                                     - A LWM plan (LWMP) for each type of LWM
                                                                     facilities;
                                                                     - Supervision/monitoring programs.

                                                                     All EMP activities are fully budgeted under the
                                                                     project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No             The policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                                                     involve any sensitive locations.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No             The policy is not triggered as the project doesn't
                                                                     involve forests resources.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes            This policy is triggered as Component 1 will
                                                                     promote IPM practices, including the use of
                                                                     biological and low toxicity, low residual
                                                                     pesticides and safe pesticide application
                                                                     equipment.

                                                                     A Pest Management Plan (PMP) has been
                                                                     prepared to describe the range of pest and disease
                                                                     control and management methods with an
                                                                     emphasis on IPM approaches and the scope of the
                                                                     recommended applications under various
                                                                     conditions. The PMP also provides a list of
                                                                     pesticides and herbicides that may be used under
                                                                     the project in compliance with World Health
                                                                     Organization's recommended categories. The


                                                             Page 4 of 10
                                                                            PMP includes detailed provisions on training of
                                                                            project stakeholders and a monitoring program.
                                                                            Implementation of the training and monitoring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            programs is budgeted in the project cost.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No             This policy is not triggered as Component 1 will
                            BP 4.11                                         support activities on existing agricultural lands
                                                                            while Component 2 will support construction of
                                                                            small size biogas facilities at existing commercial
                                                                            pig farms that have licenses and permits issued by
                                                                            EPBs and other relevant government agencies.

                                                                            Chance finds during construction may occur, and
                                                                            relevant clauses will be included in all bidding
                                                                            documents and construction contracts.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No             This Policy is not triggered as the Task Team’s
                                                                            screening and a social assessment conducted by
                                                                            the Guangdong Social Science Academy have
                                                                            concluded that there is no minority village found
                                                                            or collectively attached to project areas in the six
                                                                            counties in Huiyang and Jiangmen Municipalities
                                                                            under Component 1. As noted, Component 2 will
                                                                            be conducted within existing pig farms only.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes            It is confirmed that project activities in the first
                            4.12                                            year of implementation will not involve any land
                                                                            acquisition or resettlement issues. However,
                                                                            physical construction activities under Component
                                                                            1 may involve small-scale land acquisition issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            and/or candidate pig farms under Component 2
                                                                            may have unresolved land issues even though all
                                                                            investment activities will be carried out within the
                                                                            farms. Therefore, this policy is triggered.

                                                                            A RPF was prepared to address any land related
                                                                            issues under the project. During implementation,
                                                                            specific Resettlement Plans (RPs) in line with the
                                                                            RPF will be prepared if needed during the project
                                                                            implementation.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              The policy is not triggered as the project does
                                                                            not finance construction or rehabilitation of any
                                                                            dams as defined under this policy.
                            Projects on International        No               The policy is not triggered as the project does
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            not involve trans-boundary rivers.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No               The policy is not triggered as the project does
                            7.60                                            not involve any disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management


                                                                    Page 5 of 10
                         A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           Component 1 will support activities to reduce the use, improve the utilization, and reduce the
                           releases of excessive pesticides and nutrients from croplands. Component 2 will support
                           construction of livestock waste management facilities at existing commercial pig farms licensed/
                           permitted by local environmental and other relevant government agencies. Therefore, for both
                           components, no sensitive locations and environmental issues are expected.

                           Some negative and short-term construction and long-term operational impacts may result from
                           project implementation. Construction of project financed facilities will lead to limited negative
                           impacts on soil erosion, ambient air, water, acoustic environments, solid wastes etc. These
                           negative impacts will be small in size, short-term, temporary and site-specific. During the
                           operation phase of these facilities, there will be long term impacts such as wastewater discharge,
                           livestock wastes disposal, operation and maintenance of biogas facilities. Such impacts will be
                           small in scale and be mitigated fully with proper operation and maintenance of project financed
                           livestock waste management facilities.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           By reducing pollution discharges from project sites, it is expected that project interventions in the
                           long term will generate significant and positive environmental benefits. The EA estimated that the
                           pollutants discharged by livestock farms will be reduced significantly, with the completion of
                           construction and operation of the project, the total pollutants reduction from livestock farms will
                           be 45,000 tons COD, 5,000 tons ammonia, 14,000 tons BOD, and 240 tons total phosphorus
                           annually.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           As a pollution control project, the selection of technical approaches for both Components 1 and 2
                           activities has fully considered all available technical options/alternatives.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           As identified in the EMP, mitigation measures have been incorporated into the project design to
                           address potential negative impacts associated with the construction and operation of project
                           financed facilities. With proper implementation of the proposed mitigationmeasures, the potential
                           adverse impacts will be avoided, eliminated entirely, minimize or mitigated to an acceptable level.
                           All mitigation measures related to contractors will be included in the bidding documents and the
                           corresponding contracts.

                           The EMP includes ECOPs to address potential negative impacts associated crop production
                           activities under Component 1. A set of ECOPs were prepared for each type of investment or
                           construction activities under Component 1. These ECOPs will be included as part of the Project
                           Implementation Manual (PIM). ECOPs are prepared based on national norms, proven practices in
                           other Bank financed projects and practices recommended in Environmental Health and Safety
                           Guidelines of World Bank Group. They specify all aspects of environmental management issues
                           during the entire project cycle, including but not limited to, site preparation, erosion control,
                           construction dust management, air pollution control, noise impact control, water pollution control,


                                                                      Page 6 of 10
                         waste management, public and workers’ health and safety, as well as public consultations on
                         environmental issues. It also includes the reporting and supervision arrangements for project
                         implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The EMP includes an EMF to address potential negative impacts associated with LWM activities
                         under Component 2. The EMF is developed as most of participating pig farms will be identified
                         and appraised during project implementation. For those farms, the EMF establishes the objectives,
                         procedures, institutional framework, and implementation arrangements for identifying and
                         managing potential environmental impacts from project activities. It includes a screening tool to
                         be used to screen all sub-projects of Component 2, as well as the institutional arrangements for
                         implementing agreed actions, supervision, monitoring, and evaluation. It also specifies
                         mechanisms for public participation and redress of possible grievances.
                         The EMP also includes LWMP for the project supported three LWM modalities under Component
                         2 – two technological modalities demonstrated under the GEF LWM in East Asia Project
                         (LWMEAP, closed in FY12) and one new modality being piloted at a trial farm. A LWMP for
                         each model was prepared. The LWMP includes a set of design standards for livestock waste
                         management facilities, and specifies procedures such as waste collection, facility maintenance,
                         manure and recordkeeping. It highlights the generic mitigation measures and specific mitigation
                         measures during operation phase for each type of facilities.

                         At appraisal, EMPs were prepared for the 17 farms confirmed for the first year of project
                         financing.

                         The EMP includes a detailed environmental monitoring program prepared according to the
                         national requirements, whenever available, on discharge load reduction of agricultural pollution
                         sources. This monitoring program is in compliance with the Bank requirements and built on
                         international best practices on agricultural pollution monitoring. It details environmental
                         monitoring for the operational phase of project financed facilities, including parameters to be
                         monitored, locations, frequencies, monitoring agency and budget estimates. The environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                         monitoring has been fully integrated into and budget under Component 3 of the project.

                         A Pest Management Plan (PMP) was prepared to describe (a) major pest issues; (b) pesticide
                         management methods; (c) pesticide management organizations and their respective responsibilities
                         in the project areas; (d) environmental, occupational and safety risk assessment; (e) monitoring
                         and evaluation activities; and (f) capacity building for project stakeholders. Its outlines pest
                         andIPM based pest control and management methods and recommends various application
                         approaches under different conditions. It provides a list of pesticides and herbicides that may be
                         used under the project in compliance with World Health Organization's recommended categories.
                         Implementation of the training and monitoring programs was budgeted in the project cost.

                         Social Aspects

                         OP 4.12 is triggered as structure construction and/or equipment installation by participating farms
                         under Component 1 may involve land acquisition and candidate farms under Component 2 may
                         have unresolved land issues. As such, a RPF was prepared based on consultations to address
                         possible land issues under this project, covering detailed procedures on review of land issues,
                         preparation and approval of potential land acquisition activities, institutional and financial
                         arrangements, and monitoring plans for resettlement implementation. Abbreviated RPs will be
                         prepared by Guangdong in line with the RPF and reviewed by the Bank if land related issue is

                                                                   Page 7 of 10
                           identified during project implementation. Site specific consultation will be done at RP preparation.
                           PMO will be responsible for proper implementation, supervision and monitoring of RPs while an
                           independent agency will perform external monitoring of RP implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           In addition, a social assessment (SA) was performed to (a) investigate social economic baselines
                           of the project areas; (b) understand willingness to participate of targeted beneficiaries; (c)
                           investigate gender issues and identify appropriate actions to address such issues; and (d) identify
                           most appropriate implementation arrangements for proposed project activities. SA found that
                           potential project beneficiaries in general welcomed the proposed project for its potential
                           environmental and financial benefits. They concerns were on appropriateness of project subsidies
                           and implementation arrangements. Results of the SA have been fully incorporated into project
                           design, including the use of a Community Participatory Manual to guide project implementation at
                           the village level. Specific indicators on woman participation are included in the Results
                           Framework and will be closely monitored under Component 3 of the project.

                           Based on the successful and positive results of the GEF LWEAP, Guangdong proposed this
                           project to expand from scaling up of demonstrated LWM technologies and practices to piloting
                           technical measures to control pollution from crop production. The implementing agency of the
                           project, DOA, has successfully implemented the GEF LWMEAP and is familiar with Bank
                           safeguard policies and requirements. The DOA Project Management Office for this project was
                           established with competent and experienced staff and adequate resources. A dedicated staff was
                           appointed to manage safeguard issues of this project. Safeguard training was provided to PMO
                           staff during project preparation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           During the preparation of EMP, SA and RPF, public consultations including expert consultations,
                           questionnaires, meetings and interviews, have been conducted with the different stakeholders of
                           the proposed project. This included persons of different gender, socioeconomic and educational
Public Disclosure Copy




                           backgrounds, groups, and occupations. Totally about 1,153 people have been consulted in the
                           EMP process; and a total of 1,239 farmer households, 154 firms, from 190 villages in 20
                           townships of 6 counties participated in the social consultation process. The project information
                           was disclosed at project towns/villages, communities, and government websites. The majority of
                           those consulted expressed strong support for the project. The EMP/SA/RPF incorporated
                           countermeasures to address the concerns of the people consulted. Such countermeasures are also
                           fully incorporated into the project design.

                           In accordance with the Bank’s information disclosure policy, on January 15, 2013 the EMP and
                           PMP were made available in the project areas and on the websites of the local government
                           agencies, and are accessible at PMO and PMUs. RPF was disclosed in country on DOA’s project
                           website on February 22, 2013. The EMP, PMP, SA and RPF were disclosed at the World Bank
                           InfoShop on February 22, 2013. After project appraisal, the final EMP, PMP, SA and RPF were
                           disclosed locally and in InfoShop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         21-Jan-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      22-Feb-2013



                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           China                                                            15-Jan-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      16-Jan-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-Feb-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            22-Feb-2013
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-Jan-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-Feb-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            15-Jan-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?


                                                                    Page 9 of 10
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Jiang Ru
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Sector Manager:         Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                          Date: 27-Nov-2013




                                                                       Page 10 of 10
