                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA7845
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Uzbekistan                          Project ID:    P133703
                            Project Name:      Horticulture Development Project (P133703)
                            Task Team          Dilshod Khidirov
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          17-Apr-2014                         Estimated   10-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSAR                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Agricultural extension and research (23%), SME Finance (77%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural markets (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        160.00                Total Bank Financing:     150.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                      10.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                        150.00
                              Total                                                                                        160.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to enhance the productivity and profitability of horticulture
                           sector in the project area.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project components will be: (i) Agricultural Support Services, (ii) Access to Credit, and (iii)
                           Project Management.

                                                                        Page 1 of 12
                         Component 1: Agricultural Support Services (US$32.03 mln). This component will (i) strengthen
                         the capacity of participating research institutes and plant protection services to provide demand
Public Disclosure Copy




                         driven, participative technology transfer that will help the farmers to respond to the emerging market
                         opportunities; (ii) enhance the capacity of farmers to improve quality and productivity of their
                         product, as well as to identify and respond to market opportunities both domestically and in export
                         markets; (iii) improve the country’s food safety management system, as well as ensure their
                         regulatory harmonization with international food safety requirements.

                         Sub Component 1.1 Institutional Support Services. This sub-component will support the
                         strengthening of the capacity of the participating institutions to undertake applied research and
                         genetic material multiplication activities so that they can better provide the technological bases for
                         the horticulture production systems to be supported under the project. It will also aim to enhance the
                         human, institutional and technical capacity of the research institutes to improve the safety and quality
                         of fruits and vegetables to local consumers and export markets. The specific activities to be
                         supported include:

                         a)         Strengthening the participating research institutes. The project will: (i) strengthen the
                         capacity of the research institutes to develop pest surveillance maps focusing on horticulture crops, to
                         forecast pest outbreaks and disseminate the same to the farmers; (ii) strengthen the laboratories by
                         supplying equipment, renovating the laboratories, and training the laboratory staff to improve the
                         quality of soil testing and pest and disease identification and prevention; and (iii) establish modern
                         storage facilities for elite potato seeds in the Research Institute for Vegetables Melons and Potato
                         (RIVMP) to decrease dependency on imports.

                         b)       Industry Standards. The project will assist producers in adopting good production and
                         handling practices according to various internationally recognized food safety systems. Drawing on
                         international experience, the project would support the development a modern food safety system
                         tailored to country’s horticulture sector, including improving the regulatory framework, control
Public Disclosure Copy




                         policy, sampling and inspection procedures, accreditation and management rules, tools and training
                         of relevant stakeholders. The project will support: (i) preparation of a study to assess the gaps
                         between existing domestic rules/regulations and food safety practices in the field, gaps between
                         current food safety practices in Uzbekistan and the required international standards, and identify
                         options to bridge these gaps; (ii) the development of manuals for horticulture product quality
                         management and packaging requirements, for various products in various countries where products
                         from Uzbekistan are or could be exported; and (iii) technical assistance to private-public voluntary
                         associations for the collection and dissemination of information about private-sector standards in
                         domestic and destination markets. IFC will participate in these activities through the Agribusiness
                         Standards Advisory Program, focusing on bridging the gap between sector/industry needs and policy
                         requirements. The project will also organize study visits to the selected countries to familiarize the
                         Uzbek officials and technical specialists with regulatory f rameworks and the ways/methods food
                         safety risks are evaluated, managed and communicated.

                         Sub Component 1.2 Market-led agricultural technology transfer. This sub-component aims to bridge
                         the knowledge and experience gap related to new production techniques, storage, post-harvest
                         handling (PHH), as well as marketing and business management knowledge. The knowledge
                         management and market information system to be developed under the project will create greater
                         transparency and understanding of the market and help attract additional investments. The project
                         will support the value chain development through building productive value chains/productive

                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                         partnerships; establishing an Association of Fruits and Vegetable Industry; developing an evaluative
                         study on the country’s export and domestic marketing policies; and arran ging visits to various trade
                         events. These activities would help farmers and policy makers increase competitiveness of the sector,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         as well as develop understanding about the strategic direction for horticultural sector development in
                         Uzbekistan and provide information about new markets opportunities and possibilities that exist.

                         a)         Knowledge Management and Market Information System (KMMIS). This sub-component
                         aims to increase horticulture productivity by strengthening farmer access to and awareness about
                         improved production technologies and practices. It will support provision of demand driven
                         extension services for horticulture crops through a variety of approaches, including participative
                         bottom up planning, exposure visits, trainings, demonstrations, field days, and use of media and
                         information technology. Special attention will be given to the inclusion of vulnerable groups (such as
                         women, elderly, youth, unemployed) in such activities. This subcomponent will finance the
                         establishment of a web-based KMMIS, where all technological and market information will be
                         collected, processed, analyzed and disseminated via various channels (electronic, publications, mass-
                         media, training, etc). Topics to be covered include the efficient and sustainable production and post-
                         harvest practices for meeting volume, timing, quality requirements of different markets (both
                         domestic and export markets – current and potential) and business management knowledge. This
                         sub-component will support the preparation of four types of studies: (i) existing markets for existing
                         products, (ii) new potential markets for existing products, (iii) market situation and outlook for
                         products, which are produced in Uzbekistan, (iv) market situation and outlook for new products.

                         b)       Demonstrations of Improved Technologies and Practices. The sub-component will support
                         the establishment of demonstration plots (e.g. open field and greenhouse vegetables and potatoes,
                         fruits & berries, post-harvest handling and storage). These demonstration plots will be conducted in
                         volunteer farmer’s fields where new technologies can be demonstrated by the participating research
                         institutes, input and equipment suppliers and implementing agency’s team of international advisors
                         to farmers. Modular training programs for all issues related to record keeping and marketing will also
                         be developed jointly with participating research institutes to help farmers improve efficiency of their
Public Disclosure Copy




                         businesses and quality of their produce. The component will also support a limited number of study
                         tours.

                         c)          Value Chain Development: The project will support the value chain development through
                         (i) building of value chains/productive partnerships; (ii) establishing the Fruits and Vegetable
                         Association; (iii) promoting trade through involvement of horticultural producers in various national
                         and international trade events; and (iv) assessing export and domestic marketing policies of
                         Uzbekistan, and developing a set of policy recommendations to address existing challenges.

                         (i)        Value Chain/Productive Partnership Development. The project will promote building of
                         value chains and productive partnerships between producers and processors, producers and traders,
                         etc. This activity will include market/demand research for the specific type of product to be sold,
                         training of the chain participants, technical advice on inputs and technologies, sales and marketing
                         advice, etc.

                         (ii)     Fruits and Vegetable Industry Association of Uzbekistan. The sub-component will support
                         the establishment of the Fruits and Vegetable Industry Association of Uzbekistan. The Association
                         will represent interests of the horticulture industry in Uzbekistan; play an active role in encouraging
                         technological innovation for production, packing, handling, storing and processing of produce; and
                         support the development and extension of applied research that benefits the horticultural sector. The

                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                         Association will assist targeted farmers to come together to assemble quantities and varieties of
                         produce in sufficient quantity to supply buyers and build farmer market power. The Association will
                         closely work with the research institutes as well as farmers, traders an d processors, and will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         eventually become the voice of the industry and serve as a communication vehicle between private
                         and public sectors. International and local consultants will develop a strategy, action plan and manual
                         on operationalization of the Associati on.

                         (iii)    Trade Promotion. The project will support producer participation in national and
                         international trade shows to promote investments and exports, and to improve quality of production,
                         marketing and investment decisions. The project will also organize visits of large buyers from key
                         countries to Uzbekistan (e.g. a group of supermarket procurement managers and buyers from leading
                         i mport companies from Russia could be invited). This set of activities will also include support for
                         studies to learn from countries with advanced horticultural subsectors about successful policies
                         (Chile, Holland, South Africa, Turkey and USA). These studies will be complemented by study tours
                         for the policy makers.

                         (iv)    Assessment of export and domestic marketing policies in Uzbekistan: This subcomponent
                         will support studies and workshops to review the current export and domestic horticulture policy and
                         regulatory framework in Uzbekistan, assess it impact and examine options for improving it to
                         promote more rapid growth of the horticultural se ctor, drawing international best practice
                         experience.

                         Component 2: Access to Credit (US$118.5 mln). The subcomponent aims to enhance access to
                         financial services for farmers and agribusinesses operating in Uzbekistan’s horticulture sector, to
                         enable them to undertake the investments to strengthen their productivity and competitiveness. It will
                         support activities including the purchase of new cultivars, seeds/seedlings, water-saving irrigation
                         facilities (such as drip irrigation), cold storage and other cold chain facilities, and value added
                         handling/processing equipment and facilities. The component will build on the experience gained
                         during Second Rural Enterprise Support Project (RESP II) which has achieved sizeable results with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the provision of financial services to Uzbekistan’s agricultural enterprises. The component will
                         further expand access to investment financing through additional lending resources for use by banks
                         and leasing companies for on-lending to farmers and agribusiness. The project will also support
                         introduction of new financial products to support development of value chains in the sector.

                         Potential PFIs: The PFIs under the project are Hamkor Bank, Mikrokreditbank, Qishloq Qurilish
                         Bank, Turon Bank (all PFIs under the on-going Second Rural Enterprise Support Project), as well as
                         new potential PFIs: InfinBank, Ipak Yoli Bank, Ipoteka Bank, Xalq Bank. Uzbekleasing. They have
                         all been pre-qualified for undergoing due diligence. The nine potential PFIs are interested to support
                         development of the horticulture sector and working with such borrowers, as well as their interest to
                         participate in the training offered by the project. There is scarcity of long-term resources in the
                         banking sector, which is one of the main issues hindering investment lending to agriculture. This
                         derives from the situation that outside of donor projects, the overwhelming majority of deposits in
                         the banking sector are demand deposits and thus they are not suitable for long-term lending. The
                         project will attempt to alleviate the lack of long-term financing for the horticulture sub-sector by
                         providing funding with a 20-year maturity to the banking sector to be revolved in the PFIs.

                         Sub-component 2.1: Credit Line for Banks and Leasing Companies (IBRD Loan of US$107.89 mln
                         and Sub-borrower contribution of US$1 0 mln). This sub-component will finance investment and
                         working capital loans, principally for agribusinesses operating in the horticultural sector. The current

                                                                      Page 4 of 12
                         needs of agribusinesses for financing far exceed the long-term funds available to commercial banks,
                         as shown by the high demand for investment funds under RESP II. Particularly, attention will be
                         focused on investments supporting the enhanced competitiveness of the sector, access to new
Public Disclosure Copy




                         technologies, value addition in the sector, and improved market access through encouraging
                         establishment of linkages between farmers, processors and traders. In addition, the project would
                         introduce a range of innovative structured finance products, to support development of market
                         linkages and value chains, encouraging collaboration among the various participants of the value
                         chains.
                         Similarly to RESP II, the funds will be on-lent by the Ministry of Finance to qualified participating
                         financial institutions (PFIs), i.e., commercial banks and leasing companies. The implementation of
                         this component will be carried out by the Rural Restructuring Agency (RRA), which has prior
                         extensive experience in implementing World Bank projects, including with credit lines (Rural
                         Enterprise Support Projects 1 and 2, as well as the Additional Financing to the RESP II – a credit line
                         of US$40 million). The Ministry of Finance, representing the Borrower, the RRA and each qualified
                         PFI will sign a Subsidiary Loan Agreement for the purposes of implementing the project’s credit
                         line. A separate Operational Manual for the Credit Line will determine the criteria, eligible activities,
                         detailed withdrawal procedures, and responsibilities of all parties implementing the Credit Line.

                         Key terms and conditions of the credit line:

                         (a)      Sub-loans will not be used to finance activities that involve child or forced labor in any form.
                         The activities of all potential Project beneficiaries will be pre-screened and regularly monitored to
                         ensure that they are not related in any form to child or forced labor. Should child or forced labor
                         cases be found, the right of the Beneficiary to use the proceeds of the sub-loans will be suspended
                         and terminated, and declared to be immediately due and payable to the PFI. The PFI will return the
                         funds to the RRA, and this amount will be canceled from the Bank loan. The PFI will be disqualified
                         from further participation in t he project’s Credit Line and the PFI’s entire outstanding sub-loan
                         portfolio financed by the project will be transferred to another PFI for servicing.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (b)     Sub-loans will not be used to finance activities that involve land acquisition or resettlement
                         of people or loss of assets or income.

                         (c)    The PFIs will receive the credit line proceeds under the framework of the Subsidiary Loan
                         Agreeme nt and on-lend to eligible beneficiaries for implementation of eligible sub-projects in
                         accordance with the Operational Manual, and their banking considerations.

                         (d)     The PFIs will receive credit line proceeds for up to 20 years, inclusive of a grace period of 7
                         years, and repay the principal amount to the MOF over the period of 13 years in equal semi-annual
                         payments, upon expiration of the grace period. Any amounts, received as repayment from the sub-
                         borrowers and not needed for repayment to the MOF, the PFIs will revolve internally, providing new
                         sub-loans/leases in compliance with the PDO and the operational guidelines for the credit line.

                         (e)      The funds will be available both in Uzbek Sums (UZS) and US Dollars, based on the
                         demand of the sub-borrowers. The MOF will assume the foreign exchange risk on the portion of the
                         credit line funds channeled through the PFIs for on-lending to the ultimate beneficiaries.

                         (f)     The proposed interest rates to the PFIs are:

                         (i)     The interest rate for Subsidiary Loans denominated in US Dollars shall be equivalent to the

                                                                        Page 5 of 12
                         base rate, which will be the prevailing interest rate at which the Borrower shall have received loan
                         proceeds from the World Bank plus a spread of not less than 2% set by the Borrower from time to
                         time, and agreed to by the Bank, to compensate the Borrower for the administrative costs associated
Public Disclosure Copy




                         with the Subsidiary Loan;

                         (ii)    The interest rate for Subsidiary Loans denominated in UZ Sums shall be equivalent to the
                         base rate, which will be the prevailing interest rate at which the Borrower shall have received loan
                         proceeds from the World Bank plus a spread of not less than 7% set by the Borrower from time to
                         time, and agreed to by the Bank, to compensate the Borrower for: (1) the administrative costs
                         associated with the Subsidiary Loan; and (ii) provide a small premium to compensate for the risks
                         associated with currency exchange.

                         (g)     The maximum loan/lease size will be up to US$2 million, to ensure financing for larger loans
                         to invest in cold storages and agro-processing equipment, as well as to support entire value chain
                         development. Working capital loans will be up to US$200,000 for up to 18 months, and the value
                         chain financing products will have the maximum loan size of up to US$2 million and maturity will
                         depend on the nature of the transaction this loan will finance.

                         (h)      The maximum maturity of the sub-loans/leases will not exceed 10 years or the amortization
                         period of the asset, whichever is shorter. The actual size and maturity of the loans/leases will depend
                         on the type of investment financed, profitability of the activity, cash-flows generated, collateral, and
                         other baking considerations.

                         (i)        Maximum financing share: The project will finance up to 100% of the sub-loans/leases in
                         US Dollars, while requiring 20% co-financing from the PFIs for UZ Sum sub-loans/leases. The sub-
                         borrowers will be required to contribute 20% of the sub-project financing for both USD and UZ
                         Soums.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Technical Assistance to PFIs (tentatively US$0.6 million). Given the novelty of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the non-traditional financial products to support value chain development, the project will implement
                         a capacity building program for the financial institutions involved in the project. The training
                         program will build on the Investment Lending and Leasing in Agriculture training carried out under
                         the RESP II. The training program will cover: (i) value chain financing products; and (ii) tree-crop
                         financing methodologies. The PFIs will receive training on applicability of the new financial
                         products in lending to horticulture-related activities, assessing the suitability and effectiveness of
                         these new financial products, and on mitigation of the related risks. The training will be about 5 days
                         long, and will be targeting loan officers and branch managers of PFIs. An international bank training
                         company will be hired under the project, to do the initial training, as well as transfer this specific
                         knowledge to a local bank training company, which will take over the training activities at the later
                         stages of the project. For the PFIs trying to test value chain financing products, a longer-term
                         (resident) Technical Assistant (TA) will be provided, to ensure that PFIs can appropriately structure
                         the deal and manage the risks. In addition, all PFIs will have to undergo Environmental Training.

                         The project will collaborate with IFC on PFI training in the following manner: (i) IFC will provide
                         comments on the terms of reference and training manuals for the PFI training under HDP; (ii) the
                         bank training program under the project will incorporate information on the work done by IFC at
                         Hamkorbank, including, the experiences of setting up an agricultural lending unit, and a credit
                         scoring product that IFC has developed (along with other similar products, to allow for choice); and
                         (iii) regular reviews of the joint activities under the Access to Finance component will take place to

                                                                      Page 6 of 12
                         ensure coordination and complementarity.

                         Component 3: Project Management (US$9.47 mln). The component will be focused on
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strengthening the Rural Restructuring Agency (RRA’s) capacity for project management, monitoring
                         and evaluation through the provision of goods, consultant services, training and financing of
                         incremental operating costs. This component will: (i) support operation of RRA, and finance overall
                         project management, as well as contract administration, procurement, and financial management; and
                         (ii) establish a robust performance based Management Information System (MIS) and beneficiary
                         satisfaction survey, and arrange for data collection and reporting on key performance output and
                         impact indicators, through baseline surveys, participatory assessments, mid-term review and final
                         evaluation. In addition, the RRA will arrange awareness raising activities, as well as training of
                         beneficiaries on national legislation against child and forced labor.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in eight regions of Uzbekistan, namely Andijon, Jizzak, Ferghana,
                         Kashkadarya, Karakalpakstan, Namangan, Samarkand, and Tashkent. All these regions, with the
                         exception of Karakalpakstan, are the country’s top fruits and vegetables producing regions, with the
                         largest total area planted to horticultural crops. These regions are also known for their favorable
                         climate conditions for growing horticultural products. The Karkalpakstan region is included as it is
                         one of the poorest regions in the country, where agriculture diversification offers opportunities for
                         improving rural livelihoods. The HDP activities will complement the proposed South Karakalpakstan
                         Water Resources Management Improvement Project.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Mark C. Woodward (ECSSO)
                         Arcadii Capcelea (ECSEN)
                         Jennifer Shkabatur (ECSSO)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Ekaterina Romanova (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09            Yes

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                          4.12




                                                                     Page 7 of 12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project triggers two WB OPs and specifically OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment and OP
                              4.09 on Pest Management. The OP 4.01 is triggered as the project aims to support a series of
                              activities which will generate some environmental and social impacts. These impacts are
                              addressed in the EMF which includes also pest management plan that addresses the potential
                              purchase of pesticides under the Credit Line and includes a screening checklist, mitigating
                              measures and a program that supports the implementation of an integrated pest management (IPM)
                              program as potential alternative to the use of pesticides. In addition, the project will support
                              training, technical assistance and demonstration in support of the IPM program.

                             The project is not expected to have any significant or irreversible environmental impacts and is
                             classified as Environmental Category “B”. The Credit component will on-lend to farmers and
                             business related to horticulture (including, but not limited to provision of farming services,
                             storage, distribution and cooling facilities, processing, financing of agricultural inputs, including
                             pesticides, seeds and planting , etc.). The majority of credit line subprojects/projects components
                             would fall under the Category B which might cause limited significant impacts, for which the
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Bank requires a simple Environmental Assessment and/or a preparation of an Environmental
                             Management Plan. All subprojects under the Credit Line will be screened and none on Category A
                             will be supported. It is also expected that many of supported subprojects will not have
                             environmental impacts at all and will fall under the Category C projects. Generally investments in
                             agricultural production, agro-processing and storage and cooling facilities, are not expected to
                             cause significant adverse environmental and social impacts; they will not be located in protected
                             areas, critical habitats or culturally or socially sensitive areas; and will not entail increase in the
                             amount of water abstracted from existing rivers or have any other impact on the water source or
                             local hydrological regime. Their potential adverse environmental impacts might be summarized as
                             follows: (a) agricultural production: soil erosion, loss of soil productive capacity, soil compaction,
                             soil pollution, surface and underground water pollution, health and environmental risks associated
                             with agro-chemicals use, loss of biodiversity; (b) agro-processing: contribution to surface water
                             pollution, wastes generation, odor; (c) manufacturing: air pollution, waste waters, solid waste
                             generation; (d) construction: soil and air pollution; acoustic, aesthetics impacts, etc. All these
                             impacts are expected to be easily mitigated through sound project design and implementation
                             practices.

                             As the project may finance the purchasing of fertilizers/pesticides as well as may create conditions
                             which may lead to increased use of pesticides even if not financed by the project, among other
                             important potential project risks are health risk as well as the risks of undermining the


                                                                        Page 8 of 12
                          sustainability and productivity of the agro-ecological system (e.g., destroying natural enemies of
                          crop pests; causing development of pesticide resistance among pests, etc.). Thus the OP 4.09 is
                          triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          It is also necessary to mention that sub-projects that are to be supported under the New Credit Line
                          Project Component will generate both direct and indirect positive social impacts. Direct positive
                          impacts will be generated by increased production of products and goods which could result in
                          creation of new jobs and, respectively, more employment and increased income. Indirect positive
                          impacts are expected to relate to the overall improvement of business environment in the
                          agricultural sector, increased exports and enterprises, more secured domestic market position,
                          introduction of advanced technologies and techniques, creation of new opportunities for access to
                          foreign markets, enhancement of competitiveness of domestic production and products,
                          contribution to poverty reduction and food security, and an improvement of country's socio-
                          economic conditions.

                          As all proposed activities are likely to be implemented within the existing agricultural land and
                          settlement boundaries, the proposed project will likely not have an impact on wildlife and natural
                          habitats and thus, OP/BP 4.04 (Natural habitats) is not triggered. It is also expected there will be
                          no impact on physical cultural resources, which are generally not placed in the vicinity of
                          agricultural land. Therefore OP/BP 4.11 "Physical Cultural Resources" is not triggered.

                           Private businesses will be eligible to become project beneficiaries under the condition that their
                           activities do not involve any form of child or forced labor, they have not acquired and/or would
                           not acquire land for the needs of activities to be supported with the project proceeds, through a
                           process which involved and/or would involve officially supported expropriation. Additionally,
                           project funds will not support any sub-loans used to invest in a business which would require the
                           involuntary displacement of existing occupants or economic users of any plot of land, regardless
                           of its current ownership, or loss of, or damage to, assets including standing crops, kiosks, fences
                           and other. The project operational manual will define a screening procedure to be filled by PFIs,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and the implementing agency will closely monitor the screening procedure, with the support of the
                           Bank task team. With these restrictions in place, the project does not trigger OP/BP 4.12
                           "Involuntary Resettlement".
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The cumulative impact of the activities which might be supported by the proposed project is
                           expected to be mostly positive and includes improved knowledge on best agricultural and
                           manufacture practices, with consequent improvements in the status of the environment in the
                           country , as well as improved employment opportunities.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The task team has analyzed the possible implications of a "no project" scenario and concluded that
                           in the absence of the proposed Bank financing there is an increased probability for negative
                           economic and social consequences in the country, stemming from the deterioration of country's
                           macroeconomic situation.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The HDP is proposed to be managed and implemented by the Rural Restructuring Agency (RRA),


                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                           an institution that is currently implementing the Second Rural Enterprise Support Project, GEF
                           Climate Change and Land Degradation Project, and other donors’ projects. The RRA has already
                           established office premises in the country’s capital, with trained and professional staff that have
Public Disclosure Copy




                           experience implementing agriculture and rural development projects. Due to the complexity of the
                           implementation of the large number of components under the RESP II, the necessity to directly
                           liaise with regional and district government, and the importance of constant access to project
                           beneficiaries (farmers in project regions), the RRA has also established small offices in the eight
                           project regions. At present the regional offices provide day-to-day management of implementation
                           activities, as well as fulfilling monitoring and reporting functions. The RRA has adequate capacity
                           and sound track record under the RESP II that ensures sufficient experience and capacity to
                           effectively implement the HDP. It will recruit additional specialists (Procurement, Financial
                           Management, Environment, M&E, etc.) and they will be trained in Bank’s procedures. The Bank
                           will continue to provide regular implementation support. As of today, compliance with the
                           Environmental Management Framework under the RESP II & GEF project has been generally
                           satisfactory. The performance of the RRA environmental specialist will be closely monitored with
                           additional support provided if needed. While RESP II did not trigger any social safeguards (like
                           the current project), the project unit has done a commendable job of addressing a range of other
                           social issues such as gender (jobs for women) and child labor. A social assessment has been
                           prepared and identified social issues to be addressed throughout the project implementation. The
                           project team will continue this effort to build capacity on social issues with the project unit. The
                           project will be subject to a World Bank-managed Third Party Monitoring (TPM) and Feedback
                           Mechanism (FBM), financed through a separate Trust Fund that focus on child and forced labor
                           issues. With an aim to eliminate child and forced labor, the World Bank and Government of
                           Uzbekistan have agreed on an initial list of projects which would be subject to TPM and FBM and
                           this project is one of them. The objectives of the TPM/FBM will be to collect evidence on the
                           potential use of child or forced labor by project beneficiaries or in project areas and it will
                           implemented by an international consulting firm with experience in social auditing.

                           In order to address safeguards policy issues the RRA prepared an Environmental Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Framework (EMF). The EMF document outlines environmental assessment procedures and
                           mitigation requirements for the subprojects which will be supported by the Credit Line. It provides
                           details on procedures, criteria and responsibilities for subprojects preparing, screening, appraisal,
                           implementing and monitoring. The document also includes Environmental Guidelines and Best
                           Practices for different types of proposed subprojects providing analysis of potential impacts and
                           generic mitigation measures to be undertaken for subprojects in agricultural production, agro-
                           processing and storage and cooling manufacturing sectors at all stages - from identification and
                           selection, through the design and implementation phase, to the monitoring and evaluation of
                           results. Furthermore, the EMF provides a monitoring plan format which considers monitoring
                           indicators, timing, methods, institutional responsibilities, etc. in all phases of project's
                           implementation. Also a pest management plan is included in the EMF to address the potential
                           purchase of pesticides under the Credit Line that includes a screening checklist, mitigating
                           measures and a program that supports the implementation of an integrated pest management (IPM)
                           programs as potential alternative to the use of pesticides. The project will support training,
                           technical assistance and demonstration in support of the IPM program.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           As a part of Safeguard Policies a consultation workshop was held with project stakeholders on
                           February 13, 2014 where the representatives of the State Government organizations, commercial


                                                                     Page 10 of 12
                           organizations and NGO’s in the field of environment and pest management as well as with
                           representatives of local commercial banks and Rural Restructuring Agency participated. A lively
                           discussion followed on many aspects of the project for the component of Access to Credit,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           screening mechanism for checking sub-loans and implementation arrangements, etc. The draft
                           EMF was disclosed in country on February 17, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uzbekistan                                                       17-Jan-2014
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uzbekistan                                                       17-Feb-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?


                                                                   Page 11 of 12
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Dilshod Khidirov
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                            Date: 18-Apr-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)                      Date: 21-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
