                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA9696
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ukraine                           Project ID:    P146788
                            Project Name:      Second Power Transmission Project (P146788)
                            Task Team          Dmytro Glazkov
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          27-Jun-2014                       Estimated   30-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSEG                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (70%), Regional
                                              integration (20%), Climate change (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     354.93           Total Bank Financing:                306.50
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     306.50
                              Clean Technology Fund                                                                      48.43
                              Total                                                                                     354.93
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To improve the reliability of power transmission system and support implementation of the
                           Wholesale Electricity Market in Ukraine.
                            3. Project Description

                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         The proposed Second Transmission Project would be implemented over five years, through an
                         Investment Project Financing (IPF) to Ukraine in the total amount of US$354.925 million, where
                         IBRD will provide US$306.50 million, supplemented with a Clean Technology Fund (CTF) Loan in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the amount of US$48.425 million.

                         The proposed Second Power Transmission Project consists of three components: (i) Rehabilitation of
                         Transmission Substations; (ii) Electricity Market Enhancement; and (iii) Institutional Strengthening
                         of MoECI.

                         The description and objectives of each component are summarized below.

                         Component 1: Rehabilitation of Transmission Substations (US$241.5 million IBRD). Replacement
                         of outdated high voltage equipment, installation of gas-insulated switchgears, and replacement of
                         auxiliary power equipment, protective layering and substation control and automation systems in
                         selected high voltage transmission substations.

                         Given that the SSs are in residential areas and it is not possible to expand their territory, the
                         component will provide installation of GIS-330 kV (complete gas-insulated switchgears for 330 kV).
                         In addition, the component plans to replace auxiliary power equipment, protective relaying, and SS
                         control systems. Automation of these SSs with the installation of distributed control systems (DCS)
                         is planned, which will allow remote control and automatic operation of transmission SSs. In the
                         Central Power System, the proposed rehabilitation SSs include: 330 kV “Novokyyivska”; 330 kV
                         “October”; 330 kV “Zhytomyrska”; and 330 kV “Cherkaska.” In the Northern Power System, the
                         SSs proposed for rehabilitation include: 330 kV “Sumy” and 330 kV “Kremenchug.” All of these
                         SSs are over 50 years old.

                         Component 2: Electricity Market Enhancement (US$110.925 million: US$62.5 IBRD and US
                         $48.425 million CTF). This component consists of four subcomponents:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 2.1: Installation and connection of reactive power compensation devices for selected
                         high voltage transmission substations.

                         This subcomponent supports the implementation of the “Program for Integration of the Ukrainian
                         Power System to ENTSO-E” by financing a requirement of the program for the installation of
                         Variable Shunt Reactor to improve the voltage performance of the transmission network - a
                         mandatory rule for interconnecting the Ukrainian System with the ENTSOE synchronous. The shunt
                         reactors will be installed in the following high-voltage SSs: 330 kV “Novovolinskaya”; 220 kV
                         “Lutsk Pivdenna”; 330 kV “Kovel”; 330 kV “Shepetivka”; and 330 kV “Kamenets-Podilska”.

                         Subcomponent 2.2: Smart Grid introduction through purchase and installation of Smart Grid
                         solutions including (a) modernization of the telecommunications network between renewable energy
                         sources, key substations of transmission networks and system operator control centers; and (b)
                         modernization of the regional and national system of load control centers to improve system control
                         and dispatch including more efficient integration renewable energy into the power grid.

                         Subcomponent 2.3: Balancing market support through purchase and installation of hardware,
                         software, metering and other related elements needed by the Project Implementing Entity for selected
                         substations and the Project Implementing Entity.


                                                                     Page 2 of 8
                         This subcomponent will consist of elements for Balancing Market Operator to: determine the transfer
                         capacities that are available for cross-border trading; receive and administrate physical notifications;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         perform system operational scheduling; and procure and utilize ancillary services. Balancing Market
                         settlement and planning system components require substantial metering input. Metering information
                         is furthermore required for forecasting purposes and load profiling and will be installed at SSs.

                         Subcomponent 2.4: Support for institutional development of the Project Implementing Entity through
                         (a) establishment of a corporate-wide management information system (MIS) in the Project
                         Implementing Entity; (b) providing technical assistance to the Project Implementing Entity on
                         procurement, financial management and project management; and (c) financing audits, Training and
                         Incremental Operating Costs.

                         The investment programs will be identified and finalized in feasibility studies financed by the CTF
                         Grant (for Smart Grid) and by the ongoing Power Transmission Project (for the Balancing Market).
                         UE is financing the feasibility study for the MIS from its own funds. All feasibility studies are
                         expected to have draft reports by the time of loan negotiations and to be completed soon after Board
                         approval.

                         Component 3: Institutional Strengthening of MoECI (US$2.5 million IBRD). Technical assistance to
                         MoECI on (a) procurement, financial management and project management; (b) development of
                         feasibility studies for future projects in the energy sector, and financing of training.

                         The Project Component 1 and 2.1 will be implemented at eleven substations in two Energy Systems
                         in the following locations Khotiv village, Kyiv oblast; Kyiv; Zhytomyr; Cherkasy; Sumy; Kyiashky
                         village, Kremenchuk, Poltava oblast; Novovolynska; Lutsk; Kovel; Shepetivka, Khmelnytsk oblast;
                         Kamenets-Podilsky. UE has established, using their existing staff, a Project Implementation Unit
                         (PIU), which includes a safeguards specialist assigned from environmental department. The
                         responsibilities of PIU will include, among other responsibilities: environmental and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                         assessment as well as monitoring and evaluation.

                         The proposed Project’s institutional and implementation arrangements will take advantage of
                         existing institutional systems. The MoECI (EPCU) and UE (PIU) already have well-functioning
                         Project Implementation Units (PIUs) staffed with technical experts/safeguards specialists, financial
                         management specialists, and procurement specialists. The Bank will provide further training to the
                         PIUs to strengthen their capacity if needed, including a session on safeguards.

                         UE will be the responsible implementing agency for Components 1 and 2. Its PIU will have fiduciary
                         responsibility, including M&E functions related to the Project’s key performance indicators. UE’s
                         PIU is well staffed and functioning properly, with Project coordinators appointed for each
                         subcomponent and one director. The MoECI will be the responsible implementing agency for
                         Component 3 of the proposed Project. The MoECI’s PIU will have fiduciary responsibility, including
                         monitoring and evaluation (M&E) functions related to the Project’s key performance indicators. The
                         Project Operational Manual (POM) will be developed and adopted by the time of loan effectiveness.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed transmission project will take place entirely within the footprint of the existing
                         substations. The Project Component 1 and Component 2.1 substations are located in Khotiv village,


                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                         Kyiv oblast; Kyiv; Zhytomyr; Cherkasy; Sumy; Kyiashky village, Kremenchuk, Poltava oblast;
                         Novovolynska; Lutsk; Kovel; Shepetivka, Khmelnytsk oblast; Kamenets-Podilsky. Environmental
                         factors, such as presence of PCBs and other materials which may negatively affect compliance with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the environmental norms and standards, where considered in prioritizing transmission facilities
                         (substations), which will be rehabilitated under the proposed second power transmission project.
                         Based on previous experience with similar investments, the rehabilitation / replacement works are
                         not expected to generate any hazardous materials that will require special disposal. IT and
                         telecommunication elements identified for subcomponents 2.2, Smart Grid, 2.3 Balancing Market
                         and 2.4 Management Information System will all be installed at the UE substations or at the Main
                         Office and at the Regional Power Offices localed in 8 regions.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexei Slenzak (ECSEN)
                         Klavdiya Maksymenko (ECSSO)

                         6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The Project is classified as Environmental
                         BP 4.01                                            Category B as it will support investments which
                                                                            are expected to be Category B. For rehabilitation
                                                                            of SSs (Component 1) and introduction of
                                                                            reactive power compensation devices
                                                                            (Subcomponent 2.1), UE provided the Bank with
                                                                            Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) and
                                                                            Environmental Management Plan (EMP) in
                                                                            English; these were disclosed in the Infoshop
                                                                            prior to appraisal. Ukrainian language versions
                                                                            have been disclosed on UE’s website (http://
                                                                            www.ukrenergo.energy.gov.ua) and at Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            sites prior to appraisal. The EIAs and EMP for
                                                                            SSs identified the main issues for construction
                                                                            and operation as: (a) during the construction
                                                                            phase – dust, noise, and disposal of waste and
                                                                            used equipment, and PCB identification and
                                                                            management (if found/ applicable); and (b) during
                                                                            the operation phase – electric/magnetic field and
                                                                            noise. The chief issues identified for operation
                                                                            were noise, electric field, and bird collisions. The
                                                                            EMP contains standard mitigation measures to
                                                                            minimize negative impacts and highlight specific
                                                                            measures, consistent with applicable international
                                                                            practices, in the event of obsolete PCB-containing
                                                                            equipment or soil contamination by PCBs. For
                                                                            Smart Grid Introduction (Subcomponent 2.2) and
                                                                            Balancing Market (Subcomponent 2.3), no EIA
                                                                            and EMP are required under OP 4.01 since these
                                                                            components consist of installation of IT software
                                                                            and hardware (Category C- type activities),
                                                                            however, the TORs for these activities will


                                                                    Page 4 of 8
                                                                             require complying with basic standards and
                                                                             requirements and as such, the consultants will
                                                                             prepare basic EIA and EMP. Component 3 will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             finance TA, possibly including development of
                                                                             feasibility studies for new energy projects. It is
                                                                             not anticipated that any of these new projects will
                                                                             be Category A. An environmental management
                                                                             framework (EMF) was prepared for Component 3
                                                                             indicating that the Terms of Reference (ToRs) for
                                                                             feasibility studies need to be consistent with
                                                                             relevant World Bank safeguards policies. The
                                                                             EIA and EMP documents were disclosed by the
                                                                             Client on June 25 and comments were solicited
                                                                             from interested stakeholders, including local
                                                                             NGOs. June 27 was established as a deadline for
                                                                             comments on EIA and EMP. The EMF for
                                                                             Component 3 was disclosed by the Client on June
                                                                             24. No formal public consultations are required
                                                                             for EMF document.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No             OP 4.11 will not be triggered since no old or
                            BP 4.11                                          historic buildings/facilities will be included in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             proposed project.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No             OP 4.12 will not be triggered since no land
                            4.12                                             acquisition is expected. All sites will be located
                                                                             on company owned land. There are no illegal
                                                                             occupiers or squatters on expected project sites.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                           There are no potential large-scape, significant or irreversible impacts. Any potential adverse
                           environmental impacts are not expected to be significant and can be effectively prevented or
                           minimized by application of appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation measures. These
Public Disclosure Copy




                           measures are identified in the Environmental Management Plan (EMP), which has been prepared
                           by the UE. A designated environmental safeguards specialist will monitor environmental
                           performance of project implementation.

                           The specific project sites and investments determined during preparation did not require land
                           acquisition as works will be done within substations therefore the OP4.12 is not triggered by the
                           project. The PIU in UE has a safeguards specialist. The UE PIU and MoECI EPCU specialists
                           participated in the training on the Bank policies (including safeguards) and continue to receive
                           regular training on safeguards policies during Project implementation.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           There are no indirect and/or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project
                           area.
                           The types of activities to be implemented will have either minor or no adverse environmental
                           impacts and provide significant environmental benefits (reductions in local pollution such as dust
                           and sulfur dioxide emissions and/or reductions in emissions of greenhouse gases such as carbon
                           dioxide). Negative environmental impacts are primarily associated with construction activities (e.
                           g. dust, noise, disposal of non-hazardous waste) and they will be mitigated through good
                           construction and housekeeping practices.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Bank has supported Ukraine in its efforts to rehabilitate and restructure its energy sector
                           through policy dialogue, TA, and financing since the early 1990s. Substantial institutional capacity
                           to implement the Bank’s safeguard policies has been developed, particularly by beneficiaries of
                           the first Power Transmission Project, including UE, the beneficiary of the proposed Project. UE
                           has adopted ISO 14001, so environmental management is an important element of its institutional
                           development agenda. The company is currently performing ISO 14001 internal audits at all eight
                           of its Energy Systems and plans to go through an ISO 14001 Surveillance Audit to confirm its
                           Environmental Management System in August 2014. At present, each Energy System has several
                           experts with environmental backgrounds who report to the Chief Engineer of the respective
                           region. In addition, there is a Chief Environmental Department in UE’s office in Kyiv, consisting
                           of three experts who collect data from each Energy System and carry out supervision of EMP
                           implementation. In summary, the institutional capacity to implement the requirements of the
                           EMPs already exists to a large measure within the Borrowers’ organizational structure.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key project stakeholders are electricity market participants, renewable energy generating facilities/
                           entities, and general customers of the electricity.

                           The EIA and EMP documents were disclosed by the Client on June 25 and comments were
                           solicited from interested stakeholders, including local NGOs. June 27 was established as a

                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                           deadline for comments on EIA and EMP. Also, the Client sent written requests for formal
                           comments to local NGOs and representatives of local authorities (e.g. environmental and/or local
                           interest groups, etc.). The documented evidence of disclosure and communication regarding
Public Disclosure Copy




                           feedback on EIA and EMP documents has been provided by the Client and is on project file.

                           The EMF for Component 3 was disclosed by the Client on June 24. No formal public consultations
                           are required for EMF document.

                           UE Approach to consultations is based on their ISO14001 system procedures and entails that In
                           every city/village where the Project will be working public information meeting on the project will
                           be held with prior announcement in the local press and by posting information on the theme, time
                           and place of the consultation in the publicly attended places as office of the UE or Substation,
                           local authorities’ office, web-site of the Central or Northern Energy Systems where Substations
                           are located. The information on the project with EIA and EMP has been placed on the websites of
                           Ukrenergo. In every place the public consultation will start with a presentation by UE on the
                           current state of affairs and the project main activities and expected results as related to the locality.
                           The minutes of the public consultations for every locality will contain copies of announcements,
                           presentations made, summary of comments received and list of participants. Summaries of the
                           public consultations will be disclosed in the same way as invitation to participate in public
                           consultations. Specific support will be provided to UE and Central or Northern Energy Systems to
                           update web-sites to proactively share the information.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        20-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     26-Jun-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ukraine                                                            25-Jun-2014
                           Comments: The EIA and EMP documents were disclosed by the Client in English on June 24,
                                         2014 and in Ukrainian on June 25, and comments were solicited from interested
                                         stakeholders, including local NGOs. June 27, 2014 was established as a deadline for
                                         comments on EIA and EMP. Also, the Client sent written requests for formal
                                         comments to local NGOs and representatives of local authorities (e.g. environmental
                                         and/or local interest groups, etc.). The documented evidence of disclosure and
                                         communication regarding feedback on EIA and EMP documents has been provided
                                         by the Client and is on project file.

                                         The EMF for Component 3 was disclosed by the Client on June 24 in both languages
                                         (English and Ukrainian) and comments were solicited from interested stakeholders.
                                         No formal public consultations are required for EMF document.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                                                                        Page 7 of 8
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Dmytro Glazkov
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (SM)                        Date: 26-Jun-2014




                                                                       Page 8 of 8
