                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA8600
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Mar-2014, 07-Apr-2014, 23-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bolivia                           Project ID:    P143995
                            Project Name:      Bolivia: Improving Employability and Labor Income of Youth Project
                                               (P143995)
                            Task Team          Gaston Mariano Blanco
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       21-Mar-2014                          Estimated   15-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: LCSHS-DPT                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Other social services (60%), Vocational training (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Improving labor markets (90%), Education for all (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:         21.50                Total Bank Financing:        20.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           1.50
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 20.00
                              Total                                                                                       21.50
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the Project is to improve employability and labor income of poor youth by
                           supporting the expansion of the Skills Development Programs in Selected Cities.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed Project has the following two components:

                                                                       Page 1 of 5
                         Component 1 – Improving and Expanding the Skills Development Programs (US$15.8 million IDA).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-Component 1.1 - Improving and expanding the Mi Primer Empleo Digno Program (MPED) in
                         Selected Cities (US$10.6 million IDA). The objective of this Sub-Component is to improve and
                         expand the MPED in Selected Cities through the provision of: (i) training for medium and auxiliary
                         level technicians; and (ii) MPED Stipends all for Eligible MPED Beneficiaries.

                         Sub-Component 1.2 – Implementing the pilot Micro Entrepreneurs Skills Training and Technical
                         Assistance Program (MESTTA) in Selected Cities (US$1.2 million IDA). The objective of this Sub-
                         Component is to implement the pilot MESTTA in Selected Cities through: (i) the design and
                         implementation of a training program on inter alia math, language, communications, ICT knowledge,
                         and entrepreneurship skills; (ii) the provision of technical assistance to inter alia improve and
                         strengthen: (A) the eligible micro-entrepreneur’s skills on the applicable occupational area, and (B)
                         the eligible micro-enterprise’s business plan and access to finance; and (iii) the provision of micro-
                         entrepreneur stipends; all for eligible micro-entrepreneurs. This pilot comprises training and
                         technical assistance for upgrading the skill content of micro-entrepreneurs activities and helping
                         them to improve productivity and scaling up their business with a view to increasing their incomes.
                         Eligible Micro-Entrepreneur are poor young micro-entrepreneurs ages 22-35 years who have
                         completed at least primary education and have managed the Eligible Micro-Enterprise at least for one
                         year.

                         Sub-Component 1.3 – Implementing the pilot Remedial Secondary Education Program in Selected
                         Cities (US$4.0 million IDA). The objective of this Sub-Component is to implement the pilot
                         Remedial Secondary Education Program in Selected Cities to provide a second chance at formal
                         education to poor youth for improving access to jobs. Secondary education certification has become
                         a critical constraint to the access to quality jobs in the most dynamic economic industries (e.g.,
                         financial or service sectors) for young population living in urban areas. Student stipends will be
                         provided to eligible students poor youth ages 17-26 years who have completed at least primary
Public Disclosure Copy




                         education. The service will be provided by public institutions of the Ministry of Education (ME).

                         Component 2 – Strengthening the Implementation Arrangements to Administer, Monitor and
                         Evaluate Skills Development Programs. (US$4.2 million IDA; US$1.5 million GOB).

                         Sub-Component 2.1 – Strengthening the implementation arrangements and the institutional capacity
                         of the MTEPS to administer and coordinate the Skills Development Programs. (US$3.75 million
                         IDA; US$1.5 million GOB). This Sub-Component will provide support for: (i) designing and
                         implementing a Management Information System (MIS) for the Skills Development Programs
                         through the provision of: (1) technical assistance to design said system; (2) ICT equipment; and (3)
                         training for MTEPS’ staff responsible for operating and maintaining said system; (ii)designing and
                         implementing an information and communication strategy to promote the Skills Development
                         programs among potential beneficiaries, training institutions and employers through the provision of
                         technical assistance and goods; and (iii) strengthening MTEPS’ capacity to administer and coordinate
                         the Skills Development Programs through the provision of technical assistance (including the Project
                         audits), Operating costs; and the acquisition of Information, Communication Technology (ICT)
                         equipment.

                         Sub-Component 2.2 – Strengthening the institutional capacity of UDAPE to improve the evaluation
                         of the Skills Development Programs (US$0.45 million IDA). This Sub-Component will provide

                                                                      Page 2 of 5
                         support for: (i) carrying out mid-term process evaluations of the implementation of the Skills
                         Development Programs in order to identify, and thereafter address any identified problems; (ii)
                         monitoring the results and outcomes resulting from the implementation of the Skills Development
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Programs. Activities to be supported include: (1) beneficiary surveys; and (2) an impact evaluation of
                         the MESTTA Program; and (iii) technical assistance to improve UDAPE’s financial management
                         and procurement capacity, and to carry out Project audits.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project would be executed in 15 selected cities of Bolivia. “Selected City” means any of the
                         following cities in urban areas within the Recipient’s territory: Trinidad, Sucre, Cochabamba, La
                         Paz, Oruro, Cobija, Potosí, Santa Cruz de la Sierra, Tarija, El Alto and any Selected Municipality.
                         And “Selected Municipality” means any Municipality selected following the criteria set forth in the
                         MTEPS Operational Manual, including , inter alia, a population over 50,000 inhabitants and located
                         50 kilometers away from Trinidad, Sucre, Cochabamba, La Paz, Oruro, Cobija, Potosí, Santa Cruz de
                         la Sierra, Tarija o El Alto.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Dianna M. Pizarro (LCRDE)
                         Adam John Behrendt (LCSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       No               This policy is not triggered as the nature and
                          BP 4.01                                             scope of the project activities are not expected to
                                                                              generate adverse environmental impacts.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No               This policy is not triggered since no impact is
                                                                              expected on natural habitats.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No               This policy is not triggered given that the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              will not finance activities that affect forests.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09            No               This policy is not triggered because the project
                                                                              will not finance the purchase or use of pesticides.
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No               The policy is not triggered because there are no
                          BP 4.11                                             project activities that will impact the quality or
                                                                              management of physical cultural resources as
                                                                              defined under the policy.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No               Policy 4.10 is not triggered since Indigenous
                                                                              Peoples within the project areas do not meet the
                                                                              four criteria outlined in the Policy, specifically
                                                                              the criteria on attachment to ancestral lands.
                                                                              During project preparation, existing data was
                                                                              reviewed and focus groups were carried out in all
                                                                              of the Project beneficiary cities with Indigenous
                                                                              representatives to ascertain this conclusion.
                                                                              Although it was found that Indigenous Peoples do
                                                                              not live with collective attachment in the
                                                                              beneficiary cities, there are Indigenous peoples
                                                                              living as individuals in the Project areas, many of



                                                                      Page 3 of 5
                                                                                them migrants from rural areas who still maintain
                                                                                their basic cultural and language traditions. Given
                                                                                this, the Project carries out promotional programs
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                in all of the predominant Indigenous languages
                                                                                and the implementing agency offers culturally
                                                                                appropriate support and communication with
                                                                                beneficiaries in their preferred language. The
                                                                                focus groups, conducted in the cities of El Alto,
                                                                                Cochabamba, La Paz and Santa Cruz de la Sierra,
                                                                                confirmed that the Program has not proven to be
                                                                                exclusionary in its last three years of operation.
                                                                                However, to ensure that Indigenous peoples are
                                                                                benefiting and implicit barriers to access are not
                                                                                occurring, the Project will monitor Indigenous
                                                                                participation in Project through specific indicators
                                                                                based on the tracking surveys of beneficiaries.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No               This policy is not triggered given that the project
                            4.12                                                will not require land acquisition that would result
                                                                                in the impacts covered under OP 412.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No               This policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                                                                finance any dams nor rely on the operations of
                                                                                existing dams.
                            Projects on International          No               This policy is not triggered since the project will
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                not finance activities that impact international
                                                                                waterways as defined by the policy.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 This policy is not triggered given that the project
                            7.60                                                will not finance activities in disputed areas as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                defined by the policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              N/A
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The MTEPS has updated and improved best practices for inclusion and carried out social
                              assessment that examines the participation of youth and young women and mothers and will
                              continue to work to identify the potential needs of vulnerable groups to assure their inclusion in


                                                                        Page 4 of 5
                              the project activities. During project preparation focus groups and a social assessment were carried
                              out to determine whether: (i) Indigenous Peoples meeting the four criteria of the Policy were
                              present in the Project area, or (ii) Indigenous Peoples not meeting those criteria encountered
Public Disclosure Copy




                              barriers to access based on ethnic or cultural reasons. The conclusions from this analysis were that
                              there were no Indigenous Peoples meeting the four criteria of the Policy within the Project areas,
                              specifically the criteria on attachment to ancestral lands, nor were exclusionary factors present.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              Key stakeholders include young men and women in urban areas, micro, small and medium firms,
                              educational and training centers, and MTEPS.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            N/A. The project is a Category C project.
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Gaston Mariano Blanco
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Mansoora Rashid (SM)                         Date: 23-Apr-2014




                                                                        Page 5 of 5
