                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA8066
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Africa                            Project ID:    P126661
                            Project Name:      SAPP-Program for Accelerating Transformational Energy Projects (P126661)
                            Task Team          Mustafa Zakir Hussain
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          12-Sep-2014                       Estimated   11-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEEDR                             Lending     Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General energy sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          20.00                 Total Bank Financing:       20.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                 20.00
                              Total                                                                                     20.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to advance the preparation of selected priority regional energy
                           projects in the Southern African Power Pool participating countries.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project has the following three components:



                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         Component A: Setting up the Projects Acceleration Team (total cost US$ 7 million; of which IDA
                         US$ 5 million). This component will finance the establishment of a Projects Acceleration Team
                         (PAT), a high caliber core team in charge of moving forward the preparation of the regional projects
Public Disclosure Copy




                         identified as priorities to the SAPP region. The PAT will respond directly to the SAPP Coordination
                         Center and will consist of a Coordinator and a number of key personnel covering all the key
                         functions needed to prepare regional energy projects (including technical and financial analysis; legal
                         and transaction advisory; environmental and social management; procurement; financial
                         management; etc.). The PAT will assess and adjust to the type of role it needs to play on a specific
                         project, which may range from taking over selected or all preparation activities to providing
                         financing to the concerned agencies and ensuring that preparation effectively serves the needs of
                         project stakeholders. The PAT will be expected to provide close guidance to government agencies
                         and utilities on the appropriate packaging and allocation of preparation work and the information
                         requirements prior to bidding out projects or components of projects. IDA funding will be used as
                         efficiently as possible and in a way to enable and crowd in private sector funds for project
                         preparation activities. The costs related to renting an office for the PAT and other operating expenses
                         will also be covered under this component. A Project Preparation Advance (PPA) has been approved
                         and will be used to hire key staff for the PAT, provide training on Bank fiduciary issues, set-up the
                         PAT office and procure the consultants for the preparation of the Environmental and Social
                         Management Framework.

                         Component B: Project Preparation Funds (total cost US$10 million; of which IDA US$42 million).
                         The funds in this component will be managed by the PAT and will be used for a variety of tasks
                         related to preparation of large and complex energy projects, including technical, economic and
                         financial feasibility studies; environmental and social assessments; preparation of legal
                         documentation and financial transaction advisory services, especially related to PPA negotiations;
                         etc. Significant technical and legal support is likely to be required as well as stakeholder events,
                         roadshows, etc. There will be some flexibility in use of funds as long as they are clearly used to
                         improve the quality of project packages and enable sponsors and credit committees of banks to
                         commit commercial equity and debt. Depending on the stage of the process, the funds may be used
Public Disclosure Copy




                         independently or jointly with the funds of a project sponsor to advance project preparation. Funds
                         may also be used to support the public sector in its dealings and negotiations with the private sector.
                         All funds will be used for preparation and no funding will be used to finance infrastructure works.

                         Component C: Analytical support to SAPP (total cost US$3 million; of which IDA US$ 3 million).
                         This component will support analytical work that the SAPP judges important for advancing
                         preparation of critical projects. This includes building a solid knowledge base for investment
                         decisions and helping ensure long-term sustainability of investments. A key task will be the update
                         and revision of the SAPP Pool Plan, to be supported and complemented by a number of studies
                         potentially including: (a) a review of the generation and transmission expansion plans of the various
                         SAPP members; (b) a mapping of the energy resources available to the SAPP region with a specific
                         focus on renewable resources; and (c) major regional environmental and social impact studies. A key
                         study will concern the link between water use and energy development in the region. The exact
                         number and scope of these studies remain to be defined. The SAPP will be expected to take a
                         proactive role, together with other stakeholders in the region, in determining the need for and
                         subsequently advancing of important studies. The update of the SAPP Pool Plan and the preparation
                         of some of the associated studies identified by the SAPP will be advanced under the PPA.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         The Project will support preparation of large and complex regional energy projects (including
                         technical, economic and financial feasibility studies, environmental assessments, legal
                         documentation and financial transaction advisory services) throughout the Southern Africa Power
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pool region. This is a technical assistance project and no funding will be directly allocated to finance
                         any infrastructure or physical activities that could cause adverse environmental or social impacts and
                         effects. The Project will finance detailed studies for new generation and transmission projects that
                         might have future environmental or social impacts, if and when the related investments materialize.
                         The projects to be prepared with support under this Project have not yet been selected.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Wolfhart Pohl (GCFDR)
                         Aki Tsuda (OPSOR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Despite the project being a technical assistance
                         BP 4.01                                               (TA) project aimed at facilitating project
                                                                               preparation and capacity building, it is proposed
                                                                               that the project is classified as safeguards
                                                                               category “A” project. While the TA project will
                                                                               not finance any infrastructure or activities which
                                                                               may have direct environment or social footprints
                                                                               on the ground, it will finance detailed studies for
                                                                               potential new generation and transmission
                                                                               projects that might have significant potential
                                                                               environmental or social impacts, if and when
                                                                               these investments materialize. Part of the project
                                                                               objective and activities will be to introduce
                                                                               environmental and social assessment and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               management systems, which comply with good
                                                                               practice and would result in a range of safeguards
                                                                               instruments. The first of such instruments
                                                                               anticipated during project implementation would
                                                                               be an overall Environmental and Social
                                                                               Management Framework (ESMF), providing
                                                                               strategic guidance to the SAPP on the
                                                                               development and application of environmental
                                                                               and social criteria in project screening,
                                                                               prioritization, and development. Further
                                                                               instruments to be prepared under the Project will
                                                                               be ESIAs, RPFs and other required studies (e.g.
                                                                               cumulative impact assessments) complementing
                                                                               the techno-economic development of specific
                                                                               projects.

                                                                               The ESMF will also provide a detailed safeguards
                                                                               screening that will identify which of the Bank’s
                                                                               safeguards policies would be triggered for future



                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                                                                                project development, and establish a road map for
                                                                                the production of the required instruments.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              While the Project will not finance any infrastructure or activities which may have direct
                              environment or social footprints on the ground, it will finance detailed studies for potential new
                              generation and transmission projects that might have significant environmental or social impacts,
                              if and when these investments materialize. Thus, despite the absence of immediate physical
                              footprints or impacts, the project has been classified as safeguards category “A”.

                              Part of the project objective and activities will be to introduce environmental and social
                              assessment and management systems, which comply with good practice and will result in a range
                              of safeguards instruments. The first of such instruments anticipated during project implementation
                              will be an overall Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), providing strategic
                              guidance to the SAPP on the development and application of environmental and social criteria in
                              project screening, prioritization, and development. Further instruments to be prepared under the
                              Project will be ESIAs, RPFs, IPPFs and other required studies (e.g. cumulative impact
                              assessments) complementing the techno-economic development of specific projects.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The proposed Project itself will not have any direct physical impacts in the project area. However,
                              the projects that will receive TA support under this operation may include large scale energy
                              infrastructure investments, with a potential for significant induced,cumulative, indirect, and long
                              term impacts. The project implementation phase will include techno-economic and feasibility

                                                                        Page 4 of 7
                           studies for such investments, and likely result in a portfolio of selected, concrete investments.

                           The project design foresees that all technical, economic and engineering studies will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           complemented with appropriately scoped social and environmental studies, assessments and
                           management instruments. Furthermore the screening and selection of projects for further
                           development and financing (including possibly from IFIs / MDBs) will include environmental and
                           social factors and criteria that will be an important contribution to the overall decision matrix on
                           investment prioritization.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           There are no reasonable alternatives to the approach chosen by the proposed Project, which is to
                           develop – parallel to technical and economic studies, feasibility studies and designs – the
                           appropriate environmental and social studies, assessments, and management frameworks. In the
                           course of the environmental and social due diligence performed during project implementation,
                           alternatives will be identified and analyzed both on a portfolio level (e.g. via strategic E/S
                           assessments) and on the level of individual investments, within project specific ESIA as the
                           appropriate instruments.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Southern African Power Pool will implement this Project through the Coordination Center.
                           The SAPP is a highly credible entity, including in its approach to environmental and social due
                           diligence. It is supported by a number of donors including the EU, USAID, SIDA and Norway and
                           relies on a well-established institutional framework. Its self-governance structure is robust and
                           clear on the functions of its various committees, sub committees and working groups. The
                           Environmental Sub-Committee, which consists of environmental managers from the member
                           utilities, is responsible for advising the SAPP on environmental and social issues.

                           Africa’s mains regional institutions attribute to the SAPP a lead role in advancing regional energy
Public Disclosure Copy




                           projects that are identified as top priorities to expand electricity supply and access in the Southern
                           Africa Region. The SAPP has been at the forefront in promoting such projects with its
                           Coordination Center being recognized as key enabler, especially since it was appointed project
                           coordinator for the Central Transmission Corridor and the ZIZABONA projects, two of the key
                           transmission projects in the region. The Coordination Centre has significant experience in
                           administering donor funds and complying with donor’s requirements regarding environmental and
                           social due diligence, safeguards and oversight. Nonetheless, the Coordination Center has limited
                           capacity in a number of areas relating to project preparation, for which it relies mostly on external
                           consultants. In order to ensure that the SAPP and the Coordination Center can deliver up to
                           expectations, the current team needs to be substantially enlarged and its competencies
                           strengthened to adequately cover all the functions required for preparation of large and complex
                           energy projects. The establishment of a dedicated Projects Acceleration Team is intended to fulfill
                           this objective. The PAT will include a Coordinator and a number of experts providing the key
                           profiles needed for project preparation, including technical, financial, legal, regulatory, transaction
                           advisory, environmental and social management, financial management and procurement. Team
                           members will be a mixture of senior and mid-career highly credible specialists with strong track
                           record of project development using public and private funding.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                                                       Page 5 of 7
                           The key stakeholders at this moment are the members of SAPP, both on the institutional / agency
                           level (e.g. generation, transmission and distribution companies, utilities, regulators) and the
                           ministerial level. Also, national and international NGOs engaged in environmental protection,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           river basin and water resources management will have a strong technical interest in the Project’s
                           design and the planned environmental and social due diligence instruments.

                           The ToR for the ESMF was – as the project’s dedicated safeguards instrument – disclosed as final
                           draft both on SAPP’s website and in the World Bank’s Infoshop, inviting for comments and
                           feedback, for a period of 30 days. The comments received indicated general consent to the ToR’s
                           scope and contents, and those leading to improvements and adjustments of the PAD were duly
                           incorporated in the final version of the TOR.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         20-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      21-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Africa                                                              03-Apr-2014
                           Comments: The ToRs for the ESMF were disclosed on the website of the Southern Africa Power
                                         Pool
                         Technical Assistance Project
                         For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
                         indicate type of document disclosed, if any.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)     Yes [      ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies




                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Mustafa Zakir Hussain
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                      Date: 09-Sep-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Lucio Monari (PMGR)                            Date: 10-Sep-2014
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
