INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA6108
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Feb-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Tanzania                   Project ID:  P144497
Project Name: Tanzania: Expanding Rice Production (P144497)
Task Team       Abel Lufafa
Leader(s):
Estimated       17-Nov-2014                Estimated    30-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFADR                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Crops (51%), Irrigation and drainage (31%), Public administration- Agriculture,
fishing and forestry (13%), Agricultural extension a nd research (5%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (83%), Rural markets (17%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     22.90             Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                    0.00
Global Agriculture and Food Security Program                               22.90
Total                                                                      22.90
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
To increase the productivity and production of rice among smallholders in targeted areas of
Morogoro and Zanzibar
3. Project Description
The project will have four main components: (i) Sustainable seed systems; (i) Improving crop
Page 1 of 8


﻿productivity through better irrigation and crop management; (iii) Innovative marketing strategies;
and (iv) Project management and coordination.
Component 1. Sustainable Seed Systems: The objective of this component is to promote the adoption
O
U         and sustained use of improved rice varieties that have been released by the research system. This will
support on-farm demonstrations to introduce the new varieties to farmers, the multiplication and
distribution of preferred varieties, and improvements in quality assurance for rice seed.
Component 2. Improving Crop Productivity: This component aims to improve smallholder rice
production and productivity through improved crop and water management. The project will support
expansion and/or rehabilitation of selected irrigation schemes, and promote adoption of improved
agronomic practices through on-farm demonstrations, a temporary input subsidy, and strengthened
management support.
Component 3. Innovative Marketing Strategies: The component aims to increase the quantity of rice
marketed by strengthening access to markets and improving price incentives at the farmgate.
Activities under this component are targeted at only the Mainland, because of the current absence of
marketable surpluses, and hence limited marketing challenges, in Zanzibar.
Component 4. Project Coordination and Management: This component finances the operational
costs of the implementing agencies (Ministry of Agriculture Food Security and Cooperatives
(MAFC) for Tanzania Mainland and Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources (MANR) in
Zanzibar) including, procurement, monitoring, reporting and evaluation of activities under the
project. It also finances baseline and impact assessment studies.
The project will be implemented through the MAFC in the Tanzania Mainland, and the MANR in
Zanzibar. In the Mainland, project implementation will be led by a coordination team seconded from
within government although day to day responsibility for implementing the various components of
the project will remain with the relevant departments of the Ministry. At the local level, project
implementation will be guided by Local Government Authorities (LGA) working through the District
Agricultural Offices. Implementation in Zanzibar will be similarly let by a designated coordinator,
backed by an identified team of experts all seconded to the project by the Ministry. Ministry
procurement, financial management and monitoring and evaluation systems will be used, with
a        support from supplementary technical assistance as required.
The project will be overseen by two technical steering committees, one for Mainland Tanzania and
one for Zanzibar. These will be linked with a Joint Steering Committee encompassing the Permanent
Secretaries of MAFC and PMO-RALG in Mainland, and MANR and President's Office (Regional
Administration) for Zanzibar.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented both in the Morogoro region of Tanzania Mainland and in Tanzania
Zanzibar. Mainland locations include: Kilombero, Kilosa, and Mvomero districts. Locations in
Zanzibar include: West, Central, North A, Wete, Chakechake and Koani districts.
The Kilombero river valley includes a Ramsar site and includes or borders wildlife management
areas or national parks of unique ecological significance. Particular caution is needed to assure any
expansion of irrigation in these regions does not jeopardize the Ramsar site and surrounding wildlife
diversity.
Page 2 of 8


﻿5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Helen Z. Shahriari (GSURR)
Jane A. N. Kibbassa (GENDR)
o
6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
O
Environmental Assessment     Yes          The overall level of environmental risk is estimated
OP/BP 4.01                                to be low to moderate, stemming from the small-
scale nature of most investments including the
limited expansion of irrigated area. The two main
sets of risks relate to the competitive demands for
irrigation water, and to the possible environmental
impacts of expanding use of agro-chemicals used in
the irrigated farming systems.
There is growing competition for limited water
resources in the Morogoro region of mainland
Tanzania. This Region encompasses or borders some
of the uniquely diverse agro-ecologies in the world,
including national parks, wildlife management areas
and a Ramsar site. The expansion of irrigation
investments potentially threatens the availability of
water for wildlife and as well as for household use
and hydroelectricity. The drying of rivers and
wetlands reduces biodiversity. Multiple studies are
evaluating water availability in the larger Rufiji
River Basin, and the growing competition for water
use. The River Basin Authority is being strengthened
to better measure and manage this competition. On
U                                                    Zanzibar, the limited information available suggests
the need to better manage what water resources are
available. In either case, strong environmental
assessments are required to assure the Project
investments do not threaten degradation and to
assure continuing protection of critical biodiversity.
The expanding use of agro-chemicals fostered by this
project aims to improve the productivity of local rice
production, but creates substantial risks to the wider
environment. These include risks to neighboring
wetlands resulting from agro-chemical run-off, risks
of building resistances to pesticides, and risks to
human health resulting from the mis-use of these
pesticides, or improper storage and disposal.
An Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) has been prepared, consulted
upon and disclosed which summarizes these risks
Page 3 of 8


﻿and proposes a detailed environmental and social
review of sub-projects and associated environmental
and social management implementation plans
(ESMPs).
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes          The envisaged expansion of irrigation investments in
the Kilombero Valley potentially threatens the
availability of water for the ecosystem. Abstraction
of water may reduce environmental flow in rivers
and wetlands and negatively affect biodiversity.
Multiple studies are evaluating water availability
including Environmental Flow Assessment in the
larger Rufiji River Basin, and the growing
competition for water use. The River Basin Authority
is being strengthened to better measure and manage
this competition. Potential impacts on and proposed
mitigation measures for natural habitats are
addressed in the ESMF.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
Pest Management OP 4.09      Yes         In the long run, application of large quantities of
agro-chemicals in smallholder farming systems with
limited environmental literacy may potently lead to
development of pesticide resistant pest species,
upsurge of traditionally minor pests, and potential
elimination of useful fauna and flora species.
Exposure to these substances can also affect human
health through entry of chemical residues into the
food chains creating food and environmental safety
issues. Similarly, if improperly handled, herbicides
and pesticides can affect the health of the user and
contaminate local water supply. Occurrence of these
scenarios will increase pressure on already stretched
local institutions to implement an integrated
management approach. An Integrated Pest
Management Plan (IPMP) has been prepared,
consulted upon and disclosed with safeguards actions
to minimize these impacts.
Physical Cultural Resources  No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        The Project provides support for the rehabilitation
BP 4.12                                  and possible extension of six irrigation schemes
distributed across 3 districts in the Morogoro Region
of Mainland Tanzania, and 10 irrigation schemes
distributed across 5 districts in Zanzibar.While the
Page 4 of 8


﻿design of these investments still needs to be
completed, it is anticipated that this will involve the
rehabilitation of 376 ha of irrigatedarea and the
expansion of 352 hectares of irrigated area. In
addition, the project will support the construction of
five warehouses and rehabilitation of two feeder
roads. The level of possible resettlement is expected
to be small. Nonetheless, a Resettlement Policy
Framework for the project has been prepared,
consulted upon and disclosed and, where necessary,
each infrastructure investment will require
completion of a Resettlement Action Plan prior to
commencement of civil works.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No
Projects on International    No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The environmental and social impacts of the Project are expected to be small-scale and localized.
Mitigation measures may be readily developed and implemented.
O
U           The main environmental impacts are associated with the expansion of irrigation infrastructure and
the possible expansion of agro-chemical use linked with the adoption of improved agronomic
practices in targeted paddy production systems. Investments in the improvement of irrigation
systems target the rehabilitation and expansion of established schemes that are already functional.
The rehabilitation investments are expected to improve the efficiency of water use and reduce
water losses. The expansion sometimes involves a shift from informal irrigation to formal
irrigation (likely to save water), and in some cases involves a net increase in water use. Each of
these investments will be preceded by the preparation of environmental impact assessments which
consider the competition for limited water resources in the watershed, including completion
between agricultural uses and various environmental requirements. Efforts to promote the
adoption of technologies broadly known as System for Rice Intensification (SRI) encompass
techniques for reducing water use and increasing yields per unit of water applied.
SRI also involves the application of limited quantities of fertilizer, and in some systems the
application of herbicides. There are no plans for the application of insecticides, however, it is
possible that such application could increase in paddy rotations with vegetable crops. These
interventions create risks to human health and to the larger environment. These will need to be
controlled through the provision of training in techniques for safe handling and application, and
the monitoring of agro-chemical runoff.
Page 5 of 8


﻿The improvement and expansion of irrigation infrastructure, as well as the construction of several
warehouses and rehabilitation of two rural roads may involve a limited adjustment of property
rights. In each case, resettlement action plans would need to be considered.
o
The Project could encourage the reallocation of land from women to men insofar as the
profitability of paddy production and broader returns to irrigated farming rise. It is also possible
that the adoption of SRI could require a larger allocation of farming labor generally, and women's
labor in particular. Such impacts will need to be monitored and controlled.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The Project is not expected to lead to any significant negative indirect or long term environmental
impacts. However, the cumulative impacts of expanding irrigation systems on water availability
for broader environmental and household uses needs to be monitored. This is particularly a priority
in the Kilombero Valley region given the unique biodiversity of this area and the need to protect
designated wetlands and related nature reserves.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The Project considered avoiding investment in irrigation systems found in the sensitive agro-
ecologies like the Kilombero Valley. The Strategic Regional Environmental and Social
Assessment (SRESA) for the Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of Tanzania (SAGCOT)
completed a scenario analysis of development prospects in the Kilombero and found that the
promotion of a 'green' model of investment was better than a baseline avoidance of investment
support.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The government has prepared two documents to address these environmental safeguard risks: an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and an Integrated Pest Management
Plan (IPMP). Both set forth mandatory procedures to be applied to World Bank funded
investments supported under this Project. To additionally address social safeguard issues, the
government has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). This will be backed by the
preparation of Resettlement Action Plans once the proposed designs for infrastructure
improvements are better known. The ESMF, IPMP and RPF are currently in draft stage and
targeted for completion before the Project's appraisal.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Project is jointly managed and implemented under the leadership of the MAFC of Mainland
Tanzania and the MANR of Zanzibar. Each will establish its own technical steering committee to
oversee the management if their own budget. A joint steering committee will encompass the
leadership of the two technical steering committees and oversee the implementation of the overall
Project. This assures that lessons are shared and any reallocation of budgets is commonly agreed.
The implementation efforts of local government authorities will be managed on the Mainland
Tanzania under the auspices of the PMO-RALG. Backstop support is expected from the National
Environmental Management Council (NEMC).
The consultation of safeguard issues as been initiated by the MAFC and the MANR during the
preparation of the key safeguard documents including the ESMF, IPMP and RPF. When
Page 6 of 8


﻿completed, these will be publicly disclosed in country and through Infoshop.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              08-Jul-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           01-Sep-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  /
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Tanzania                                                 01-Sep-2014
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              24-Jun-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           05-Sep-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Tanzania                                                 01-Sep-2014
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                              02-Jul-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           05-Sep-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Tanzania                                                 01-Sep-2014
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
O
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]   NA [   ]
report?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
Page 7 of 8


﻿Is a separate PMP required?                              Yes[X] No[       ]  NA[    ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a      Yes[X]    No[       NA
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes[X]  No[      NA
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
O
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
O          the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Abel Lufafa
Approved By
Regional Safeguards    Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)          Date: 04-Feb-2015
Advisor:
Practice Manager/      Name: Tijan M. Sallah (PMGR)               Date: 04-Feb-2015
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


