                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC805

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Feb-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Feb-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Samoa                            Project ID:       P128904
                            Project Name:       WS: Pacific Regional Connectivity Program: Phase 3 - Samoa (P128904)
                            Task Team           Natasha Beschorner
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           23-Apr-2015                      Estimated         19-Jun-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GTIDR                            Lending           Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          General information and communications sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Rural services and
                                                infrastructure (40%), Regulation and competition po licy (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     38.00                      Total Bank Financing:          15.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              4.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                      15.50
                              Asian Development Bank                                                         18.50
                              Total                                                                          38.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the Project is to reduce the cost and increase the availability of ICT
                           services to support social and economic development in Samoa.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Project is expected to finance a submarine fibre-optic cable linking Samoa to either Fiji (at the
                         Southern Cross Cable Network at its landing station in Suva) or New Zealand (at the Spark cable
                         landing facilities in Auckland. In addition, the project will finance a dedicated domestic cable from
                         Apia, to Savai’i island.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project Components are as follows:

                         Component 1. Submarine cable system (SCS) (US$14.0 million). IDA financing will be provided
                         through on-lending or an equity contribution to the Government to finance its participation in SCC.
                         SCC will be responsible for procuring and managing the proposed submarine cable system, including
                         commercial arrangements for backhaul and interconnection, as appropriate.
                         Component 2. Technical Assistance (US$1.0 million) for sector regulation and regulatory capacity
                         development. This will finance medium-term technical assistance for the Office of the Regulator to
                         review, develop and implement effective regulation for the sector with a particular focus on
                         wholesale markets. Such assistance will include provision of legal and regulatory expertise,
                         especially for: competition and market regulation activities; review of existing legal regulatory
                         framework including drafting new instruments and reforms; and training and skills development.
                         Additionally, funding will be provided for procurement of technical equipment that is needed to
                         administer and plan effective arrangements for the sector.
                         Component 3. Project management support ($0.50 million) for a Project management unit to be
                         established in the Ministry of Finance, consistent with arrangements for other IDA-financed
                         operations. This component will finance overall Project coordination, financial management, audit,
                         communications and outreach, and reporting, monitoring and evaluation.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project is not expected to have any major environmental impacts and would be proposed for
                         consideration as a Category “B” Project. The international route currently proposed is from Samoa
                         (Upolu) to either Suva, Fiji or Auckland, New Zealand. For the Samoa to Fiji direct option, the
                         landing point will likely be the existing Vatuwaqa station in Laucala Bay, Suva operated by FinTel
Public Disclosure Copy




                         where the Southern Cross cable currently terminates. No new construction is required at this site,
                         with connection enabled through a service agreement and provision of requisite space within existing
                         facilities for the interconnection, shared provision of power, UPS, fire protection and security, etc.
                         The Samoa to New Zealand option will terminate at existing cable landing facilities owned by Spark
                         (formerly Telecom New Zealand) in Takapuna near Auckland. The domestic cable, if included in the
                         final project scope would be constructed to the neighboring island of Savai’i, with the landing station
                         to be built on government-owned land at Tuasivi landing. Both the international and domestic cables
                         will originate at the Samoa/American Samoa (SAS) - American Samoa-Hawaii (ASH) cable landing
                         site at Fagalii, Upolu (owned by BlueSky Samoa).
                         The main construction-phase activities will be:
                         (i)       a marine survey to characterize the route and avoid hazards and/or environmentally
                         significant zones. Surveys include water depth and seabed topography, sediment type and thickness,
                         marine faunal/floral communities, and potential natural or human-made hazards. A marine route
                         survey for a SCS installation commonly assesses a seabed corridor from 1 to 10 km wide with repeat
                         passes where necessary;
                         (ii)      detailed design of the submerged infrastructure – the cable and repeaters. This will determine
                         the cable route and cable types and quantities, and clarify the nature of its deployment on the seafloor
                         – surface laying, or trenching and burial, supplementary protection, etc.
                         (iii)     construction of a landing facility and cable station at Tuasivi landing on Savai’i comprising a
                         small beach manhole and a shore end to the sea. The exact terrestrial arrangement is still to be
                           defined but the station will likely be on government land associated with the adjacent hospital.
                           (iv)     cable laying – the cable will likely be buried in the shallow water approaches to the landing
                           sites and surface-laid along the deep water route. In sections where the cable is not buried it will lie
Public Disclosure Copy




                           directly on the seabed. Where burying is undertaken, the most effective method is by sea plough (i.e.
                           as a cable approaches the seabed, it is fed through the plough, which inserts the cable into a narrow
                           furrow). In near shore environments, cable burial may require other excavation methods (eg. backhoe
                           trenching).

                           Once the route option has been selected the exact cable route will be determined by a marine survey
                           that will also map out the locations of all the sensitive ecosystems and the laying of the cables will be
                           done by a specialized ship guided by sonar and other systems. The final cable route will be chosen to
                           avoid sensitive deep ocean ecosystems such as hydrothermal vents and seamounts given that the
                           geophysical conditions at these locations could also destroy the cable. Similarly, avoidance will be
                           the key mitigation measure to avoid impacts in the near-shore environment (eg. coral-based
                           ecological communities, seagrasses, fishing grounds etc.). The use of sonar may be a nuisance to
                           cetacean communities but this risk will be mitigated by adoption of industry best practice protocols.
                           Given these considerations, the Project is unlikely to significantly impact the marine environment
                           and sensitive ecosystems and species during the laying of the cable (i.e., the construction phase).
                           Therefore, any impacts that occur are likely to be short-term, and will not lead to induced and/or
                           cumulative impacts.

                           The Project will take into account the implementation experience of the recently-commissioned
                           Tonga-Fiji cable, co-financed by the World Bank and Asian Development Bank. No adverse social
                           or environmental impacts were experienced during marine operations or landing at Suva or
                           Nuku'alofa.

                           The Project will use the applicable safeguards policies of the World Bank and Asian Development
                           Bank. The safeguards process will include a gap analysis to establish differences between World
                           Bank and Asian Development Bank policies with the highest standards being adopted by the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The World Bank, in consultation with the Asian Development Bank, will take primary responsibility
                           for review and clearance of safeguards instruments.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Samoa has an established Code of Environmental Practice (COEP) and a regulatory agency. The
                           COEP of Samoa was developed through the assistance of the World Bank and consists of 14 codes
                           which cover different activities such as road works, quarry operations, drainage works and
                           telecommunications facilities among others. These codes generally cover the safeguards
                           requirements of the 14 specific activities identified in the COEP.
                           The Planning and Urban Management Agency (PUMA) as the environmental regulatory agency of
                           Samoa will monitor the compliance with the applicable local regulations, which is the COEP.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Nicholas John Valentine (GSURR)
                           Ross James Butler (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment      Yes   This Project will finance the laying of a submarine
                         OP/BP 4.01                          fiber-optic cable system, with associated marine and
                                                             land based infrastructure, between Samoa and Fiji/
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             New Zealand and within Samoan territory (Savai’i
                                                             Island). The project influence area (PIA) will include
                                                             the terrestrial and marine environments in Samoa and
                                                             Fiji or New Zealand. Potential adverse
                                                             environmental impacts may include temporary site-
                                                             specific disturbance of marine ecosystems (including
                                                             habitats and species) and coastal areas and
                                                             communities during installation and maintenance of
                                                             the cable, and construction of the land and marine
                                                             based infrastructure, which are expected to be
                                                             temporary and/or short term and readily manageable.
                                                             The Project has been initially assigned a category
                                                             "B" consistent with the nature of these impacts and
                                                             the requirements of OP4.01. An Environmental and
                                                             Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and corresponding
                                                             Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
                                                             will be prepared by the Project team to address these
                                                             issues in Samoa and Fiji or New Zealand. As part of
                                                             this process consultations will be undertaken with all
                                                             stakeholder groups in the relevant countries
                                                             (potentially affected communities, NGOs and
                                                             research groups with interest and experience in the
                                                             Pacific). The ESIA and ESMP will be prepared and
                                                             disclosed locally in Samoa and in the destination
                                                             country and also via the World Bank’s Infoshop.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The PIA may have designated marine protected areas
                                                             and parks and important habitats and migratory
                                                             routes for marine species, and significant flora (e.g.
                                                             mangroves, seagrasses).The ESIA/ESMP process
                                                             will determine, investigate and assess these issues
                                                             and relevant and tangible management measures to
                                                             ensure full compliance with this policy, and relevant
                                                             national and international laws, treaties and other
                                                             obligations. The key mitigation measure will be
                                                             avoidance of natural habitats and there is sufficient
                                                             design flexibility to allow this.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    The project infrastructure will not impact on forests.

                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    The project will not include pest management.

                         Physical Cultural Resources   TBD   The ESIA process will determine the presence of
                         OP/BP 4.11                          Physical Cultural Resources (PCRs) in the PIA, and
                                                             will propose measures to avoid impacts to PCRs or
                                                              prepare acceptable plans to manage these impacts if
                                                              PCRs are present in the project influence area. As
                                                              two of the three landing sites are at existing facilities
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              (and hence will not require new infrastructure) PCRs
                                                              are unlikely to be relevant. Nevertheless, a Chance
                                                              Find Procedures/Protocols will be included in all
                                                              works contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No    Based on prior country-level social analysis
                         4.10                                 undertaken as part of preparation of the
                                                              Environmental and Social Safeguard Procedures for
                                                              the Pacific Island Countries, OP 4.10 is not typically
                                                              triggered in Samoa. Indigenous Peoples are defined
                                                              by four characteristics: self-identification as
                                                              members of a cultural group, collective attachment to
                                                              habitats/territories, customary institutions, and
                                                              indigenous language. All four characteristics must be
                                                              present to trigger the policy. In Samoa, virtually all
                                                              of the population is ethnic Samoan and there are no
                                                              significant ethnic cleavages among them; therefore,
                                                              they do not self-identify as members of a distinct
                                                              indigenous cultural group within their own country.
                                                              Similarly there are no customary cultural, economic,
                                                              social or political institutions that are separate from
                                                              the dominant society and culture because they are the
                                                              dominant society and culture. There also is no
                                                              indigenous language different from the official
                                                              language of the country.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   The proposed landing sites in Apia and Fiji are
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.12                              existing and no further land disturbance is required.
                                                              Nevertheless, due diligence on land ownership will
                                                              be undertaken. Due diligence will also be undertaken
                                                              to determine whether or not there are legacy issues
                                                              (such as involuntary displacement, grievances of lost
                                                              assets etc) associated with the proposed landing site
                                                              in Savai’i. The site proposed is understood to be a
                                                              government-owned hospital site. Nevertheless, this
                                                              will be confirmed through consultation with
                                                              Government agencies and associated documentation.
                                                              In the unlikely event of any legacy issues a strategy
                                                              to address them will be prepared. This may include
                                                              securing agreement with relevant parties to ensure
                                                              appropriate compensation arrangements or other
                                                              remedial measures agreeable to all parties are made.
                                                              If involuntary land acquisition and/or resettlement
                                                              are confirmed and specific Project areas are known
                                                              prior to appraisal a Compensation and Resettlement
                                                              Plan will be prepared. When land acquisition and/or
                                                                                                                        involuntary resettlement are not confirmed or
                                                                                                                        specific Project areas are unknown prior to appraisal,
                                                                                                                        a Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        will be prepared.
                                                                                                                        Although any impacts are likely to be minimal/
                                                                                                                        temporary, there is potential for the customary use
                                                                                                                        right owners (land, fisheries) to be entitled to
                                                                                                                        compensation payments due to any temporary
                                                                                                                        interrupted access to their fishing grounds as a result
                                                                                                                        of the laying of the cable. ). The issue of linkage will
                                                                                                                        be investigated by the Task team to determine if
                                                                                                                        there are linked activities as defined by the World
                                                                                                                        Bank’s OP4.12, clause 4. If there are, the Task team
                                                                                                                        and the Project Implementing Entity will agree on a
                                                                                                                        due diligence approach and agree on how best to
                                                                                                                        address any issues that might arise. These issues will
                                                                                                                        all be clearly stated in all the Project documents.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project scope does not include dams.

                                 Projects on International                                   No                         The project entails construction of a submarine cable
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   between the territorial waters (ocean) of Samoa and
                                                                                                                        Fiji or New Zealand. However, these water bodies do
                                                                                                                        not form a boundary between countries.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      There are no disputed areas within the scope of
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                project implementation.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Public Disclosure Copy




                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 16-Mar-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Safeguards studies TOR were approved by December 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Natasha Beschorner
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name:                                                                                                                         Date:
                                 Practice Manager/    Name:                                                                                                                        Date:
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
