INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCIO70
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Dec-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Kenya                      Project ID:   P151816
Project Name:    Financial Sector Support Project (P151816)
Task Team        Smita Wagh
Leader(s):
Estimated        10-Feb-2015                Estimated     30-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFMDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       General finance sector (100%)
Theme(s):        Other Financial Sector Development (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      30.00             Total Bank Financing:    30.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                      30.00
Total                                                            30.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project's development objective is to strengthen the legal and regulatory environment for access
to affordable and long term financing.
C. Project Description
Having affected a significant number of baseline reforms over the last decade or so, Kenya's
financial sector is now at the stage where it would benefit from a more targeted approach that
supports solutions to specific constraints that curtail the growth and job creation potential of the


﻿Kenyan private sector. Some of the key constraints are:
i.     availability of affordable credit to businesses and individuals,
ii.    scarcity of term instruments and inadequate mobilization of long term savings to address the
development finance gap, and
O
U       iii.   gaps in specific financial product markets (securitization, project finance products, housing
finance, insurance)
The key financial sector issues that Kenya faces currently cut across subsectors, as do their potential
solutions. Under the new project, components will be organized by thematic cohesion rather than by
subsectors. During the implementation phase such an organization will allow for a more targeted
approach to solving specific issues in a comprehensive multi-pronged way. Project funds will be
used to procure consultancy services, goods, workshops and training.
The four main thematic areas/components proposed are as follows;
a.     Component 1 - Financial architecture: This component will focus on the overarching reforms
to the financial sector legal and regulatory framework that influence the overall playing field for the
provision of financial products and services. Given the all-encompassing nature of these reforms the
key counterpart for this component will be the National Treasury.
b.     Component 2 - Efficient financial intermediation: This component will move forward the
financial inclusion agenda in Kenya with a focus on strengthening and making more transparent the
pricing of financial intermediation so that more businesses and individuals have access to affordable
financial products.
c.     Component 3 - Long-term finance: This component will focus on strengthening the demand
for and supply of long-term funds so that Kenya's growing development finance needs for long-term
projects in infrastructure, housing, etc. can be met.
d. Component 4 - Strengthening institutions: This component will focus on assisting the regulatory,
supervisory and institutional framework keep pace with an evolving financial system.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
U
Kenya-nationwide
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
N/A
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Edward Felix Dwumfour (GENDR)
Svetlana Khvostova (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    No          The project screening did not identify any proposed
OP/BP 4.01                              activities with adverse direct or indirect
environmental or social impacts. It is proposed that
the project is assigned the EA Category C.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No


﻿Forests OP/BP 4.36           No
Pest Management OP 4.09      No
Physical Cultural Resources  No
O
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No
BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No
Projects on International    No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 26-Jan-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
No environmental and social studies are required for this project.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s):     ame: Smita Wagh
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                 Date: 21-Jan-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/      Name: Irina Astrakhan (PMGR)                    Date: 22-Jan-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


