                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA7182
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Dec-2013, 20-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Armenia                          Project ID:    P130182
                            Project Name:     Education Improvement Project (P130182)
                            Task Team         Mario Cristian Aedo Inost
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         09-Dec-2013                      Estimated   13-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    ECSH2                            Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        General education sector (50%), Tertiary education (30%), Pre-primary
                                              education (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (70%), Education for all (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        30.00           Total Bank Financing:  30.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     15.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               15.00
                              Total                                                                                     30.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)



                                                                     Page 1 of 7
                            A. Project Development Objective(s)
                            The Project Development Objectives (PDO) are to improve school readiness of children entering
                            primary education, improve physical conditions and the availability of educational resources in
Public Disclosure Copy




                            upper secondary schools, and support improved quality and relevance in higher education
                            institutions in Armenia.
                            B. Global Environmental Objective(s)


                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed project aims at supporting the Government of Armenia in two main endeavors:
                         enhancing the quality of pre-primary and general education, and fostering the relevance of tertiary
                         education through mainstreaming the Competitive Innovation Fund, or expanding it from a pilot
                         program to one with full implementation.

                         The Project consists of 3 components:

                         Component 1: Enhancing the Quality of General Education

                         Subcomponent 1.1: Promotion of School Readiness and equal opportunities at the start of General
                         Education - The objective of this subcomponent is two fold: first, it will support the Government’s
                         efforts to increase preschool enrollment, focusing on vulnerable populations, as a means of
                         improving the school readiness of five and six-year-old children entering primary education. By the
                         end of 2017, it is expected that 90 percent of five and six-year-olds would be enrolled in preschool
                         institutions. Second, this component will finance activities aimed at improving the quality of
                         preschool education offered by community-based initiatives. Establishment of sustainable,
                         community-based preschool education units will be supported under a competitive grant financing
                         scheme.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 1.2: Enrichment of Upper Secondary Schools - The objective of this subcomponent
                         is to strengthen the recently established network of high schools by supporting the rehabilitation of
                         selected facilities in poor physical condition and improvements in all high schools in teaching and
                         learning conditions, including the provision of contextualized digital learning materials in classrooms
                         and modern equipment. This subcomponent will support the rehabilitation and refurbishment of a
                         limited number of high schools recently designated by the Government.

                         Subcomponent 1.3: Strengthening key institutions for monitoring educational outcomes and
                         monitoring student learning in Armenia - This component will improve the capacity of the National
                         Center of Education Technology (NACET) to monitor schools in Armenia and provide them with
                         adequate ICT coverage. This subcomponent will also provide financing for the participation of the
                         country in large-scale international student assessment studies.

                         Subcomponent 1.4: Support to further improvements in the quality of education through curriculum
                         revisions - The objective of this subcomponent is to bring the National Curriculum Framework for
                         grades 1-12 into conformity with the requirements of the General Education and State General
                         Education Curriculum law approved by the Government Decree No. 1088, dated July 28, 2011.

                         Component 2: Mainstreaming of the Competitive Innovation Fund (CIF) for Higher Education
                         Institutions (HEI) into full implementation

                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         The objective of this component is to support the roll-out of the competitive grant program for HEIs
                         that was developed and piloted under the Second Education Quality and Relevance Project (EQRP2).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The fund was designed to support the best proposals prepared by HEIs with the aim of improving the
                         quality, modernization and particularly the labor-market relevance of the academic programs and
                         increasing efficiency, equity and the development of new academic programs of HEIs. This
                         component will support the assessment of the piloting of the CIF implemented under EQRP2 and
                         reviewing the grant-financing scheme based on the findings of this assessment. Representatives of
                         HEIs will be encouraged to participate in the CIF program and would be trained on proposals
                         preparation, project and financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation.

                         Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation

                         The objective of this component is to provide continued s upport for the management and monitoring
                         of project implementation activities and outcomes. This component would provide funds for
                         monitoring and evaluation studies and for audits of project financial statements and grants
                         implementation. The Center for EducationProjects (CEP) under the Ministry of Education, acting as
                         a project implementation unit, will provide day-to-day management of the project, including
                         procurement, disbursement, safeguards, monitoring and evaluation, and will be responsible for
                         reporting on the implementation progress.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will be implemented country-wide. Beneficiary educational facilities are not pre-
                         identified and, therefore, their locations are not known at present. A Feasibility Study will be carried
                         out to select them.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sarah G. Michael (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes                The Project will support upgrading of the
                          BP 4.01                                              selected school buildings. Rehabilitation works
                                                                               are expected to have some temporary negative
                                                                               impacts typical for reconstruction / rehabilitation
                                                                               of small to medium size buildings. OP/BP 4.01
                                                                               Environmental Assessment is triggered.
                                                                               According to the principles of this safeguard
                                                                               policy, and based on the outcome of
                                                                               environmental screening, the Project is classified
                                                                               as Category B. Environmental risks of the Project
                                                                               implementation will be of the modest scale, and
                                                                               limited to the construction sites and to the period
                                                                               of construction works. Managing these impacts
                                                                               and keeping them to the acceptable minimum will
                                                                               be achieved effectively by adhering to the good
                                                                               construction practice and applying specific



                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                                                                         mitigation measures to be provided in the
                                                                         Environmental Management Plans (EMPs). An
                                                                         Environmental and Social Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Framework (ESMF) was developed as part of the
                                                                         Project preparation process, while the site-
                                                                         specific EMPs will be worked out later on, as the
                                                                         beneficiary institutions get identified and detailed
                                                                         designs for their rehabilitation become available.
                                                                         Possible minor repair works in the interiors of
                                                                         preschool institutions under sub-component 1.1
                                                                         will fall under Category C and will not require
                                                                         environmental management planning.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             School buildings suggested for rehabilitation
                         BP 4.11                                         with support of the Project are predominantly old
                                                                         and there is some likelihood of some of these
                                                                         buildings carrying a historical value. OP/BP 4.11
                                                                         is triggered to ensure that the process of school
                                                                         selection will involve checking if any of the
                                                                         buildings are formally entered into the list of the
                                                                         nation's historical and/or cultural heritage. In such
                                                                         cases the building renovation designs will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         cleared with the national authorities responsible
                                                                         for the preservation of cultural heritage to ensure
                                                                         that historic/cultural value of such buildings are
                                                                         not compromised as a result of improvement
                                                                         works. These provisions are included into the
                                                                         EMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No             All rehabilitation works under the project are
                         4.12                                            expected to take place within the existing
                                                                         footprint of educational facilities and no land
                                                                         acquisition/use is expected.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International        No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                         7.60




                                                                 Page 4 of 7
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Project will finance upgrading of the existing school premises, which is associated with
                              modest environmental and social risks limited to the construction period and to the construction
                              sites. An important principle for selecting school buildings and for preparing adequate design
                              documents for their upgrading will be to screen them against any structural damage and instability,
                              and to address these faults or drop buildings which are beyond repair of structural problems. If the
                              designed works imply replacement of damaged roofs, there is a high likelihood of encountering
                              asbestos-containing old roofing materials. Handling of such hazardous construction waste at the
                              work site and its disposal will require close supervision and control, in order to minimize exposure
                              of construction workers and avoid future risks to public health that may arise in case of improper
                              dumping. It would be preferable to schedule rehabilitation works during school breaks. However if
                              and where that is not doable and works will be undertaken in buildings where classes are being
                              held, there may be a risk of disruption of the teaching process and to the health and safety of
                              students and teachers. Therefore, proper planning will be required for the provision of alternative
                              temporary teaching space, and for preventing children's entrance to the area of ongoing works and
                              to the locations where construction materials and waste is being stored. Minor indoor repair works
                              may be undertaken in the premises of preschool institutions under sub-component 1.1, which are
                              not likely to have any measurable negative impacts on the natural and/or social environment. As
                              all civil works will be rehabilitation of existing buildings (within their existing footprint) and no
                              new construction is expected, no resettlement is expected under the project. Moreover, no civil
                              works will be permitted under the Competitive Innovation Fund grants program.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Rehabilitation of school buildings is expected to have strong positive long term social impact and
Public Disclosure Copy




                              to be neutral for the environment.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Analysis of alternatives will be part of selecting schools for the Project support. This multi-criteria
                              selection process will include screening of buildings with significant structural damage and severe
                              seismic instability. If reasonable investment into school rehabilitation cannot eliminate risks of
                              instability, such building will be excluded from the Project's work program.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              According to the Project design, civil works will be implemented in multiple locations to be
                              identified during at a late stage of the Project preparation and early into implementation. The
                              nature of works to be undertaken in all of these locations will be pretty similar, with generally well
                              known environmental and social impacts. Therefore, an Environmental and Social Management
                              Framework (ESMF) was developed as part of the Project preparation process, while the site-
                              specific EMPs will be worked out later on, as the beneficiary institutions get identified and
                              detailed designs for their rehabilitation become available. The simplified EMP Checklist for Small
                              Construction and Rehabilitation Activities will be used for the predominant number of
                              construction sites, while a fuller version of EMP may be required in an unlikely case of higher risk
                              Category B works. A template of monthly field monitoring report is also provided in the ESMF, as


                                                                          Page 5 of 7
                           a user-friendly tool for tracking environmental performance of works contractors and for reporting
                           on the compliance with EMPs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Ministry of Education and Science (MoES) is the implementing agency for the Project. CEP,
                           under the MoES, will act as the Project implementation unit responsible for day-to-day
                           management of the Project implementation, including procurement, disbursement, safeguards
                           application, and M&E. Although MoES and CEP have been involved in the implementation of the
                           Bank-supported project in the past and performed well in that capacity, their experience in the
                           application of safeguards policies is modest as in difference from the present Project, the previous
                           activities did not include civil works are were classified as environmental Category C. The Bank
                           team discussed with the CEP institutional arrangements to close the gap in human capacity for
                           safeguards application. It was agreed, that for the period of the Project preparation CEP
                           management will appoint one of the staff members as a focal point for overseeing required
                           safeguards compliance work, and will hire an environmental and social safeguard specialist once
                           the Project enters into operation and resources become available. The specialist should have
                           relevant experience and skills, and will receive on-the-job coaching from the Safeguards Specialist
                           of the World Bank Task Team promptly upon recruitment. Hiring and maintaining a safeguards
                           specialist in CEP throughout the period of civil works performance under the Project will be a
                           legally binding commitment of the Borrower.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Schools, targeted by the project for upgrading of their premises, are under the MoES and hence
                           this Ministry is the main recipient of the Project assistance. Administrations and personnel of the
                           schools selected for rehabilitation, as well as the students attending these schools will directly
                           benefit from the Project interventions.

                           The advanced draft of the ESMF document was disclosed in-country in Armenian and English
                           languages by posting on the web page of the MoES. It was published through the Bank’s InfoShop
Public Disclosure Copy




                           as well. A public consultation meeting on the draft ESMF was held in Yerevan on 12/10/2013.
                           The ESMF was then finalized and re-disclosed in-country and through the InfoShop. Site-specific
                           EMPs, once drafted, will also be disclosed nation-wide, with special emphasis on their
                           accessibility to project-affected local communities. Draft EMPs will be open for public feedback,
                           after which they will be finalized and get included into tender packages. EMPs will be attached to
                           contracts to be concluded with works providers, and become mandatory for implementation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          02-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       11-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Armenia                                                              04-Dec-2013
                           Comments: The ESMF was posted in the web site of the Ministry of Education and Science,
                                         including the announcement of public consultation date, time and venue. The link of
                                         the Ministry’s web site is as follows: http://edu.am/index.php?
                                         id=-6432&topMenu=4&menu1=-1&menu2=4&arch=0


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Mario Cristian Aedo Inost
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Andrea C. Guedes (SM)                        Date: 20-Dec-2013




                                                                       Page 7 of 7
