                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC7647

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                           Project ID:      P147381
                            Project Name:      Zhuzhou Brownfield Development Project (P147381)
                            Task Team          Frank Van Woerden
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          20-Apr-2015                     Estimated        15-Dec-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GENDR                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General industry and trade sector (50%), General agriculture, fishing and
                                               forestry sector (20%), Solid waste management (30%)
                            Theme(s):          Pollution management and environmental health (70%), Urban Economic
                                               Development (20%), Environmental policies and institutions (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    350.00                     Total Bank Financing:       150.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    200.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       150.00
                              Total                                                                       350.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           13.     The proposed project development objective is to support site remediation in Zhuzhou’s
                           Qingshuitang core industrial area with the aim to reduce public exposure to contaminated land and to
                           control site contamination in a manner that enables the safe redevelopment of the area.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed project involves a section of the Qinghsuitang Core Area. The proposed project
                         envisages the remediation of around 7.5km2 within the core area, adjacent to some major industrial
                         complexes. Project interventions will mainly consist of remediation works, such as soil and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         groundwater cleanup or containment, and waste dump removal or in-situ management. Where
                         needed, the proposed project will support some additional activities, such as demolition of structures
                         at remediation sites and related basic infrastructure, e.g. access roads for remediation works and
                         infrastructure for water management (run-off water and drainage water) at remediation locations.

                         The proposed project costs are estimated to be around US$350 million (US$150 million World Bank
                         loan and US$200 million from counterpart funding).

                         Component 1. Remediation of Contaminated Plots in the proposed project Area. Under this
                         component all remediation activities will be implemented as defined in the Feasibility Study Report
                         (FSR). Within the present project area of 7.5km2, the FSR will determine plot by plot which
                         remediation approach is most suitable and cost effective, based on current use and contamination
                         levels; risks from contamination; and future destination of the plot according to the functions
                         approved development plan.

                         This approach will result in an order of magnitude of 100 plots with a set of 5-10 different
                         remediation models/approaches. Some plots will not need any cleanup work; other plots will only
                         require relatively low-disturbing interventions (e.g. removal of materials) without impacts on
                         ownership or need for demolitions/resettlements. At the end of the spectrum of remediation
                         approaches will be certain plots that require substantial works to achieve full restoration. This
                         approach ensures full tailoring of remediation to specific site characteristics but also flexibility to
                         change from one remediation and restoration approach to another if e.g. the future land-use
                         destination of a plot would change.

                         Component 2. Associated Investments of Remediation Works. This component includes investments
Public Disclosure Copy




                         associated to the remediation works under Component 1 that are required to enable the remediation
                         of certain plots or to make sure that the remediation is sustainable. Examples of such association
                         investments and activities are:
                         •        demolitions;
                         •        water management works (run-off water, drainage systems);
                         •        removal or remediation of waste disposal sites within the proposed project area; a former
                         quarry at the site has been suggested for development and sanitary disposal of these waste materials
                         and will be further examined including its potential for continued operation as industrial waste
                         disposal facility after the proposed project implementation period;
                         •        access roads to facilitate remediation and site restoration;
                         •        activities to support reallocation of manufacturing plants; resettlement and compensation of
                         workers.

                         Component 3. Capacity Building and Knowledge Management. The FSR will identify needs for
                         institutional capacity building to develop skills for management, remediation and restoration of
                         contaminated (former) industrial sites. Since the proposed Project will build know-how and develop
                         capacities that are new in China, particularly tailoring remediation to specific circumstances, risks
                         and future use, there is interest to start a knowledge center for urban redevelopment and site
                         remediation in Zhuzhou. The purpose is to deepen and share the developed expertise across the
                         country. This concept of this center will be further developed in the FSR.
                         Component 4. Project Management. The objective of this component is to manage project resources
                         in accordance with the proposed project's objectives and procedures as outlined in the proposed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project Implementation Manual (PIM) which will be developed during project preparation. The
                         proposed project will finance the following sub-components: (i) Project Management; and (ii)
                         Establishment of a Monitoring and Evaluation system.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Zhuzhou City is located in the eastern part of Hunan Province and mid-low reach of Xiang River.
                         The area belongs to subtropical monsoon humid area, with four distinctive seasons. Average annual
                         rain precipitation is 1,418 mm. Dominant landform are plains and low hills.

                         The proposed project area is about 7.5km2, located in the northern part of Zhuzhou City and by the
                         Xiang River on its north side. The project area is a portion of a 16km2 Qingshuitang Core Area that
                         is part of a 47km2 Qingshuitang industrial area. Qingshuitang industrial area started to house
                         industries in early 1950’s, while 90% of those industries are located in the Qingshuitang Core Area.

                         The entire Qingshuitnag industrial area is located in Zhuzhou’s Shifeng District. Within Sihfeng
                         District and adjacent to the Qingshuitang area there is a Zhuzhou north railway station, which is the
                         largest railway hub in mid-south China. There is an intensive road network in the district.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The project area is located in Zhuzhou’s Shifeng District; a PMO has been established at district
                         level to manage the project preparation and implementation, under direct supervision of a municipal
                         level Project Leading Group (PLG).

                         Though Zhuzhou Municipality managed Bank-financed projects such as Hunan Urban Development
                         Project, the proposed project will be the first standalone Bank-financed project to be managed by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         city and the district. Institutional capacity building, including safeguards, is much needed. Zhuzhou
                         has developed an institutional arrangement plan that includes safeguards-related government bodies
                         in its PLG, such as municipal land bureau, labor and social security bureau, and environmental
                         protection bureau. The PLG will play an important coordinating role in addressing safeguards issues
                         beyond the district jurisdictions.

                         The PMO includes district level land, labor and environmental bureaus as well. Under PMO there is
                         a Project Implementing Unit (PIU), Zhuzhou Recycling Economic Investment and Development
                         (ZREIDC), which will carry out day-to-day project management. The PIU has assigned dedicated
                         unit/staff to manage social and environmental safeguards issues in collaboration with these bureaus,
                         in particular, land and worker settlement issues. The PIU has engaged experienced consults to
                         prepare safeguards instruments required by the Bank.

                         The Bank team considered the current institutional setup appropriate and has provided safeguards
                         training to the PMO and PIU. The Bank team will continue work with them closely during project
                         preparation to ensure that their safeguards capacity will be adequate to meet Bank safeguards policy
                         requirements.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Songling Yao (GSURR)
                           Ning Yang (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          The project is an environmental cleanup project
                           BP 4.01                                     by nature, thus it will have significant
                                                                       environmental and social benefits by
                                                                       remediating site contamination and improve
                                                                       ambient environmental quality. The project is
                                                                       assigned Category A for environmental purpose
                                                                       due to complex contamination situations, land
                                                                       use patterns in the project area, industrial
                                                                       pollution issues, and high demand for technical
                                                                       efforts throughout remediation process. An EIA,
                                                                       a standalone EMP and an Environmental
                                                                       Assessment Executive Summary will need to be
                                                                       prepared.

                                                                       The project will draw on international
                                                                       experiences in contaminated site remediation,
                                                                       notably US Superfund site and brownfield
                                                                       remediation. In addition, Bank experiences
                                                                       gained from similar projects in ECA countries
                                                                       will be incorporated into the project. The
                                                                       following aspects will be given special attention
                                                                       during EA preparation.

                                                                       EA study area. Based on available information,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       the proposed project area is 7.5km2. It is a
                                                                       portion of 16km2 Qingshuitang Core Area,
                                                                       which holds 90% of industries of those in the
                                                                       47km2 Qingshuitang industrial area. While the
                                                                       Core Area will be the focus of EA study, the EA
                                                                       study will cover entire Qingshuitang industrial
                                                                       area to present a full picture of historical and
                                                                       current industrial pollution emissions, land,
                                                                       surface water and groundwater contamination,
                                                                       and communities. Due diligence review of
                                                                       industrial emissions will be included in the EA.
                                                                       In addition, Xiang River that is located on the
                                                                       south of the project area will be included in the
                                                                       EA study. In addition, site investigation carried
                                                                       out during project preparation will further
                                                                       determine if certain impacts are or could of
                                                                       concern beyond the Qingshuitang industrial
                                                                       area.
                         Baselines. The Qingshuitang Core area has a
                         mix of land uses, including heavy industry, light
                         industry, commercial activities, utilities,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         residential area and agriculture. Long time
                         industrial operations have led to serious soil
                         contamination to this area. Exposure paths may
                         include airborne emissions, waste disposal,
                         wastewater discharge and sludge deposits, soil
                         contamination at manufacturing sites and
                         ground water pollution through infiltration of
                         pollutants.

                         It is noted that in 2011 the State Council issued
                         an Implementation Plan for Heavy Metal
                         Pollution Treatment in Xiang River Basin.
                         Follow-up actions by Hunan provincial
                         government required that by end of 2015,
                         enterprises involved in heavy metals and heavy
                         metals emissions will reduce 50% compared to
                         the level at 2008. Consequently, in the Core
                         Area many small enterprises were shut down in
                         the past 2 years. Remaining industries in the
                         Core Area include a major lead-zinc smelter
                         complex and a chemical complex. They have
                         undergone technical renovation, installed
                         sophisticated pollution control facilities and are
                         under close inspection of local environmental
                         protection bureaus. However, they will remain
Public Disclosure Copy




                         active in foreseeable future. These two major
                         industrial complexes are located adjacent to the
                         project area and will need to be closely
                         investigated during EA study.

                         Land use survey. It is noted that currently the
                         western part of the project area is dominantly
                         green area while the eastern part is industrial.
                         Because of serious soil pollution, local farmers
                         do not engage in farming. A detailed land use
                         survey will be carried out during project
                         preparation and summarized in the EA. This
                         survey will include all existing land uses (both
                         formal and informal such as informal farming, if
                         any), all existing structures including houses,
                         farms and industrial buildings, and land
                         ownerships.

                         Environmental site investigation and risk
                         assessment. A detailed environmental site
                         investigation will be carried out and
                         summarized in the EA. The investigation will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         cover historical analysis of the area, land use
                         analysis of the area, sampling and analysis of
                         surface water, ground water, soil, and
                         sediments. The sampling and analysis, including
                         risk assessment, are based on domestic technical
                         guidelines for environmental monitoring,
                         environmental investigation and risk assessment
                         of contaminated sites. These technical
                         guidelines were recently prepared and are
                         generally consistent with international good
                         practices.

                         Alternative analysis. The project EA will
                         include a section addressing alternative analysis.
                         The alternative analysis will focus on selection
                         of remediation interventions and technologies
                         based on comprehensive economic, technical,
                         environmental and social considerations.

                         Impact assessment and mitigation. It’s
                         anticipated that all physical activities, including
                         in-situ and ex-situ remediation, and associated
                         works, will be situated within the project area.
                         Though the physical activities under the project
                         are mainly remediation activities, there are still
Public Disclosure Copy




                         potential negative impacts associated with these
                         activities. These activities include a spectrum of
                         interventions ranging from low-disturbing
                         actions to substantial works based on
                         contamination levels and risks and future land
                         use requirements. Impacts associated with in-
                         situ remediation and ex-situ remediation that
                         needs transport, treatment and disposal will be
                         fully assessed and mitigation measure provided
                         in the EA. Off-site impacts, if any, such as
                         transportation of polluted materials to disposal
                         and treatment sites, the impacts of disposal sites
                         located outside the study area will be included
                         in the EA. The EA will also address social
                         impacts other than OP4.12 impacts and gender
                         issues. Key findings and measures of the project
                         Social Assessment will be summarized and
                         integrated into the EA.
                         For environmental impacts associated with
                         household and enterprise relocation, the EIA
                         will look into look into local policies for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         relocation of enterprises and households, and
                         relocation practices that have occurred recently
                         originating from the project area

                         Cumulative impacts. By design, upon
                         completion of the project the project area should
                         be safe for redevelopment. However, there will
                         be still a long road ahead to realize full
                         redevelopment because significant investments
                         on infrastructure development after the land
                         remediation will be needed, and changes to
                         existing big industries will be uncertain in the
                         foreseeable near future. Since Zhuzhou City has
                         developed a new urban planning plan for the
                         Qingshuitang Core Area, the EA will include an
                         analysis based on the urban planning and
                         screening of cumulative impacts issues. The
                         project will include a technical assistance
                         component to further assess the cumulative
                         impacts during project implementation, based
                         on the screening made at preparation stage. The
                         screening and ToR for the Cumulative Impact
                         Assessment follow well known international
                         practice. Recommendations for adjustment of
                         these plans will be based on the expected results
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of the clean-up operations and residual impacts
                         after the implementation of the project.

                         Environmental management plan. A standalone
                         EMP will need to be prepared. The EMP will
                         include institutional arrangement, specific site
                         remediation plans, monitoring plans, site
                         maintenance requirements (i.e. mitigation
                         measures during operation), capacity building,
                         public engagement, and EMP implementation
                         budget. In particular, an existing quarry is
                         proposed as a disposal site. This site will require
                         a detailed environmental management plan. All
                         disposal and treatment sites will require detailed
                         EMPs and consultation programs in surrounding
                         communities.

                         Public consultation and information disclosure.
                         At least two rounds of information disclosure
                                                                 and public consultation will need to be carried
                                                                 out during EA preparation; one at TOR stage
                                                                 and the other at draft EA stage. Each round will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 be carried out through questionnaire survey,
                                                                 interviews, and group meetings. The
                                                                 consultation will include areas and communities
                                                                 near the project site.Public opinions will need to
                                                                 be incorporated into project design and EA
                                                                 properly. Draft EA will be disclosed locally
                                                                 when prepared.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   The project area is industrialized, largely
                                                                 polluted, and does not include any critical
                                                                 natural habitats. Through project intervention
                                                                 the project may contribute to rehabilitation of
                                                                 natural habitats such as several small rivers in
                                                                 the project area and are beneficial to Xiang
                                                                 River. therefore by definition of OP4.04 the
                                                                 policy is triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project will not involve any forests.

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not result in use or procurement
                                                                 of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Initial screening of PCRs suggested there were
                         BP 4.11                                 no cultural relics existing in the project area.
                                                                 Further screening will be carried out during
                                                                 project preparation and determine whether this
                                                                 policy should be triggered. EA will include a
                                                                 summary of PCR survey and chance-find
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 procedures.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    The mission conducted ethnic minority
                                                                 screening, including desk review and directly
                                                                 consulted with Minority Bureau of Zhuzhou
                                                                 Shifeng District. The project area is a peri-urban
                                                                 area, where besides urban citizens there are five
                                                                 villages, which are Han Nationality villages.

                                                                 The screening concluded that no ethnic village
                                                                 present in the project or collectively attached to
                                                                 the project areas, and so IP Policy is not
                                                                 triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The project component two will probably entail
                         4.12                                    relocation of households and enterprises; and
                                                                 the component one will link to enterprise
                                                                 closure or cleanup of closed enterprise plots,
                                                                 which needs due diligence review issues on
                                                                 resettlement or worker settlement issues. So the
                                                                                                                                 OP 4.12 is triggered and a resettlement plan
                                                                                                                                 (RP) for resettlement impacts from some
                                                                                                                                 activities clearly defined prior to the appraisal
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 and a resettlement policy framework (RPF) for
                                                                                                                                 other resettlement impacts will be prepared.

                                                                                                                                 On worker settlement related to enterprise
                                                                                                                                 closed and to be closed, a worker settlement
                                                                                                                                 plan will be prepared.

                                                                                                                                 Given the social impact is mainly related to the
                                                                                                                                 land use, relocation of households and
                                                                                                                                 enterprises, so the social assessment could be
                                                                                                                                 conducted together with the resettlement
                                                                                                                                 planning process and as part of the RP/RPF. The
                                                                                                                                 SA should also cover non-social safeguard
                                                                                                                                 issues, such as Gender and others.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project doesn’t involve any dams.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project is located in hinterland and doesn’t
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            involve any international waters.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is doesn’t involve any disputed
                                 7.60                                                                                            areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 16-Feb-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Preparation environmental assessment, social assessment and resettlement plans started in March
                                      2014 and will be completed by February 2015.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Frank Van Woerden

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Josefo Tuyor (RSA)                                                                                                   Date: 17-Nov-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Christophe Crepin (PMGR)                                                                                             Date: 18-Nov-2014
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
