                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6805
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Sep-2013, 26-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Samoa                             Project ID:    P126596
                            Project Name:      Enhancing the Climate Resilience of Coastal Resources and Communities
                                               (P126596)
                            Task Team          Samuel G. Wedderburn
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       30-Sep-2013                          Estimated   17-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASNS                                 Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:         14.60                 Total Bank Financing:   0.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   0.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                              14.60
                              Total                                                                                     14.60
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to support coastal communities to become more resilient to
                           climate variability and change.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project project will develop and implement immediate and urgent activities to: (a)

                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         assist the population of Samoa in adapting to climate variability and climate change; (b) protect
                         people’s lives and livelihoods, coastal and inland infrastructure, and the environment; and (c)
                         increase awareness of climate change impacts and adaptation activities in communities, civil society
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and local government. The project will promote a broad “ecosystem based approach? that recognizes
                         the importance of functioning ecosystems to enhance communities’ resilience to climate-related
                         impacts, and manages risks through green or nature-based approaches and interventions that can be
                         combined with hard infrastructure where necessary. The project will be concerned with all natural
                         hazards rather than just coastal-associated hazards, and look to assess vulnerabilities and solutions on
                         a ridge-to-reef basis, recognizing the fundamental link between processes occurring in different parts
                         of the catchment.

                         Component 1: Implementation of Priority Adaptation Measures to Manage Climate and Disaster-
                         related Threats

                         This component will strengthen the adaptive capacity of communities, and increase the resilience of
                         coastlines and near shore areas as well as coral reefs (including their productivity) to the risks posed
                         by climate variability and change. It will support the implementation of priority community
                         adaptation measures derived from revised Coastal Infrastructure Management (CIM) Plans and other
                         community planning frameworks. The project will implement a ridge-to reef-approach that involves
                         managing climate and disaster risks from the coastal zone to upper water catchment areas. The
                         component will include the following sub-components:

                         a)        Sub-component 1: Participatory Prioritization of Disaster Risks and Adaptation Options (US
                         $0.6m). This sub-component will support communities in the 16 targeted districts in upgrading CIM
                         Plans through a participatory process that will also include integration with other management plans
                         such as Disaster Risk Management, Sustainable Development, and Watershed Management.
                         Adaptation options will be prioritized, and sub-projects aimed at strengthening resilience will be
                         prepared. Experienced NGOs, together with technical specialists from line agencies, will provide
                         facilitation and undertake vulnerability and adaptation (V&A) assessments utilizing the most up-to-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         date data available in helping communities to accurately identify climate risks and appropriate
                         responses.

                         b)      Sub-component 2: Sub-grants for implementing priority climate resilience measures (US
                         $9.6m). This sub-component will provide financing for the priority sub-projects described in sub-
                         component 1. Small grants of up to WST$50,000 (US$22,720)would be provided directly to
                         community groups for village-level projects through the existing Civil Society Support Program in
                         accordance with the provisions of a Community Engagement Plan (described under Component 2.1),
                         which would include community procurement procedures. Larger grants (WST$50,000 < WST
                         $500,000 per activity) or (US$22,720 < US$222,720) will be provided through line agencies for
                         larger and more complex projects that would cover several villages.


                         Component 2: Strengthened Climate Information Services

                         This Component will strengthen the provision of climate information. It will include activities to
                         increase public awareness of climate change issues and to improve the availability and use of data for
                         risk analysis, hazard mapping and knowledge sharing. The component will include the following
                         sub-components:



                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         a)       Sub-component 1: CSO training, national and local-level education and awareness-raising on
                         climate resilience (US$0.3m). The capacity of CSOs would be strengthened through a series of
                         trainings provided by line ministry specialists to enable them to deliver a range of climate change-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         related services to community-level applicants. MNRE and stakeholder line ministries would work
                         with the Civil Society Support Program (CSSP) and interested CSOs to develop a Community
                         Engagement Plan (CEP) that the CSOs would then use to assist communities in designing, applying
                         for funding, and implementing simple community-based adaptation activities. The sub-component
                         will also support the development of a comprehensive and targeted Communications Strategy to raise
                         awareness of climate resilience at the national and level levels, including among school children and
                         women’s groups, who have higher levels of vulnerability to climate change and disasters.

                         Sub-component 2: Strengthened data platforms (US$.1.2m). This sub-component will support the
                         provision of data (bathymetric, topographic, ecological) for spatial hazard mapping, through
                         financing of a comprehensive LiDAR (light detection and ranging) system throughout the country.



                         Component 3: Institutional strengthening for climate and disaster resilience, project coordination and
                         monitoring

                         This component will finance project management and technical support activities under components
                         1 and 2. More significantly, it will provide the Institutional Framework for a programmatic approach
                         to climate and disaster resilience, facilitating the more effective use of funds from different sources,
                         including the PPCR, the Adaptation Fund, and the LDCF. The Institutional Framework will be
                         integrated with existing government structures and procedures, including the PPCR Steering
                         Committee, which will provide overall policy guidance and supervision for the project.

                         To reduce the burden of implementing the growing number of climate and disaster resilience
                         projects, and meeting different donor requirements, a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         established within the MNRE-Planning and Urban Management Agency (PUMA). This unit will be
                         responsible for the day-to-day management of the project. It is envisioned that over time, the PCU
                         could be expanded to provide a common administration and operational platform through which all
                         funding and support for climate and disaster resilience could be efficiently managed.

                         The PPCR support for this project will provide for hiring of (a) a Project Manager, (b) a Financial
                         Management Specialist, (c) a Procurement Specialist, and (d) an M&E Specialist; together with (e) a
                         locally recruited Financial Management Officer, (f) M&E database specialist, and (g) Program
                         Assistant. The Government will provide counterpart staff for the Project Manager and Financial
                         Management Specialist. Additionally, the project will provide for some three person-years of short-
                         term technical assistance (Coastal Engineer, Coastal Geo-morphologist, Ecosystems Specialist,
                         Climate Change Specialist, and GIS specialist) to undertake the revalidation of CIM Plans. The
                         project will also support more detailed technical review where necessary, especially for sub-projects
                         identified in the CIM Plans and implemented by the communities and CSOs through the CSSP.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in 16 districts which have already been selected , 12 on the island of
                         Upolu and 4 on the island of Savai'i. A map delineating the districts is included in the PAD.



                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Beverly Ann McLean (EASNS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Gerardo F. Parco (EASPS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes             The Project intends to finance a variety of types
                         BP 4.01                                         of small scale structures and ecologically based
                                                                         measures i.e. soft approaches such as
                                                                         reforestration and mangrove rehabilitation, which
                                                                         may, in some cases, have adverse environmental
                                                                         impacts. These impacts will be due to the
                                                                         construction of structures and also due to the
                                                                         location of the activities. Typical construction
                                                                         related impacts are temporary and can be
                                                                         mitigated through proper measures. Potential
                                                                         impacts on natural habitats on the other hand
                                                                         need to be adequately assessed and negative
                                                                         impacts of which are minimized to the extent
                                                                         possible.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes             The Project area encompasses a number of
                                                                         protected areas and key biodiversity areas, and
                                                                         may fund subprojects that may be located in, or
                                                                         adjacent to these and in such cases the potential to
                                                                         cause encroachment or to introduce access to
                                                                         natural habitats which did not previously exist is
                                                                         likely.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes             In the ridge to reef approach of the project,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         forested areas and mangrove areas are within the
                                                                         project’s scope. Potential impacts on forest will
                                                                         have to be assessed as part of the Environmental
                                                                         Assessment.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              There will be no use or increase in use of
                                                                         Pesticides in this project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             Samoa has a distinctive and long founded
                         BP 4.11                                         culture, featuring a communal way of life known
                                                                         as Fa’a Samoa. Distinctive music, dress, faith,
                                                                         family structures and cuisine have evolved. To
                                                                         mitigate against the potential for adverse impacts
                                                                         on cultural property, the checklist will help
                                                                         ensure that Cultural property resources are
                                                                         identified during subproject planning, and
                                                                         appropriate measures are taken to amid damaging
                                                                         them. There is a possibility that items of
                                                                         archealogical significance such as graves, pigeon
                                                                         mounds (tie seu lupe) could be revealed, and
                                                                         artefacts such as adzes, potsherds and stone flakes


                                                                 Page 4 of 9
                                                                                unearthed. Procedures for such chance finds will
                                                                                be incorporated into civil works Contracts and
                                                                                into agreements with CSOs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      Yes                Triggered as per policy. Social Assessment
                                                                                reports ethnic and cultural homogeneity and
                                                                                protection of the ‘people of Samoa’ under the
                                                                                Constitution and law. Project design takes
                                                                                account of the need for consultation, protection of
                                                                                land-based livelihoods and benefit sharing.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes                Both larger and village scale subprojects will be
                            4.12                                                developed with participation and broad support of
                                                                                affected communities. Most land impacts are
                                                                                therefore expected to occur on public or
                                                                                voluntarily donated land. A Resettlement Policy
                                                                                Framework complements provisions under
                                                                                Samoan law to guide resettlement planning in the
                                                                                event of involuntary impacts, should compulsory
                                                                                land acquisition for a public purpose be
                                                                                unavoidable, or restrictions be necessary for
                                                                                rehabilitation/ establishment of natural habitats or
                                                                                protected areas.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No                 Not applicable

                            Projects on International        No                   Not applicable
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   Not applicable
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is not expected to have adverse negative impact on environment and people given the
                              scale of investments. It does have some temporary impacts related to community-led civil works
                              activities, but these impacts are deemed manageable and short term. The project will also finance
                              ecologically based measures such as reforestation and mangrove rehabilitation, which on the
                              overall will have positive impacts but in in some cases may also have environmental and social
                              impacts. Again, given the nature of the activities, impacts are deemed short term and manageable.

                             Social impacts include use of public land or easements, or land selected and donated voluntarily
                             by beneficiary communities as part of the usual community contribution in CSSP projects.
                             Similarly, village subprojects will not proceed without community consent, and as is the current
                             practice.

                             Indigenous Polynesians comprise 93 percent of Samoa’s population and will be the overwhelming
                             majority-beneficiaries of the project. Provisos to ensure that land-based livelihoods are protected


                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                           and benefits are equitably shared are central to this project, and have been incorporated into the
                           project design and ESMF.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                           The project is expected long term to have benefits for the entire population, but in particular for
                           those in vulnerable areas and whose livelihoods depend on natural resources. The benefits will be
                           not only physical, but also psychological in alleviating the mental stress associated with the
                           anticipation of natural calamities. Women, who predominate in the village domestic work force,
                           will have an opportunity to become a strong focal point in planning village resilience. The project
                           will assist economic security both directly in protecting productive systems but also indirectly in
                           diminishing disruption and insecurity in the important tourism industry. A potential future long
                           term impact is the continued use of resources from forests and natural habitats. If this use of
                           resources is not sustainable, degradation of these resources is possible.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Lessons in particular from the Samoa Infrastructure Asset Management and the Adaptation Fund
                           projects have been inculcated. The restructured project has widened its frame of reference from a
                           Coastal Infrastructure Management to a ridge to reef focus and Community Implementation
                           Management approach to resilience. This more holistic frame invites consideration of alternatives
                           to hard infrastructure options, such as resilient agriculture or agro-forestry and emphasis on
                           improved management of water and other natural resources.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Recipient has over a decade of experience of managing infrastructure initiatives with the Bank
                           through the Samoa Infrastructure Asset Management projects. MNRE and key government
                           stakeholder Ministry of Women, Community and Social Development have considerable
                           experience of partnership with Civil Society Support Program and the Samoa Umbrella NGO
Public Disclosure Copy




                           organization in managing community-led resilience projects under the Pilot Program for Climate
                           Resilience and the UNDP-supported Adaptation Fund. Government partners are committed
                           through training and development of awareness raising materials and technical support ‘tools’ in
                           the Community Engagement Plan to strengthen CSOs to assist community organizations to apply
                           for subproject funding, and to manage assets after implementation. The quality of CSO training
                           and delivery will be important to successful delivery of project investments. An Environmental
                           and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been developed by the GoS and is designed to
                           identify potential negative impacts, and direct project stakeholders, CSOs and communities, to
                           practical ways of avoiding or mitigating them. A negative list of activities has also been
                           incorporated in the ESMF to directly avoid activities whose environmental and social risks are not
                           acceptable. The recipient has also prepared a Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework
                           (LARF) as part of the ESMF which would guide subproject proponents on land acquisition and
                           resettlement issues in case they would arise during implementation.

                           In line with OP 4.10, since the beneficiaries are overwhelmingly Indigenous Peoples (IP), a
                           separate IP Plan or Framework is not required, instead the elements of an IPP are integrated into
                           the project design.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           At grass-roots level, key stakeholders are the residents of vulnerable villages that will receive


                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                           assistance under the project. First points of contact with external agencies are the Pulenu’u
                           (Mayor) and the Women’s Representatives in each village, together with Matai and other
                           traditional family and extended family leaders. Trained CSOs will be the main conduit for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           communication between grass-roots stakeholders, Government line agencies and CSSP, which
                           will fund community level projects, supervised by a Board comprising MNRE, MWCSD and
                           SUNGO representatives. Government stakeholders meet in a Steering Committee of the relevant
                           line agencies, with facilitation through a Ministry of Finance chaired Unit that coordinates the
                           various climate change initiatives in the country. Implementation of larger investment projects will
                           be undertaken by the concerned stakeholder agency – Environment, Transport, Agriculture,
                           Fisheries, Women and Community, Health etc, as appropriate. A Program Coordinating Unit
                           within MNRE will oversee the awareness raising campaign and exchange of information amongst
                           the stakeholders at each level.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         16-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      24-Sep-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Samoa                                                               24-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         28-Aug-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      24-Sep-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Samoa                                                               24-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         25-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      25-Sep-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Samoa                                                               25-Sep-2013
                           Comments: In line with OP 4.10 in cases where the beneficiaries comprise solely or
                                         overwhelimingly Indigenous Peoples (IP) and a separate IP Plan or Framework is not
                                         required, instead as required by the Policy, the Task Team has prepared and
                                         disclosed a brief summary outlining how the project complies with the IP Policy.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level


                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies




                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Samuel G. Wedderburn
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Michel Kerf (SM)                            Date: 26-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
