                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC6892

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Lao People's Democratic                         P125082
                                                                            Project ID:
                                               Republic
                            Project Name:      LA - FCPF Readiness Grant (P125082)
                            Task Team      Robert Ragland Davis
                            Leader:
                            Estimated
                            Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASTS

                            Sector(s):        Forestry (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          3.60                Total Bank Financing:         0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    0.00
                              Carbon Fund                                                                 0.00
                              Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                    3.60
                              Total                                                                       3.60
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           1.    The Project Development Objective is to contribute to Lao PDR’s efforts to design and
                           implement a sound national REDD+ strategy.

                           2.     Achieving this objective will enable Lao PDR to participate in and benefit from the emerging
                           performance-based payment system from REDD+ within the context of the UN Framework
                         Convention on Climate Change. The activities aim to put into place socially and environmentally
                         sound policies and programs to reduce deforestation and forest degradation, an internationally
                         recognized reference emission level, generate forest carbon emission scenarios, and technically
Public Disclosure Copy




                         robust systems of forest monitoring and emissions reporting. The program will also focus on non-
                         carbon outcomes vital to achieving REDD+ objectives which will include enabling forest policy and
                         regulations, increasing the participation of local communities in forest management, building
                         institutional capacity in the forestry sector, improved information and data management and related
                         activities which will contribute to the overall development of forests and well-being of communities
                         in Lao PDR and contribute to the national goals of poverty reduction, economic development and
                         environmental sustainability.

                         3.       To achieve the PDO the grant will support: a) operational costs and capacity build for the
                         REDD+ Office at the Department of Forestry (DoF, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry) and the
                         REDD+ Division within the Department of Forest Resources Management (DFRM, Ministry of
                         Natural Resources and Environment), b) developing a National REDD+ Strategy, c) developing
                         REDD implementation approaches and benefit sharing mechanisms in coordination with other
                         Development Partners, d) implementation of safeguards through preparation of a Strategic
                         Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) and an Environmental and Social Management
                         Framework (ESMF) for REDD in Lao PDR, and e) development of Reference Emission Levels and
                         design of a system for monitoring, reporting and verification. The FCPF grant will finance some
                         initial work on most major areas of REDD+ capacity building as defined in the Lao PDR R-PP.

                         4.      As mentioned above the grant will fund only a portion of the activities identified in the R-PP,
                         which will accelerate Lao PDR efforts to achieve REDD+ Readiness. Nevertheless, the country may
                         not reach full readiness until after the grant closes. Based on the activities outlined in the R-PP, it is
                         expected that Lao PDR would be able to participate in REDD+ carbon transactions, potentially
                         including under the FCPF Carbon Fund, which would purchase emissions reductions from FCPF
                         countries. Other options for selling emissions reductions may exist in the future, but depend on the
                         development of the global carbon market for forest carbon credits.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5.      Additional funding in the forestry sector will be through the Forest Investment Program
                         (FIP) program and the International Development Association (IDA) which will jointly support the
                         expansion of Participatory Sustainable Forest Management (PSFM) in Lao PDR under the Scaling-
                         up Participatory Sustainable Forest Management project (P130222).

                         6.      Key results, as follows:

                         a)      Strengthened technical and institutional capacities for effective management, implementation
                         and coordination of REDD+ Programs, projects and policies
                         b)      Strategies to address drivers of deforestation and degradation
                         c)      REDD+ institutional framework designed and validated nationally, including an
                         Environmental and Social Management Framework
                         d)      Social inclusion mechanisms in REDD+ at the national, provincial, district and community
                         levels
                         e)      Regional collaboration mechanism for REDD+ implementation and avoidance of emissions
                         displacement
                         f)      National reference scenario for emissions from deforestation and forest degradation
                         prepared, taking into account t he relationship between national accounting and sub-national
                         implementation of activities; a national carbon registry developed and operational.
                         C. Project Description
                         7.      FCPF Readiness grant funds will be used to support the following REDD+ Tasks and
                         Activities:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Task 1: Readiness Process Management and Stakeholder Consultation

                         8.       Establish National and Provincial REDD+ offices. The REDD+ readiness process in Lao
                         PDR recognizes the importance of the need to establish effective offices and efficient communication
                         and operations. The REDD+ offices will play a crucial role to ensure early start up to activities
                         within its remit, to facilitate other departments and ministries, to establish constructive contacts and
                         support community institutions, ethnic group organizations and broader civil society groups.

                         9.      This task will aim to establish operational REDD+ offices at the national level and in
                         selected provinces, and establish protocols for coordination between these offices. A key role of
                         these institutional mechanisms will be to initiate the process of organizing forums and consultations
                         to address the policy and regulatory framework for REDD+. Several diagnostic studies will be
                         commissioned to inform these policy level discussions.

                         10.     Assess and Align REDD+ with National Policy Framework. The successful introduction and
                         mainstreaming of REDD+ obligations in Lao PDR will have significant bearing on the existing
                         national policy and regulatory framework especially in relation to its approach in the NESDP. Key
                         drivers of the Lao PDR economy remain utilization of natural resources as a tool to address national
                         poverty. It is important that the REDD+ preparatory process is used as a mechanism to assess trade-
                         offs and seek a balance between national economic goals, environmental sustainability, and REDD+
                         opportunities and commitments.

                         11.      The activities in this task will involve the high-level inter-ministerial forum under the NEC
                         that will use its office to create consensus on alignment of the national policy framework with REDD
Public Disclosure Copy




                         +. An important outcome is an approach paper that will be used for discussions and as a tool to
                         address emerging issues of policy significance. Given the importance of safeguarding vulnerable
                         communities and women a series of studies will be undertaken to assess disaggregated impact of
                         REDD+ activities. Early action on this recommendation will enable the calibration of choice of
                         programs and activities in both carbon and non-carbon domains for the wellbeing of vulnerable
                         communities and women in Lao PDR.

                         12.      Stakeholder Consultations. The grant will support an inclusive consultative process leading
                         to the development and implementation of a stakeholder participation and consultation plan that
                         provides opportunities for all stakeholders to participate and voice their concerns. The GoL has
                         internalized this important aspect of REDD+ preparation and has agreed to a continuous process of
                         stakeholder consultation and engagement.

                         13.     A Stakeholder Participation Working Group will be established under the NEC that will have
                         oversight on the process of seeking and eliciting the participation of all stakeholders. The first step of
                         this Working Group will be to agree on fundamental principles of identifying stakeholders and a
                         process appropriate to each stakeholder. Following this a Stakeholder Participation and Consultation
                         Plan (SPCP) will be evolved and validated. In addition, through a process of research, study, and
                         discussion, appropriate mechanisms for conflict resolution and grievance redress will be established.
                         Task 2: REDD+ Strategy Development

                         14.      Develop and Finalize REDD+ Strategy. REDD+ strategy development will continue
Public Disclosure Copy




                         alongside the readiness process of establishing institutional arrangements, policy analysis, and
                         stakeholder consultations. The inter-ministerial forum at the NEC will begin to examine the context
                         of the national policy framework with REDD+ requirements. The REDD+ strategy will turn its focus
                         to the forestry sector and communities most-dependent on forest resources.

                         14.      The evolution of the REDD+ strategy is embedded in continued stakeholder consultations
                         with the agenda will remain focused on forestry sector strategy. The existing forestry strategy 2020
                         of Lao PDR will be reviewed, as will be related policy documents that guide the governance and
                         operation of the sector. While the GoL has acceded and ratified diverse forest and environmental
                         international obligations which include the Convention on Biological Diversity, Climate Change,
                         Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, and Endangered Species, the Readiness process is an opportune
                         moment to revisit and incorporate principles of sustainable forest management in Lao PDR. The
                         project will assist GOL in their ongoing efforts to sustainably manage natural resources and utilize
                         these resources to contribute to economic growth and poverty reduction. Livelihoods of forest-
                         dependent people will be supported through a review of policy and regulatory frameworks taking
                         into account current pattern of resource use and existing cultural practices.

                         15.      Participatory Land Use Planning and REDD+ Strategy Tenure, rights, access and land use
                         have emerged as important issues in REDD+ discussions and implementation globally. Land and
                         natural resources in Lao PDR are under pressure from agriculture concessions, exploration licenses
                         for mining, infrastructure, and hydropower. Concessions for these development activities are
                         increasingly having an impact on land allocation and land use at the local level. REDD+ provides an
                         ideal forum to address issues of land allocation, both at the policy level and, locally as practice and
                         attempt to secure gains in non-carbon domains. Security of tenure to land and resources, predictable
                         and continued access to forest resources, and rights are important drivers of sustaining livelihoods
                         and sustainable natural resource management especially for communities practicing shifting
Public Disclosure Copy




                         cultivation and upland agriculture. The process of consultation and discussion on a new land policy is
                         well advanced in Lao under the oversight of the National Assembly.

                         16.      The landscape of empirical evidence on land tenure and shifting cultivation lacks high
                         quality information that can contribute to constructive policy debate. The grant will support the
                         review of existing studies and preparation of complementary new studies. Participatory land use
                         methods and tools will be developed to create practical and alternative models that are feasible and
                         realistic.

                         17.     Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment. A preliminary assessment indicated that a
                         number of World Bank safeguards policies are likely to be triggered by REDD+ related activities in
                         Lao PDR. A SESA will be conducted as part of the Readiness process to assess the potential impacts
                         from future national REDD+ programs and policies, formulate alternatives and mitigation strategies
                         and enhance the decision-making process around the design of the national REDD+ framework.

                         18.     SESA aims to refine the REDD+ strategy by assessing options for addressing environmental
                         and social issues associated with REDD+ activities. The assessment would also identify gaps in the
                         REDD+ strategy options and propose mitigation or remedial actions. Potentials to equitably share
                         REDD+ benefits with broad segments of the society, including importantly Ethnic groups, would be
                         assessed and appropriate mechanisms to deliver such benefits would be identified, which would be
                         reflected in the REDD+ strategy options.

                         19.      Lao is an ethnically diverse country where 45 percent of the population belong to Ethnic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Groups (non-Lao-Thai linguistic groups), who are highly dependent on forest resources as they rely
                         on rotational rice cultivation, non-timber forest products (NTFPs), fuel, medicines, food, construction
                         materials and other forest resources for income and livelihood. A significant number of people who
                         belong to Lao-Thai linguistic groups are also dependent on forest resources for food security, forest
                         products and livelihoods. The constitution provides equal rights to all ethnic groups and protects
                         their right to preserve their own traditions and culture, and national laws safeguard the basic rights of
                         forest dependent and ethnic groups including communal rights to land that may be shared by
                         members of the community.

                         20.       SESA also aims to develop an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                         that will outline the procedures to be followed for managing potential environmental and social
                         impacts of specific policies, actions and projects during the implementation of the REDD+ strategy
                         that is finally selected.

                         Task 3: Implementation Arrangements

                         21.      Establish Institutional and Financial Arrangements. This task and activities will aim to
                         establish appropriate institutional and financial arrangements for supporting the REDD+ preparatory
                         process. Financial arrangements, staff and equipment will be put into place to support the REDD+
                         Task Force and Office in the Ministries of Agriculture and Forestry, and Natural Resources and
                         Environment. Necessary decrees will be issued and regulations put into place. Once these systems
                         are fully operational a governance framework and guidelines for a future REDD+ fund will be
                         developed.

                         22.      Develop Benefit Sharing Arrangements. To ensure fair and equitable sharing of incentives
                         due importance to the core issue of benefit sharing has been given by situating it as a specific task
Public Disclosure Copy




                         with a set of activities. A number of important studies including a review of revenue management
                         and benefit sharing mechanisms being implemented in the country and a study of the proposed
                         system of REDD+ incentives will be undertaken. This will enable convergence with discussions on
                         benefit sharing for carbon revenue generated from REDD+ activities which will take place in other
                         consultations on related issues of forest resources use rights, tenure and land, and exclusion from
                         potential REDD+ areas.

                         23.        A Benefit Sharing Working Group comprising of all relevant stakeholders will be established
                         and facilitated by the National REDD+ Office to carry out these studies and make technical
                         recommendations to the National REDD+ Task Force for discussions and submit to the Ministers of
                         relevant ministries/Prime Minister for approval. As required sub-groups will be created to ensure
                         concerns of vulnerable communities, ethnic groups and women are captured and find appropriate
                         expression in the discussions and outcomes of the Working Group. The remit of this Working Group
                         will also be to study and establish appropriate conflict resolution mechanisms that are close to the
                         origin of conflicts, are accessible, and have the requisite mandate to deliver fair and rapid decisions.
                         It is critical to recognize the diversity of Lao PDR and to ensure that conflict resolution mechanisms
                         take into consideration existing customary and traditional mechanisms, and build on these with
                         culturally appropriate methods and tools.

                         24.     Knowledge Management and Capacity Building. Early in the start up phase an assessment of
                         knowledge management and capacity building needs will be undertaken. The purpose of this
                         assessment will be to address issues of capacity within the institutions of the GoL to deal with the
                         diversity of needs in the REDD+ preparation processes. Information and knowledge management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         forms a crucial component to successful and broad based REDD+ preparation and due attention will
                         be given to this aspect. Adequate funds have been provided for strengthening capacity through a
                         diversity of options. In addition culturally appropriate media will be produced to meet all the needs
                         of different stakeholders and ensure an inclusive REDD+ preparatory process and outcome.

                         Task 4: Reference Emission Level and Monitoring Systems

                         25.      Develop Reference Emission Levels. Once the broad canvas of the REDD+ strategy is
                         evident analytical work will begin on developing and finalizing a REL aligned to the strategy. Case
                         studies and research will be undertaken in selected areas to establish sub-national and national
                         emission levels. Appropriate coordination mechanisms will be created with relevant institutions and
                         ongoing projects supported by multilateral and bilateral agencies including FIP/IDA financed
                         production forests.

                         26.      Develop Monitoring, Reporting and Verification System. While the first year will see some
                         preliminary work on developing a monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) system it will be in
                         the second year that focused activities will be started. The objective will be to establish a MRV
                         system that incorporates nesting, and links several tiers at the national, sub national and project level.
                         Technical requirements to design and set up a national system will be assessed. In addition
                         collaboration with regional mechanisms in the Mekong river basin and/or Southeast Asia will be
                         established.

                         27.     Establish Carbon Registry. With initial activities in the first year the second year will see
                         enhanced action on processes to establish a carbon registry in Lao PDR. Institutional mechanisms
                         and protocols will be finalized and community carbon monitoring mechanisms will be established to
                         address equity issues. The registry will also ensure that it has the methods and the ability to handle
Public Disclosure Copy




                         both carbon and non-carbon requirements of REDD+.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         28.     The project does not entail physical impacts nor activities on the ground.

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         29.      The Department of Forestry under MAF was an implementing agency for the FCPF
                         Readiness Fund. Prior to June 2011 DoF was responsible for overall management of the nation’s
                         forests including the state managed forest categories of conservation, protection and production
                         forests, and forest areas outside state management such as plantation and village use forests. GoL
                         had also delegated authority to DoF to be a focal point of the REDD+ agenda in Lao PDR, which
                         included coordination and implementation of several REDD+ initiatives, financed by FCPF, JICA,
                         GIZ, KfW, United States Agency for International Development (USAID) etc since 2007. The FCPF
                         program will be coordinated and managed by the Planning Division within the DoF, with support
                         from the Forest Inventory and Planning Division.

                         30.     In June 2011 through a Prime Minister decree the responsibility of the national REDD+
                         agenda was transferred from MAF (DoF) to MoNRE. Whilst the new ministry is still in the process
                         of developing capacity to act as the focal point for coordination of national REDD+ activities, DoF
                           will continue as implementing agency for this FCPF Readiness Preparation Grant and engage the
                           relevant departments of MoNRE in planning and implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           31.     DoF’s mandate is thus to support production forest management and policies, by
                           implementing existing regulations and laws, and expanding participatory sustainable forest
                           management practices, as well as managing forest concessions and new forest plantations. DoF is
                           staffed with an adequate number of trained professionals, but relative to the vast areas of land they
                           oversee, their numbers are limited and they face transportation and access challenges, limited control
                           in many regions of the country, and limited budgets. DoF has a good track record of working with
                           the Bank in implementation of the SUFORD project over the past nine years. This experience has
                           provided a sound basis for gradually expanding participatory approaches to sustainable forest
                           management geographically in the context of REDD+ with both FPCF and FIP funding.

                           32.      The choice of the Department of Forestry as FCPF implementing agency is realistic and
                           practical. The DoF retains substantial responsibility and authority for implementation of production
                           related forest-sector policies and programs. DOF has served as the designated focal agency for
                           REDD+ implementation since 2007 and is in a position to support the orderly transfer of
                           responsibility for management of REDD+ related activities to MoNRE as capacity develops within
                           the REDD+ Division of DFRM. Overall responsibility for coordinating the implementation and
                           monitoring of the national REDD+ program, including the establishment of a carbon registry, and for
                           coordination among agencies will eventually reside with the REDD+ Division of DFRM. Both DoF
                           and DFRM will continue to have responsibility for REDD+ activities in their respective forest areas.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)
                           Viengkeo Phetnavongxay (EASTS)
                           Sybounheung Phandanouvong (EASTS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              An environmental assessment (EA) is required
                           BP 4.01                                              for the operation as the REDD+ strategy will
                                                                                identify measures and propose activities to be
                                                                                implemented downstream in possible
                                                                                subsequent operations in the terrestrial
                                                                                landscape, largely in forest areas. Therefore
                                                                                thepolicy is triggered both for REDD+ strategy
                                                                                and proposed policy reforms developed during
                                                                                the readiness phase (the Grant) and for possible
                                                                                future REDD+ investments. The EA will help to
                                                                                ensure the REDD+ activities are
                                                                                environmentally sound and sustainable, and thus
                                                                                to improve decision making. The Environmental
                                                                                Assessment is used to identify, avoid, and
                                                                                mitigate the potential negative environmental
                                                                                impacts associated with activities implemented
                                                                                on the ground. In addition to a SESA, MAF
                                                             will prepare an Environmental and Social
                                                             Management Framework to establish the
                                                             modalities and procedures to address potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             negative environmental and social impacts from
                                                             the implementation of a national REDD+
                                                             framework as well as associated mitigation
                                                             measures.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The operation will assist in the development of
                                                             REDD+ strategies and approaches to promote
                                                             conservation and the sustainable use of natural
                                                             habitats, especially forests. The SESA will
                                                             evaluate the possible risks associated with the
                                                             strategic options and their potential impact on
                                                             natural habitats, in both production and
                                                             protection forests. Other proposed REDD+
                                                             activities such as new plantations would also be
                                                             assessed in respect to possible impacts on non-
                                                             forest habitats and ecosystems. The ESMF
                                                             would include provisions to assess, avoid or
                                                             mitigate potential impacts on natural habitats
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   REDD+ activities in forest lands aim to reduce
                                                             deforestation, enhance the environmental
                                                             services contribution of forested areas, promote
                                                             reforestation, reduce poverty, and encourage
                                                             economic development. Overall, the REDD+
                                                             activities are expected to have significant
                                                             positive impacts on forest, in that the main goal
                                                             of the program is to reduce deforestation, while
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             contributing to the well-being of forest-
                                                             dependent communities who will be consulted
                                                             during the course of the project. Critical issues
                                                             related to forest governance and resources and
                                                             potential impacts from the national REDD+
                                                             framework will be assessed through SESA and
                                                             potential negative impact addressed in the
                                                             ESMF.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       TBD   This policy could be triggered depending on the
                                                             scope of REDD+ strategies, which might
                                                             include reforestation activities or the
                                                             intensification of agricultural activities on
                                                             degraded lands. SESA will assess the
                                                             application of this policy and appropriate
                                                             mitigation plans including plans for Integrated
                                                             Pest Management will be developed and
                                                             included in the ESMF if required.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Future REDD+ activities will not be known in
                         BP 4.11                                 detail while preparing the ESMF. However,
                                                                 since such activities will operate in forest areas
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 where local communities in Laos commonly
                                                                 assign particular cultural values to certain
                                                                 locations and habitats a Physical Cultural
                                                                 Resources Management Framework will be
                                                                 included in the ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   After the readiness phase and outside the
                                                                 present operation, many of the activities which
                                                                 will be proposed to be implemented as part of a
                                                                 national REDD+ program are likely to take
                                                                 place in areas inhabited by ethnic groups,
                                                                 therefore the OP is triggered for both the
                                                                 readiness and in possible subsequent phases.
                                                                 The Government (DoF) will consult with the
                                                                 ethnic groups identified by the ethnic screening
                                                                 to be present in or have collective attachment to
                                                                 project areas, ensure that they participate in, and
                                                                 benefit from REDD+ activities in a culturally
                                                                 appropriate way and that adverse impacts on
                                                                 them are avoided, or where not feasible,
                                                                 minimized or mitigated. As a key process to
                                                                 ensure this policy requirement, Free, Prior and
                                                                 Informed Consultation will be conducted with
                                                                 affected ethnic groups, and their broad
                                                                 community support to the project would be
                                                                 ascertained. Issues of ensuring that livelihoods
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 of ethnic groups and forest-dependent people
                                                                 are duly safeguarded through a review of
                                                                 existing policy and regulatory framework, by
                                                                 design of specific interventions in selected
                                                                 areas, and by recognition of both livelihoods
                                                                 and cultural practices, which will be integrated
                                                                 into the strategy. In addition, the SESA will
                                                                 identify ways to strengthen traditional /
                                                                 customary land tenure and secure access to
                                                                 natural resources by ethnic groups (indigenous
                                                                 people) and local communities. The Strategic
                                                                 Environmental and Social Assessment will
                                                                 assess potential impacts, both positive and
                                                                 negative, on ethnic groups. The Environmental
                                                                 and Social Management Framework to be
                                                                 developed based on the SESA will include an
                                                                 Ethnic Group Planning Framework (EGPF) that
                                                                 describes the processes and procedures to be
                                                                 followed to ensure Free, Prior and Informed
                                                                                                                                 Consultation by affected ethnic groups leading
                                                                                                                                 to their broad community support of REDD+
                                                                                                                                 activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           While no land acquisition will be carried out
                                 4.12                                                                                            under the operation nor is it expected as part of
                                                                                                                                 future REDD+ activities, it is conceivable that
                                                                                                                                 local population’s access to forests, forest
                                                                                                                                 products, forest reserves, forest management
                                                                                                                                 areas or protected areas could be restricted and,
                                                                                                                                 although unlikely, the possibility of land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition cannot be completely discounted at
                                                                                                                                 this time. Such impacts would be avoided to the
                                                                                                                                 extent feasible, or minimized and mitigated if
                                                                                                                                 they are unavoidable. The SESA would assess
                                                                                                                                 and identify all potential issues related to
                                                                                                                                 involuntary resettlement and access restriction,
                                                                                                                                 and the ESMF will include a Process
                                                                                                                                 Framework (PF) and a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                                 Framework (RPF).
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Public Disclosure Copy




                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         33.      The operation would help the Government of Lao PDR in developing its REDD+ Strategy
                         so that it is technically sound and environmentally and socially sustainable, as well as in
                         compliance with World Bank safeguards policies. Because the present operation is a planning,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analytical and capacity building exercise to support strategy development and no physical
                         investments for REDD+ are included in the design or financed by the grant, it is classified as
                         Category B. At the same time, the Safeguards Policies that may be triggered (or TBD) by future
                         possible REDD+ investments are shown as triggered in the table below for the present operation,
                         so as to provide the necessary background and guidance to the development of an ESMF.

                         34.     The FCPF Readiness Preparation grant will comply with World Bank safeguard policies
                         regarding the management of environmental and social impacts. This grant will, in part, support
                         the country’s activities to identify the potential risks associated with REDD+ and mitigation
                         options. In order to do this, the FCPF will finance implementation of a Strategic Environmental
                         and Social Assessment (SESA) to integrate key environmental and social considerations into
                         REDD+ Readiness by combining analytical and participatory approaches. In addition, through a
                         process of research, study, and discussion, appropriate mechanisms for conflict resolution and
                         grievance redress will be established during the grant’s tenure.

                         35.      The SESA allows: (i) social and environmental considerations to be integrated into the
                         REDD+ Readiness process, in particular the REDD+ strategy; (ii) stakeholder participation in
                         identifying and prioritizing key issues, assessment of policy, institutional and capacity gaps to
                         manage these priorities and recommendations, and disclosure of findings in the REDD Country’s
                         progress reports on Readiness preparation; and (iii) an Environmental and Social Management
                         Framework (ESMF) to be put in place to manage environmental and social risks and to mitigate
                         potential adverse impacts. The SESA guidelines have been integrated into the R-PP template.

                         36.      The safeguards policies noted in the REDD+ Readiness process are triggered since the
                         REDD+ strategy and possible policy reforms have implications for these safeguard policies, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         all the safeguard policies listed as triggered (or TBD) may apply to future REDD+ investments.
                         The SESA will assess impacts of both proposed policy reforms and strategy options as well as
                         impacts of future REDD+ investments, while the ESMF will include provisions and requirements
                         concerning all the safeguard policies triggered.

                         37.     The proposed timeline for SESA implementation is outlined in the SESA Terms of
                         Reference (Staff Assessment Note – Annex 5; Addendum 3). Final delivery of the SESA and
                         ESMF is expected by the end of the grant’s tenure. As noted above the main safeguard instrument
                         to be developed during grant implementation is the SESA. The SESA includes the preparation of
                         an ESMF. The ESMF may evolve and be updated over time when new REDD + strategy options
                         and projects or activities (including investments), or policies/regulations are identified during
                         implementation of REDD+. The SESA addresses the key environmental and social issues
                         associated with the analysis and preparation of REDD+ strategy options as well as REDD+
                         projects, activities (including investments), policies and regulations. In this manner SESA can
                         ensure compliance with World Bank’s environmental and social safeguards.

                         38.     The SESA process requires that the selection of REDD+ strategy options should take into
                         account the country’s institutional and capacity constraints for managing environmental and social
                         risks and the potential environmental and social impacts associated with these strategy options.
                         Any identified gaps to manage these risks and potential impacts in relation to relevant World
                             Bank’s safeguard policies should be identified along with the strategy options to feed into the
                             preparation of the ESMF. The ESMF should provide a framework to manage and mitigate the
                             potential environmental and social impacts related to specific projects and activities (including
Public Disclosure Copy




                             investments and carbon finance transactions), in the context of the future implementation of
                             REDD+.

                             39.      The ESMF will be structured to contain subject-specific frameworks addressing the
                             relevant requirements of the applicable environmental and social safeguard policies including, but
                             not necessarily limited to stand alone documentation including a Resettlement Policy Framework
                             (RPF); Process Framework (PF); and Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) known
                             locally as an Ethnic Group Planning Framework (EGPF).
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:       Name: Robert Ragland Davis

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (RSA)                        Date: 23-Dec-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Julia M. Fraser (SM)                                Date: 23-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
