                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC8370

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Mozambique                       Project ID:      P149377
                            Project Name:       Water Service & Institutional Support II (P149377)
                            Task Team           Luiz Claudio Martins Tava
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           15-Sep-2015                      Estimated        28-Jan-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTU1                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Water supply (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Urban services and housing for the poor (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       186.00                Total Bank Financing:           186.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   186.00
                              Total                                                                         186.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           (i)   Increase water service coverage in key cities; and

                           (ii) Strengthen institutional capacity and regulatory frameworks for water supply services in the
                           Regional water utilities in the North and Central Regions of Mozambique.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project will finance priority water supply investments in four major systems, serving 6
                         urban areas: (i) Pemba, (ii) Nacala, (iii) Beira and Dondo, and (iv) Tete and Moatize, and increase
                         the number of water supply connections in a fifth system covering 3 additional urban areas: (v)
                         Chimoio, (vi) Manica and (vii) Gondola. In addition, the project will support the creation of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Water Utilities in the North and Central parts of Mozambique, and enable engineering -
                         design and supervision, project management/auditing, and technical studies and institutional capacity
                         development, including specialized skills (e.g. safeguards and dam safety).

                         The project is expected to include five components, as follows:

                         Component 1: Rehabilitation and Expansion of Water Supply Production (US$84.3 million):
                         Investments will aim to increase the production capacity of four major water systems through
                         rehabilitation or replacement of civil, electrical and mechanical works. Key activities will include
                         expansion and refurbishment of well fields, refurbishment of intakes, expansion and refurbishment of
                         water treatment facilities (all of which currently exist). In addition, it will include the rehabilitation
                         and expansion of transmission infrastructure, including new pipelines along existing corridors, pump
                         stations and associated fittings.

                         Component 2: Expansion of Water Distribution (US$78.6 million): Investments under this
                         component will include the development of priority infrastructure to increase service coverage and
                         improve operational efficiency of the water distribution system. Investments will include
                         rehabilitation of existing and construction of new distribution centers, including increasing storage
                         with ground reservoirs and pressure through elevated water towers within the existing footprint,
                         water supply network expansion and rehabilitation, installation of district meters and pressure control
                         valves within existing pipelines, and approximately 105,000 new household meters and associated
                         materials for yard type connections. The component will also finance goods and equipment in the
                         target cities related to water supply and utility management (computers, monitoring systems, and
                         office equipment, generators, vehicles, miscellaneous water treatment equipment, etc.).

                         Component 3: Institutional Support (US$14.1 million): The project will also support project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         engineering, design and supervision, project management, project audits, and various technical
                         studies as needed, as well as assistance to FIPAG in the establishment of independent regional water
                         "companies" that would ultimately be responsible for water supply operations. Furthermore, this
                         component supports the implementation of Environment and Social safeguards and the safety of
                         Nacala dam.

                         Component 4: Output-Based Connections Subsidies for Low-Income Households (US$6 million):
                         The objective of the component is to increase access to piped-water for low-income households in
                         the project cities and the Maputo Region by providing an output-based subsidy to the utility operator
                         (s). The output-based subsidy would cover the labor cost of installing new connections normally paid
                         by new clients (currently Mtn 2,000 or US$67 equivalent per connection) and would be provided in
                         two phases: (i) after the installation of functioning new yard-connections to eligible households; and
                         (ii) after demonstrating the con tinuity of water supply service for a period of three months. About
                         70,000 yard-taps will be subsidized over a six-year period. The component would also finance an
                         independent verification of the eligibility requirements, provision of the yard-connections, and their
                         functioning prior to payments. The component is a continuation from an ongoing GPOBA project
                         (P104945) in Maputo that has successfully installed about 28,000 subsidized connections. The
                         current GPOBA project is scheduled to close June 30, 2014.

                         Component 5: Capacity Building and Operational Support to CRA (US$3 million): This component
                         will provide resources for operating expenses and technical assistance to enable CRA to support
                         implementation of existing regulations in the Central and Northern regions of the country over a six-
                         year period. This includes support for the expansion of the regulatory framework and oversight,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         particularly in the newly created regional “companies,” and reviews of the structure and form of
                         subsidies for low-income customers and of financing the extension of water to the urban poor. The
                         component will also provide goods, operational support, capacity building, training, and technical
                         assistance to CRA. Also, the component will finance the social-economic impact assessment in the
                         project cities.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project investments will take place in nine cities: Nacala, Tete, Moatize, Beira, Dondo, Pemba,
                         Chimoio, Manica, and Gondola, served by 5 water supply systems. Given the nature, scale and scope
                         of the infrastructure investments planned, the potential adverse environmental and social impacts of
                         the project are expected to be moderate, reversible and temporary. The civil works will be carried out
                         either on land already owed by FIPAG or along existing roads right-of-way.

                         There are no protected areas for nature conservation, species or habitats of particular interest that will
                         be directly or indirectly affected. It is expected that most of the potential adverse environmental and
                         social impacts associated with the project investments will be avoided and/or mitigated through
                         provisions adopted during the project preparation phase and/or the development of the technical
                         designs. In addition, the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) with Environmental
                         and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will identify safeguards risks and define mitigation measures
                         of negative environmental and social impacts associated with the construction works.

                         The proposed WASIS II project is a repeater of the ongoing WASIS project, which is a Category B
                         project. WASIS II will finance the same nature of investments as those financed by WASIS in the
                         same locations in Mozambique. WASIS II is also a Category B project. In addition, the locations of
                         infrastructure investments under both projects are similar - urban areas and rights-of-way of existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         roads.

                         The proposed project investments and associated potential impacts are summarized below:

                         Typical project-supported infrastructure investments:

                         The proposed infrastructure investments include:
                         (a)      Civil, electrical and mechanical works to improve water supply production, which include
                         expansion and refurbishment of well fields, a water intake, and water treatment plants;
                         (b)      Priority infrastructure to increase service coverage and operational efficiency of the water
                         distribution system, which include goods and rehabilitation or construction of water distribution
                         centers, increasing water storage capacity and pressure;
                         (c)      Rehabilitation or expansion of water transmission infrastructure, including new pipelines and
                         pump stations, as well as rehabilitation and expansion of water supply networks.

                         Typical negative environmental and social impacts expected from the project-supported investments:

                         •       Infrastructure investments under (a) and (b) above will be constructed in FIPAG-owned land,
                         in which similar infrastructure already exists but are in need of expansion or rehabilitation. When
                         carrying out the field visits, the project team observed that FIPAG properties are mostly fenced, free
                         of encroachment and, in general, well kept. The negative environmental and social impacts expected
                         from the project investments in these areas will be limited to the construction phase; these impacts
                         will be mitigated through implementation of the ESMF and the subproject specific ESIAs/ESMPs. It
Public Disclosure Copy




                         is expected that there will be little or no land acquisition in the project, but in case any construction
                         requires land acquisition and/or affects community or individual livelihoods, FIPAG will follow the
                         provisions of the RPF addressing compensation requirements, Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
                         will be prepared as necessary.
                         •        Infrastructure investments under (c) will be constructed on the existing rights-of-way of
                         roads. During field visits, the project team observed that the road rights-of-way envisaged for the
                         investments are free of encroachment, but detailed information about any required land acquisition
                         and/or impact on livelihoods (such as of street vendors who may eventually use the area) will be
                         available only during the preparation of the detailed engineering designs. Given the technical
                         flexibility allowed for the installation of water pipelines, it will be possible to avoid land acquisition
                         and also impacts on livelihoods. In case these impacts cannot be avoided, FIPAG will follow the
                         provisions in the RPF addressing compensation requirements.

                         Specific project infrastructure investments and associated impacts to be noted:

                         •        In the city of Nacala, the project infrastructure investments involve completing infrastructure
                         construction works financed by the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC) – a United States
                         foreign assistance agency that closed its activities in Mozambique in September 2013. The
                         investments financed by MCC included the rehabilitation of a dam for water supply purposes
                         completed in 2013. The MCC project also included construction of a treatment plant, distribution
                         centers, and the water distribution pipelines. Following MCC safeguards policies and procedures
                         (which are very close to those adopted by the Word Bank), a set of environmental and social
                         safeguards documents were prepared in an integrated manner with the technical studies. The WASIS
                         II team visited the project sites in Nacala and observed that there are no outstanding environmental or
                         social issues. This activity also triggers the Policy on Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37.
                         •        The project will add wells to two different well fields, Pemba and Tete/Moatize.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (a) In Pemba the project will expand production of the Metuge well field from around 17,500m3/day
                         to around 30-32,000m3/day (i.e 12-14,000m3/day increase) by installing additional 10-15 new
                         boreholes. A ground water assessment undertaken in 2012 defines a sustainable yield of 45,000 m3/
                         day for the Metuge well filed. So, the proposed project will reach about 70% of the sustainable
                         yield of 45,000 m3/day.

                         (b) In Tete/Moatize, the project will expand the total production in the system from around 44,000
                         m3/day to around 59-60,000 m3/day (i.e 15-16,000m3/day increase). This will include installation
                         of additional 20-22 new boreholes in the Tete and Nhartanda well fields – both of which are high
                         yielding due to their potential interconnectivity with the Zambezi river, according to an assessment
                         done in 2013. The well fields are potentially interconnected with the Zambezi river which is close to
                         the well fields. The additional amount of water to be abstracted is about 0.015% of the Zambezi river
                         flow in the dry season, close to the sites.

                         •       Although the Zambezi abstraction, if it occurs, would be a small fraction of the dry weather
                         flow of the river, close to the well field, the Operational Policy on International Waterways OP/BP
                         7.50 has been triggered.
                         •       In order to increase protection of the water intake structure located in the embankments of
                         the Pungue River, which supply water to the cities of Beira and Dondo, the project will finance
                           rehabilitation works of the structures protecting the intake. This activity also triggers the Policy on
                           International Waterways OP/BP 7.50.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Adequate staffing capacity and procedures exist within FIPAG, including specialists dedicated to
                           oversight on similar projects, including the Category A Greater Maputo Water Supply Project, and
                           the WASIS project, whose implementation is ongoing. There is a strong record of experience with
                           environmental and social Safeguards aspects of projects financed by the World Bank and other
                           international and bilateral donors. An ESMF acceptable to the Bank was prepared and disclosed for
                           WASIS. Prior to appraisal of the proposed project, the exiting ESMF will be updated and re-
                           disclosed in Mozambique and in the Bank InfoShop. Where necessary, ESIAs, ESMPs, and RAPs
                           will be inserted in the works contracts obligations.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS)
                           Nuno Maria Brilha Vilela (AFTU1)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              This project is a repeater of WASIS, which was
                           BP 4.01                                                classified Environmental Category B. The
                                                                                  nature, scale and scope of the infrastructure
                                                                                  investments proposed for the project are similar
                                                                                  to those financed under the original project.
                                                                                  This policy is triggered due to potential negative
                                                                                  environmental impacts expected during the
                                                                                  construction phase.
                                                                                  During project preparation, existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                  Frameworks (ESMF) and Environmental and
                                                                                  Social Management Plans (ESMP) prepared for
                                                                                  the original project and disclosed in the Bank's
                                                                                  InfoShop (03/23/2010) will be updated and re-
                                                                                  disclosed prior to appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No               There are no sensitive or critical natural habitat
                                                                                  areas affected by proposed investments.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No               The project does not involve or affect forests.

                           Pest Management OP 4.09               No               The proposed project activities do not require
                                                                                  the use of pesticides or other inputs that trigger
                                                                                  this policy.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/       No               The presence of physical cultural resources has
                           BP 4.11                                                not been identified in the project area. In
                                                                                  addition, the project will avoid disturbing or
                                                                                  affecting physical cultural resources.
                                                                                  Nonetheless, civil works contracts will include
                                                                chance finds procedures as described in the
                                                                project ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No    There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   The proposed project activities might result in
                         4.12                                   temporary or permanent loss of assets, i.e.,
                                                                crops or other means of income generation.
                                                                Therefore, appropriate compensation for these
                                                                negative social impacts may be needed.

                                                                Under the original project, the Borrower
                                                                developed a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                (RPF). This was reviewed, approved and
                                                                disclosed in the Bank's InfoShop (03/23/2010).
                                                                The RPF will be updated and made available
                                                                prior to appraisal. In case land acquisition or
                                                                restriction of access to resources will be
                                                                identified as a requirement for a project activity,
                                                                a RAP will be prepared, consulted upon and
                                                                publicly disclosed.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        Yes   This policy is triggered because the raw water
                                                                supplied to the city of Nacala comes from an
                                                                existing dam (whose recent rehabilitation was
                                                                financed by MCC). Safety procedures such as
                                                                Seismic Safety Analysis, the Maintenance and
                                                                Operational Manual and the Emergency
                                                                Preparedness Plan were prepared by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                Government and are currently under review by
                                                                the World Bank.
                         Projects on International        Yes   This policy is triggered because the project will
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   finance activities potentially affecting two
                                                                International rivers, the Pungue river and
                                                                Zambezi river.

                                                                Pungue -The project will rehabilitate structures
                                                                protecting the water intake located on the river
                                                                embankments, but there will be no increase of
                                                                water abstraction compared to the original
                                                                design.
                                                                Pungue river is shared by Zimbabwe and
                                                                Mozambique. Mozambique is the downstream
                                                                riparian.

                                                                Zambezi - The project will rehabilitate and
                                                                install new boreholes that may affect about
                                                                0.015% of the river flow in the dry season,
                                                                                                                                 assuming that the aquifers are interconnected.
                                                                                                                                 The Zambezi river is shared by Angola,
                                                                                                                                 Botswana, Mozambique, Namibia, Zambia and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Zimbabwe. Mozambique is the downstream
                                                                                                                                 riparian.

                                                                                                                                 Based on the detailed review, notifications to
                                                                                                                                 riparian states may be required during project
                                                                                                                                 preparation.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not taking place in disputed areas.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Updating of Safeguards Documents – from October 2014 through September 2015
                                      •      Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                                      •      Generic Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
                                      •      Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)

                                      Nacala Dam – Review and update as needed the technical and safeguard documents will take
                                      place from October 2014 through September 2015. This includes:
                                      •       Operation and Maintenance Manual – review and updated as needed
                                      •       Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) – review and updated needed
                                      •       Report on the performance of the dam after the first (re)impoundment – review
                                      •       Possible hiring of an independent safety review panel – To be defined
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      International Waterways – review from July 2014 through October 2014
                                      •        Request exceptions to the notification requirement - Paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Luiz Claudio Martins Tava

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 26-Jun-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Rosemary Mukami Kariuki (SM)                                                                                         Date: 30-Jun-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
