INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 167
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Feb-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        India                       Project ID:  P150520
Project Name: IN Punjab Rural Water and Sanitation Sector Improvement Project (P150520)
Task Team       Srinivasa Rao Podipireddy
Leader(s):
Estimated       28-Jan-2015                 Estimated    24-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWADR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Water supply (40%), Wastewater Collection and Transportation (30%),
Sanitation (15%), Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (15%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (75%), Participation and civic engagement
(10%), Gender (10%), Water resource management (5%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     354.00             Total Bank Financing:   248.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                    106.00
P            International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      248.00
Total                                                                       354.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       Yes
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
To improve water and sanitation service levels, reduce open defecation, and strengthen service
delivery arrangements in targeted villages in Punjab
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 11


﻿1.     The Project will have four components with beneficiary villages or households selected
using objective criteria.
Component 1. Transformation - Improved Livability of Villages (US$160 million)
0
2.     Around 570 villages with poor water services and/or partially covered status will be
upgraded under Sub-component 1(a) to receive service standards similar to urban areas (10 hours/
day, 100% household connections, volumetric charging), thus triggering a transformation in village
living conditions. Following the approach piloted under PRWSSP, those villages with a strong
interest to enhance community sanitation services, and demonstrating operational and financial
capacity in managing the water supply schemes, will be allowed to compete for sewerage schemes
under sub-component 1(b) (target:315 villages). Improved service standards will have greater
benefits for women.
Component 2. Inclusive Household Water and Sanitation Services (Project funding: US$ 85 million)
3.     This component will benefit women who do not have access to water and sanitation in the
household. In addition targeting full coverage of household connections in the village ensures
inclusion of marginalized communities. This component envisages small investments to make house
connections or network extensions, or in some instances, to simply improve operation and
maintenance practices. Sub-component 2(a) will support service delivery to about 0.65 million
households through the provision of small network extensions and household connections. Sub-
component 2(b) will support operational improvement for higher service levels and Sub-component 2
(c) will provide a subsidy to households without toilets to construct a toilet, including IEC to trigger
behavioral change necessary to achieve ODF status
Component 3. Improved Water Quality (US$ 60 million)
4.     This component will begin to address the water quality problems that are now becoming
more apparent and making Punjab one of the most quality affected states in India. 29% of schemes
have water quality problems (Source: DWSS January 2015). Sub-component 3(a) will strengthen
water quality monitoring and develop mitigation measures. Under sub-component 3(b) the Project
O
)        will finance (i) retrofitting of water schemes with engineering solutions to treat arsenic, fluoride,
iron, etc. (target 150 villages); (ii) support construction of surface water supply schemes to supply
safe drinking water in districts such as Moga and Barnala where most of the villages are affected by
uranium and other heavy metals (121 villages).
Component 4.Strengthening Institutions and Project Management (US$49 million)
5.     This component will support non-infrastructure project costs. Sub-component 4(a),
Strengthening Institutions, will finance transition costs as the sector institution (DWSS) moves from
a construction-centric to a service-delivery-oriented organization. This will include the design and
implementation of a MIS to monitor on-going service delivery performance of the schemes, and the
performance of the GPWSCs that operate them. Capacity building to deliver technical and
administrative support to the GPWSCs, etc.In addition sub-component 4(a) will finance a program to
support transfer of responsibilities to the project supported GPWSCs. Sub-component4(b) will
finance Project Management costs of project implementation, consultancies, internal and external
audits and other incremental costs
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
6.     Punjab is located in the North-Western region of India and is bounded on the west by
Pakistan, on the north by Jammu and Kashmir, on the North East by Himachal Pradesh and on the
Page 2 of 11


﻿south by Haryana and Rajasthan. The State is spread over an area of 50,362 sq. km. which is 1.54%
of the country's total geographical area. Pre-partition Punjab was drained by five rivers which
formed part of Indus basin till 1947. After partition of the country, India's right of usage was
restricted to only three Eastern rivers namely Satluj, Ravi and Beas. The total stretch of canals and
O
distributaries including minors in Punjab is approximately 14,500 km.
7.     Forests: The total area under forests in Punjab is about 1,764 sq. km, out of which 736 sq.
km is moderately dense forest area and 1,028 sq. km is open forest area. Against the total
geographical area of 50,362 sq. km, forest area is only 3.50 percent. There are 12 wildlife sanctuaries
covering an area of 32,370 hectares.
8.     Demographics: There are 12,827 villages and 143 towns in the State. The administrative
structure of the State consists of 4 divisions, 22 districts, and 142 blocks. The State of Punjab (as per
2011 census) has a total population of 27.7 million, out of which the male population is 14.6 million
and the female population is 13.1 million. Of the total population of Punjab state, around 63 percent
(17.3 million people) of the State's population live in rural areas. As much as 30 percent of the
population (highest in an Indian state) belongs to scheduled caste. Further, the below poverty line
(BPL) category constitutes 8.26 percent of the total population as compared to 29.5 percent of the
Indian population as a whole. About 75% of its population depends directly on agriculture.
9.     Water availability: Increasing levels of water contamination and over-exploitation of ground
water resources due to anthropogenic activities is slowly becoming an area of concern in addition to
natural contamination like fluoride and arsenic due to geogonic conditions. According to baseline
data, the state of Punjab has annual replenishable groundwater resources of 22.53 billion cubic
meters (BCM) and net groundwater availability is 20.32 BCM, out of which, 172 percent is being
utilized annually. With regard to groundwater exploitation, out of the 138 blocks in Punjab, 110
blocks are classified as over-exploited, 4 as critical, 2 as semi-critical, and 22 as safe. The canal
systems of Punjab supply water for irrigation and water supply from the dams. About 9 percent of the
water supply schemes in Punjab are based on canal-water supply. In some cases, the water supply is
adversely affected during the periods of canal maintenance shutdown. The State has experienced
drought in 1978, 1979, 1985, 1987, 2002 and 2004, both in rural and urban areas.
10.    Water Quality: According to the DWSS estimates for the year 2013-14, 1,587 villages of the
total 12,827 villages suffer from poor water quality conditions, namely, iron, fluoride, arsenic, and
a        nitrates. Apart from these villages, there are 2,307 villages affected with major water quality
problems of uranium, lead, aluminum, and selenium. Due to its higher depth and relative
hydrogeological isolation from shallow aquifers, deep groundwater is expected to be free from the
presence of bacteriological contamination, but chemical contaminants such as fluoride, iron, lead,
and aluminum could be present. The discharges of untreated domestic wastewater, industrial
wastewater, run-off from agricultural fields, and urban sewage water is polluting the canals in the
State. Information available with different line departments dealing with water sector development
suggests that heavy metals and chemical contamination may also bring in important considerations
on water quality and needs appropriate management. The table below provides summary of presence
of contaminants in various districts (MoDWS, April 2014).
Contaminant   Affected Districts
Iron    Amritsar, Ferozepur, Rupnagar, Gurdaspur and Hoshiarpur
Flouride      Patiala, Fatehgarh Sahib and Sangrur
Arsenic Gurdaspur
Uranium       Ferozepur, Barnala and Moga
Page 3 of 11


﻿Nitrate Ferozepur, Hoshiarpur, Fatehgarh Sahib and Jalandhar
Aluminum      Rupnagar, Pathankot, Hoshiarpur, Moga and Patiala
Lead      Patiala, Jalandhar and Ludhiana
Selinium      Jalandhar, Ludhiana and Kapurthala
U
11.    Current Water Supply and Treatment Practices: The existing rural water supply schemes are
essentially tube well based, canal based and hand pumps. Out of total schemes of 9,302 as on March
2013, 6,807 are tube well based; 1,659 schemes are with India Mark II hand pumps and only 836
schemes are with canal source. In tube well based schemes, a chlorination unit/silver ionization plant
is connected to the pumping main for disinfection of water. After disinfection, water is pumped to the
overhead tank and subsequently supplied to the users through distribution network. In canal based
schemes, water treatment is provided by filtration units followed by disinfection through chlorination
and finally to the clear water sump, which is then pumped to overhead tank and subsequently to the
distribution network by gravity flow.
12.    Incidence of Water and Sanitation Related Diseases: As per the assessment of Health
Department done for the years 2008 to 2013, Jalandhar and Patiala were found to be the worst
affected districts with 1,58,437 and 88,918 acute diarrhoea cases respectively. Jalandhar, Ludhiana
and Gurdaspur districts reported 31,477, 21,621 and 20,472 enteric fever cases respectively in last six
years. Ludhiana, Sangrur and Moga are the worst affected districts with 1,577, 902 and 890 Hepatitis
A & E cases respectively.
13.    Sanitation: In Punjab, more than 70 percent of rural households have household latrines and
usage level is observed to be good. In many of the habitations, open defecation is not widely
prevalent. Moga and Ludhiana are the districts where more than 90% households are having IHHLs,
whereas in Bathinda, Faridkot, Jalandhar, Patiala and Sangrur it is more than 80%. Amritsar is the
only district where only 50% households are having IHHLs. As far as coverage of BPL households is
concerned, special attention needs to be given in Amritsar, Nawansher, Kapurthala and Tarn Taran
districts where less than 50% households are having IHHLs.
0
14.    Sewerage Schemes: According to Department of Water Supply and Sanitation (as on
December 2014), there are 97 operational sewerage schemes in 18 districts of Punjab.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Mridula Singh (GSURR)
Pyush Dogra (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The Project will support construction of single
OP/BP 4.01                              village and multi-village based rural water supply
and sanitation schemes/services (RWSS), which will
improve overall environmental conditions through
improvement in quality of RWSS services.
Incorporating the key environmental challenges
identified under the EA, an EMF has been prepared.
The EMF includes various environmental
management strategies to be used during project
implementation. Environmental Code of Practices
Page 4 of 11


﻿have been prepared and included in the EMF. The
above measures are effectively utilized to screen the
schemes from environmental impacts, and suggest
measures of mitigation. These practices will be
followed in this Project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No            The earlier project (closed on December 2014) and
EA conducted for the current project does not
provide any learnings that the proposed Project
activities are in any way impacting natural habitat.
Hence, policy is not triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes          Environmental Code of Practices have been prepared
and included in the EMF. The above measures are
effectively utilized to screen the schemes from
environmental impacts, and suggest measures of
mitigation. The same practices will be followed in
this Project.
Pest Management OP 4.09      No           No activity will support use of pesticides or related
activity, hence policy is not triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources  No           The project activities do not foresee any impact on
OP/BP 4.11                                physical cultural resources. Hence, policy is not
triggered
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No           There is no indigenous population in the state. Hence
4.10                                      policy is not triggered
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No          The project does not entail any land acquisition
BP 4.12                                   therefore the policy is not triggered.
The main component that requires land is sewerage
scheme with treatment systems. These schemes
require about 2.5 acres per scheme. These facilities
would be located in encumbered GP lands. The
scheme selection criteria will ensure that such
sewerage schemes will be taken up only in such GPs
where land is available. The total extent of land
needed for this entire project is of the order of 787.5
acres (315 scheme x 2.5 acre per scheme). Other
project components are of the nature of up gradation
of service levels, increasing access through
expanding house connections, improving inclusion
by extension to cover uncovered areas and
addressing water quality issues. As such there is no
requirement of land anticipated for these
components. In exceptional cases if land is needed
for these components, these facilities would be
located on unencumbered GP lands or through direct
market purchase (willing buyer-willing seller).
Page 5 of 11


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           There is no water supply source involving dams or
ponds hence policy is not triggered.
Projects on International    Yes          OP 7.50 is applicable to the proposed project since
U         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       the rural water supply, drainage and sanitation
activities will be carried out in the watersheds of the
Sutlej, Ravi and Beas Rivers, or their tributaries.
These rivers and their tributaries are considered
"international waterways" for purposes of the policy.
Taking into account the project's focus on improved
efficiency and service delivery for already existing
water supply and sanitation schemes in Punjab, it is
the Team's assessment that the proposed activities
will (i) not adversely change the quality or quantity
of water flows to the other riparians, and (ii) will not
be adversely affected by the other riparians' possible
water use. Thus, an exception under paragraph 7(a)
of OP 7.50 has been obtained.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         Project is not in disputed area.
BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
This assessment comprised an assessment of the current status of RWSS in the State, status of
water resources availability for sourcing of drinking water in terms of quantity and quality,
identification of baseline environmental issues pertaining to RWSS, institutional and policy
O
U           assessment, expected environmental impacts of the proposed project interventions and proposed
mitigation measures, development of the EMF, and institutional arrangements for implementation
O           of the EMF. Findings of the EA indicate that while the proposed project interventions are expected
to result in overall environmental and public health improvements in the state, potential adverse
,           impacts could occur if the schemes are not properly designed, sited, implemented, and maintained.
Water Supply Issues:
-      Water Availability / Water Quantity: Ground water has been the major source of rural
drinking water and irrigation in Punjab. Owing to large scale extraction of ground water for
irrigation, combined with increasing demands in other sectors due to population and industrial
growth, the aquifers are prone to be under stress and some of the sources have become either
unsustainable or contaminated.
-      Water Source Protection: Drinking water from local drinking water utilities is sourced
from ground water, streams, rivers or lakes in a watershed. Although most of the raw water
requires some kind of treatment before being supplied for its intended purpose mainly for
drinking, domestic or industrial use, protecting sources of water is an important part of providing
safe drinking water to the public.
-      Water Quality (Surface water & Ground water): A major canal network of the Punjab state
is relatively free of industrial or municipal discharges, and the irrigation drainage flows are seldom
Page 6 of 11


﻿routed into the canal system. The water quality in the main canals is generally better than that of
the river courses. The quality problems with respect to surface water sources are more acute in the
locations and during the periods when the flow in the river is not sufficient to cause acceptable
level of dilution of the discharge effluents. The shallow ground water quality in Punjab is poor
O
owing to natural presence of salinity and pollutants at concentrations exceeding the permissible
levels for drinking water use. In addition, the ground water quality may also indicate
bacteriological and chemical contamination due to inadequate treatment of effluents from septic
tanks or industrial discharges and disposal of sullage.
-       Leakage from Water supply: Water is often wasted through leaking pipes, joints, valves
and fittings of water supply system either due to bad quality of material used, poor workmanship,
corrosion, age of installations, or through vandalism as well. This leakage leads to reduction in
supply and loss of pressure. The leakages could either be visible or invisible. In the case of
invisible leaks, sections of pipeline should be isolated and search to be carried out for location of
leaks. Also, the lack of maintenance of pipeline may cause leakages in long run which has
negative impact on the various attributes due to water stagnation in the village roads/streets/low
lying areas.
-       Maintenance of Water Disinfection System: The disinfection of potable water is almost
universally accomplished by the use of gaseous chlorine or chlorine compounds. Other methods of
disinfection are also available such as ozone, ultra-violet light, chlorine dioxide, silver ionization
etc. Disinfection should be done continuously to maintain the residual chlorine in the distribution
system.
Sanitation Issues:
-       Household Sanitation options and issues: There are no provisions of sanitation facilities in
30% of the total rural households in The Punjab state. Amongst the 70% households which have
access to a sanitary facilities, about 94% have a toilet within their house, 4% households share a
toilet with other households while about 2% households use a public toilet.
-       Septic Tanks: All the wastewater of households should flow into septic tanks. As
wastewater flows into the tank, the heavier solid materials settle to the bottom, the lighter grease
and fats float to the top and liquid flows out of the tank, which untreated can cause pollution.
-       Site Selection for STP: Site selection of a waste water treatment facility should be based
on careful consideration on development patterns as well as social, environmental and engineering
constraints. It is important to understand that the selection of a site for sewage treatment plant will
have long lasting social, environmental and economic repercussions on the affected community
and neighborhood.
-      Effluent Disposal & Utilization: The effluent disposal of STP and its utilization should be
planned at design stage otherwise its accumulation in the nearby areas leads to un-aesthetic view
and becomes a breeding ground for mosquitoes. The effluent from the STP may be discharged in
the water bodies such as existing drains, ponds, streams or on land provided that it meets the
PPCB standards.
Environmental Management
An EMF prescribing the requisite measures to address environmental impacts arising out of the
project. The EMF will address following aspects:
*      Water availability. Piped-water systems will draw water from deep aquifers. The current
and expected future drinking water abstractions from these aquifers are very small compared to the
estimated sustainable yield of the deep aquifer, but over-exploitation of the same aquifer for
irrigation puts stress on source sustainability for deep groundwater-based schemes. In areas where
Page 7 of 11


﻿the quality of deep aquifers is affected, canal-based schemes or groundwater sources with adequate
treatment systems will be implemented, and adequate year-round supply will be ensured through
storage or other measures.
*     Water quality monitoring. Conventional water quality parameters for the DWSS's deep
O
groundwater-based schemes indicate acceptable water quality for drinking purposes. However, due
to emerging concerns regarding the possible presence of industrial or agricultural chemicals in
some locations, the Project will commence and support a systematic assessment of groundwater
quality in the State. Effective and regular disinfection, preventive and corrective maintenance of
water distribution systems, and regular water quality monitoring will be ensured.
* Environmental sanitation and hygiene. The Project will support IEC campaign to create
and enhance awareness on hygiene aspects pertaining to hand-washing, water collection, storage
and handling practices and to generate demand for drainage improvement schemes including
small-bore sewers or /sewerage schemes.
*      Water Quality Standards: the project/ DWSS will continued to follow Water and
Wastewater quality standards of Bank group guidelines, applicable National guidelines (IS, CPCB,
etc) and if required, international (mainly for uranium, heavy metals etc).
To address impacts following safeguard management process will be adopted in the Project:
As per the EMF prepared for the Project, at the Detailed Scheme Report (DSR) preparation stage,
the available environmental information in the Environmental Data Sheets (EDS) will be
evaluated and based on the level of expected environmental and public health impacts, the
proposed water supply and sewerage schemes would be classified as either Category I
(insignificant environmental impacts) or Category II (moderate environmental impacts). For
Category II schemes, a detailed environmental appraisal is required. Based on the environmental
categorization of the schemes for the proposed Project, appraisals have to be done and approvals
have to be obtained from the respective agencies. The environmental issues at planning, design,
construction, and O&M stages are identified and mitigation measures, with the persons
responsible to ensure the implementation, are detailed in the EMF. An EMP will be prepared to
mitigate negative impacts and enhance positive impacts. The plan will cover environmental issues
like site preparation, public safety and access management, construction site and material
management, air pollution, water pollution, land contamination, noise, occupational health and
safety, construction camps and labor issues. Environmental management and mitigation activities,
including associated cost, will be included in the specifications and conditions of the civil works
a           contract by the contractor. A provision of 1 percent of subproject cost is made for implementing
the EMP. In response, the EMF has provided adequate management measures (under the
Environmental Codes of Practice [ECoPs]) to comply during the planning and design,
construction, and O&M stages of RWSS schemes. Environmental management strategy, with
technical specification required for effective implementation, is captured under the ECoPs given in
the EMF. These ECoPs respond to the environmental priorities analyzed as part of the EA. The
Focal Point Environment and the Environment Specialist at the state level will monitor compliance
of the schemes with the EMF. All completed schemes shall be visited at regular intervals by the
environment team to check if all environmental safeguard requirements are met and to identify any
issues that need to be addressed. An External Environmental Audit of all the sewerage schemes
and surface water supply schemes will be conducted by consultants on an annual basis. Apart from
this, the project environment team will audit all the remaining schemes immediately upon
completion, on a regular basis.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Page 8 of 11


﻿No indirect and/ or long term impacts are expected as a result of the project intervention. Most of
the project components will have complementary positive impacts on the environment e.g. a
combination of ground water recharge measures, greater ownership by communities and
willingness to improve sustainability of local water sources. The selection of safe drinking water
sources coupled with water quality monitoring programs and environmental sanitation and health
hygiene education will contribute in sustainable water supply systems and in improving
environmental conditions in villages. The sewerage schemes will as well improve the disposal and
drainage systems in the rural areas.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Environment: Due to the participatory nature of the schemes and framework approach adopted for
environmental management, the alternatives to avoid or minimize adverse impacts on villages
would be considered during the design and planning phase of each scheme.
Social: It is well recognized that the RWSS reforms are difficult and challenging task for the
government, PRIs and communities. Hence, towards ensuring that potential positive benefits do
translate into reality, a variety of alternative interventions will be explored for extending
community development support as well as human and institutional development efforts. This will
be complemented with an ample provision for 'change management' initiatives.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The social and environmental management will form an integral part of the overall scheme cycle.
Each detailed scheme report shall contain environmental screening format known as EDS,
highlighting the issues and mitigation measures. Scheme appraisals will take due note of this and
shall guide in decision making. Roles and responsibilities for ensuring implementation of the
environment and social safeguards have been detailed out at state, district, block and village/
scheme levels. At the state level the DWSS (Head Office) prepares the environment policy and
sets the guidelines for the EMF implementation, monitoring and evaluation. This Office also
O
liaises with other departments with regard to environment issues.
The State level officer, DWSS will be responsible for ensuring the implementation of the EMF
across the State. To assist State level Officer, there will be an Executive Engineer and an
o           Environmental Specialist, who will ensure that environment management activities are in
conformity with the EMF and that necessary guidance and budget is provided to implement these
plans. The state level Environment Specialist will be in charge of the overall responsibility for
ensuring the implementation of the environmental aspects. The EMF will be implemented through
engineering staff and will be supported by environmental specialists at state HQ level, regional
level (CEs and SEs offices) and at each district level (AE/JE level). Further, at village level JE will
be assigned with the responsibility of environmental sanitation management and awareness.
SMAP will be implemented through Social Development Specialists engaged at HQ level,
regional and village level. The Project will develop capacities of GPWSC through training and
other information sharing measures to execute these functions effectively. The Project envisages
building on the existing institutional model that enables demand driven community action.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key program stakeholders were identified and consultations held at village level and at state level
during the course of updating of EMF and also at the time of disseminating draft findings in the
Page 9 of 11


﻿month of November 2014. This was undertaken to seek their views and incorporate the same into
designing of the program. Grassroots level stakeholders included: (i) benefiting households
(including women, poor, and Scheduled Castes); (ii) Gram Panchayats (men and women elected
representatives), (iii) Junior Engineers, and (iv) other community based organizations. Block/
district level stakeholders are the respective Panchayat Raj Institutions; other concerned
stakeholder departments and non-governmental organizations, contractors/ suppliers and
consultants The environmental and social assessment studies have been conducted with active
participation by relevant stakeholders Summary of EMF and SMAP has been translated into local
Punjabi language and disseminated throughout the Department's website on December 29, 2014;
revised SMAP on February 3, 2015.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              18-Dec-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           19-Jan-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
India                                                    18-Dec-2014
Comments: Disclosed in project website "www.pbdwss.gov.in'
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [ X] No [ ]  NA [   ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?  Yes [  ] No [ X]   NA [   ]
Page 10 of I1


﻿If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                Yes [X] No [ ]       NA [   ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Srinivasa Rao Podipireddy
Approved By
Regional Safeguards   Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)            Date: 03-Feb-2015
Advisor:
Practice Manager/     Name: William D. Kingdom (PMGR)           Date: 04-Feb-2015
Manager:
Page 11 of 11


