                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA5556
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Liberia                          Project ID:    P143064
                            Project Name:     Liberia: Public Sector Modernization Project (P143064)
                            Task Team         Raymond Muhula
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         27-Nov-2013                      Estimated   06-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTP3                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General public administration sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Administrative and civil service reform (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         11.00                 Total Bank Financing: 2.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                      0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             2.00
                              US Agency for International Development (USAID)                                         5.25
                              SWEDEN Swedish Intl. Dev. Cooperation Agency (SIDA)                                     3.75
                              Total                                                                                  11.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To improve pay and performance management in participating ministries, and strengthen payroll
                           management in the Civil Service in Liberia.



                                                                     Page 1 of 5
                         3. Project Description
                         The Project Development Objective (PDO) is improved performance, pay and payroll management
                         in the Civil Service in Liberia.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Improved Pay Management
                         The objectives of this component are (i) to provide Civil Service compensation that can attract and
                         retain qualified and skilled personnel; (ii) to facilitate sustainable wage bill management, and (iii)
                         provide a clear and fair basis for accountability at the agent level. The project will support the
                         following activities: (i) undertake a mapping of current pay structure; (ii) conduct comparative
                         remuneration survey;(iii)Assign civil servants to relevant grades;(iv) revise HR policy manual to
                         include pay administration and grading procedures;(v) train CSA staff in key HR functions;(vi)
                         revise of pay strategy; (vii) conduct information awareness campaign.


                         Component 2: Strengthened Payroll Management

                         The objective of this component is (a) to establish and maintain a clean, accurate and complete Civil
                         Service payroll and (b) ensure predictability in the government’s wage bill through the frequent
                         monitoring of payroll exits and entries. The project will support the following activities: (i)
                         preparation and dissemination of HR planning and procedures; (ii) strengthening of personnel
                         records and issuance of biometric cards; (iii) decentralization of HRMIS in at least four CSA
                         outreach centers ; (iv) independent systems audit by GAC; (v) train ministry staff in payroll
                         management functions; (vi) and strengthen payroll controls;

                         Component 3: Improved Performance

                         The objective of this component is to (i) support the ministries and agencies to focus on performing
                         their core functions. It will support the strengthening of managerial, professional and technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                         capacity in MACs to ensure that agents in organizations can perform functions and deliver on the
                         mandate of the ministries; (ii) establish performance and accountability standards among civil
                         servants.

                         The project will support the following activities:

                         (a)     Subcomponent 3.1 (Organizational Development): (i) mapping of existing organization
                         structures and revision of current organizational re-design model; (ii) conducting mandates, function
                         and organization review of selected ministries; (iii) undertaking organizational diagnosis of each
                         MAC (including staffing and skills gaps); (iv) preparation of legislation to amend structure and
                         functions of MACs; and (v) preparation of options for voluntary separation program for eligible civil
                         servants.

                         (b)     Subcomponent 3.2 (Human Resource Management): (i) develop a policy framework for
                         Civil Service management (including manpower planning, merit appointment; and performance
                         management); (ii) support training and career development (including of HR and line managers in
                         CSA and across ministries; (iii) develop a policy framework for establishing a Civil Service
                         Commission; and (iv) develop a policy framework for appointment of Principal Administrative
                         Officers.



                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                           Component 4: Project and Program Management

                           This objective of this component is to support the coordination and delivery of project inputs and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           overall implementation program. In addition to general project management, the component will
                           support monitoring and evaluations, procurement and financial management as well as institutional
                           capacity building of three key implementing agencies. Key activities include (a) project coordination
                           (b) communication and change management (c) monitoring and evaluation and (d) fiduciary
                           arrangements.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project implementation will be in Monrovia. However, the project is for the entire public sector
                           in Liberia. The focus of the project is capacity building and strengthening of public servants. There
                           are no safeguards issues as there are no activities that trigger any of the safeguards policies.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFCW1)

                            6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/       No
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              N/A




                                                                        Page 3 of 5
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           N/A
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           N/A
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         No safeguards policy is triggered.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                          Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                          be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                          issue, been prepared
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the OP?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?




                                                                      Page 4 of 5
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Raymond Muhula
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Mark Roland Thomas (SM)                   Date: 04-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 5 of 5
