                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSR1029
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ethiopia                                     Project ID:           P096323
                            Project Name:      Tana & Beles Integrated Water Resources Development (P096323)
                            Task Team          Catherine Signe Tovey
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          11-Feb-2008                                  Estimated   29-May-2008
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GWADR                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%), General agriculture,
                                               fishing and forestry sector (30%), General public administration sector (15%),
                                               General transportation sector (10%), Water supply (5%)
                            Theme:             Water resource management (50%), Rural services and infrastructure (25%),
                                               Participation and civic engagement (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                        No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        70.00           Total Bank Financing:                                       45.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                   17.60
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                          45.00
                              Bilateral Agencies (unidentified)                                                                     7.40
                              Total                                                                                                70.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                                                                                 Page 1 of 9
                         The Project Development Objective is to create an enabling environment for improved development
                         and management of land and water resources of the Tana and Beles
                         sub-basins to contribute to accelerated growth and sustainable socio-economic d
Public Disclosure Copy




                         evelopment. This will be achieved in a phased program with initial focus on ins
                         titutional capacity building and demonstrative investments on watershed and floo
                         d management; and creating enabling environment for private sector
                         participation                                .
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The Project Development Objective is to create an enabling environment for improved development
                         and management of land and water resources of the Tana and Beles
                         sub-basins to contribute to accelerated growth and sustainable socio-economic d
                         evelopment. This will be achieved in a phased program with initial focus on ins
                         titutional capacity building and demonstrative investments on watershed and floo
                         d management; and creating enabling environment for private sector
                         participation                                .
                         3. Project Description
                         This ISDS has been updated for the fifth restructuring of the Tana & Beles Integrated Water
                         Resources Development Project. There are no changes to the safeguards applied or their mitigation
                         in this restructuring.

                         A two-phased is proposed with the TBIWRDP-I addressing the initial phase. This phase will focus
                         on:

                          - Setting up an institutional framework for integrated water resources planning and management in
                         the Tana-Beles integrated sub-basin. The institutional framework will also include the development/
                         strengthening of market institutions, reforms in extension and agricultural research, strengthening of
                         legal and regulatory institutions and other agencies to promote economic linkages and private sector
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development; and institutions related to coordination of public investment such as roads, airports etc.
                         - Initiating activities in key areas of natural resource management such as watershed and flood
                         management (flood preparedness and early warning of floods) in Tana sub-basin
                          - Promoting an enabling policy and institutional environment for private sector development and
                         associated facilitation to enhance private sector participation.
                          - Planning/preparedness for major investments proposed to be made in the subsequent phase.

                          The second phase ( as a follow-on project) will then focus on implementing the planned physical
                         investments contributing to economic growth. Success in the development of an enabling
                         environment for economic growth and proper management of the region's key economic resource:
                         water, will determine whether physical investments, to be carried out in the second phase of the
                         program will contribute to accelerated growth.

                          The project implementation will be premised on some of the guiding principles, e.g., (i)
                         interventions should be bottom-up and demand driven based on local capacity; (ii) there should be
                         strong private/public partnerships; (iii) planning should be participatory and development should be
                         local (iv) there should be a strong element of capacity building. A strong stakeholder consultation
                         process is planned during project preparation (the conceptual framework itself is a product of a series
                         of stakeholder consultation at federal and regional levels).



                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The physical investments proposed for this project (Phase I) are concentrated in the Tana-Beles
Public Disclosure Copy




                         basin. This includes physical investments in the Lake Tana catchment area for small-scale watershed
                         management and small-scale community-level flood management interventions in the Tana-Beles
                         basin. The institutional capacity building may also include national and regional level institution
                         strengthening.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chukwudi H. Okafor (GSURR)
                         Asferachew Abate Abebe (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes             The proposed project (Phase I) is primarily
                          BP 4.01                                           designed to strengthen institutional capacity
                                                                            supported by small-scale investments in
                                                                            watershed and flood management. These are not
                                                                            expected to have significant adverse
                                                                            environmental and social development impacts.
                                                                            The preparation of the watershed and flood
                                                                            management projects is already underway
                                                                            (including detailed environmental and social
                                                                            assessments built in). A detailed social
                                                                            assessment of flood affected communities around
                                                                            Lake Tana has been completed. These studies
                                                                            will be amalgamated into an overall
                                                                            Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) that
                                                                            will be conducted for this project (to be financed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            by PHRD). Since physical investments under
                                                                            Phase-I will be small-scale, community-driven
                                                                            and not known precisely in advance, an
                                                                            Environmental and Social Management
                                                                            Framework (ESMF) will be developed as part of
                                                                            the ESA. During preparation, this framework
                                                                            will also be applied to some initial first-year
                                                                            proposed locations to develop any required
                                                                            management plans. The findings of the ESA will
                                                                            also be incorporated into appropriate operational
                                                                            manuals. It is expected that the ESMF will
                                                                            maximize social and environmental opportunities
                                                                            and effectively manage environmental and social
                                                                            development risks under the project.This would
                                                                            include appropriate consultation with various
                                                                            stakeholders during the s coping and draft
                                                                            recommendation stages. Any policy and
                                                                            institutional development improvements to better
                                                                            manage impacts of public and induced private



                                                                    Page 3 of 9
                                                                        sector investments will also be examined in these
                                                                        studies. The ESA will also outline the kinds of
                                                                        strategic and investment-related environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        and social assessments that will be supported in
                                                                        Phase-I to better prepare for Phase-II, including
                                                                        capacity gaps and institutional responsibilities.
                                                                        The ESA will factor in the sustainable
                                                                        development/management/use of the Lake?s
                                                                        resources, and help conceptualize a long-term
                                                                        program of data collection and analysis on
                                                                        environment and social aspects to strengthen the
                                                                        knowledge base for Lake management.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No           The ESA will examine if the proposed activities
                                                                        of the project (Phase-I) will trigger the Natural
                                                                        Habitats OP and propose any mitigation measures
                                                                        required. The ESA will also outline TORs for
                                                                        studies required during Phase I for preparation of
                                                                        Phase II activities that may have a significant
                                                                        impact on Lake Tana Natural Habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No           The project may induce the increased use of
                                                                        pesticides in the project areas where irrigation
                                                                        related to catchment management is to be
                                                                        enhanced or developed. This would require
                                                                        mitigation in the form of a significant emphasis
                                                                        on Integrated Pest Management and Integrated
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        Nutrient Management demonstrations, training/
                                                                        extension services and related market
                                                                        development. A Pest Management Plan (PMP)
                                                                        will be developed that describes the necessary
                                                                        measures. The PMP, in addition to pest and
                                                                        pesticide management issues related to
                                                                        agriculture productivity and diversification, will
                                                                        also address vector management issues that may
                                                                        be caused by storage/irrigation schemes.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No           The project activities are not currently expected
                         BP 4.11                                        to have significant impacts on physical cultural
                                                                        property. However, these will be further assessed
                                                                        during the Environment and Social Assessment.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No           The project area includes the Beles basin;
                                                                        however, it is not known yet if any physical
                                                                        investments would be made in the Beles basin in
                                                                        this project (Phase I). This area is inhabited by
                                                                        pastoral and hunter-gatherer groups. However, at
                                                                        this time, we do not have adequate information to



                                                                Page 4 of 9
                                                                                make an informed decision about triggering the
                                                                                policy. The planned ESA will explore this issue
                                                                                in detail and suggest appropriate approaches to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                address identified special needs of such groups.
                                                                                The completed social assessment for the flood
                                                                                activities in the Tana area has confirmed that
                                                                                there are no IP groups in that area. The ESA
                                                                                would also indicate if any investments to benefit
                                                                                the local potential IP groups in the Beles basin
                                                                                could be considered under the Phase I.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes              This policy is considered triggered due to
                            4.12                                                potential land acquisition for small-scale
                                                                                watershed and flood-management investments. A
                                                                                Resettlement Policy Framework will be
                                                                                developed as part of the ESA as exact project
                                                                                locations for these small-scale investments are
                                                                                unknown currently. As part of project activities,
                                                                                any detailed RAPs needed for proposed activities
                                                                                in Phase II will be developed.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International          No               The Tana-Beles basin is a part of the Nile Basin.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                This would require appropriate riparian
                                                                                notification as required by this policy.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               TBIWRDP is an EA Category “B” project given that significant adverse environmental and
                              social impacts are not expected given the nature of the proposed activities that focus on
                              institutional development, watershed and flood management investments, and investment
                              preparation. Potential impacts are all manageable and will be addressed within the project.

                             The safeguards policy concerns vary by project component and none are expected to cause any
                             potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible adverse impacts:

                             • Component A (Sub-basin Planning and Management): During the development of sub-basin
                             development and management plans, it will be important to balance economic, environmental and
                             social factors with a good mix of analysis and stakeholder consultation to achieve sustainable
                             development. Institutional development activities will include relevant activities linked to capacity
                             building for environment and social issues and ensure that institutions responsible for managing
                             development around Lake Tana have the necessary structures, skills and procedures in place to
                             ensure that development is done in an environmentally and socially sustainable manner.


                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                          • Component B (Natural Resources Management in Tana Sub-basin): Most of the proposed
                          interventions are environmentally beneficial or are likely to have insignificant adverse impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Nonetheless, some interventions, especially those linked to watershed management and site
                          selection of structures, need procedures to ensure that they are done with adequate technical
                          (environmental, pesticide management, gabion/check dam construction) knowledge to ensure they
                          achieve their intended objectives as required under OPs 4.01, 4.09 and 4.37. Some activities may
                          also involve limited concerns for involuntary resettlement resulting from land acquisition or
                          restrictions on access to resources that are not wholly communal or which affect specific
                          households more than others. There are no groups in the project area that fall into the WB
                          definition of indigenous peoples. However, project design includes necessary criteria and
                          procedures to ensure that specific needs of vulnerable groups are identified and addressed.

                          • Component C (Growth-Oriented Investment Preparation): Component C was canceled in the
                          third restructuring.

                          • Component D (Project Management): The project monitoring needs to include appropriate
                          environmental and social indicators.

                           The project triggers the OP 7.50 on international waters. The physical activities –watershed
                           development and flood management – have been agreed by the Eastern Nile Council of Ministers
                           (ENCOM) as part of the Eastern Nile Strategic Action Plan (ENSAP) of the Nile Basin Initiative.
                           The GoE is in the process of formally notifying the NBI Council of Ministers through the Eastern
                           Nile Technical Regional Office (ENTRO) regarding the TBIWRDP.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             There are not expected to be significant adverse impacts due to project-related activities in the
                           project area. However, there are a number of activities anticipated in the area that are of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           environmental and social concern – including a Tana-Beles Hydropower diversion tunnel under
                           construction, flow regulation dams on rivers tributary to Lake Tana, the development of intensive
                           irrigated agriculture around the lake, new ago-processing and tannery industries, unplanned
                           fisheries development, and urban development without adequate waste water treatment. The
                           development of sub-basin development and management plans, and preparatory work for growth-
                           oriented investments, under TBIWRDP is focused on shaping basin developments to carefully
                           consider environmental, social, and economic aspects to ensure that proposed investments are
                           sustainable and appropriate instruments are developed for effective Lake regulation. The
                           environment and social instruments also ensure that all activities are undertaken using
                           environmentally sound techniques and to benefit a broad range of stakeholders.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             The project has sought to focus project physical investments (Component B) on sustainable
                           natural resource management – specifically on watershed management and on community-based
                           flood management which are intended to maximize the environmental and social benefits of the
                           project while minimizing any adverse impacts. The preparation of Environmental Management
                           Plans (EMPs), Pest Management Plans (PMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for
                           Component B sub-projects will consider alternatives to avoid or minimize adverse impacts.




                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment   of borrower
                            An Environmental          capacity
                                                and Social      to plan and
                                                            Management      implement
                                                                         Framework      the measures
                                                                                     (ESMF)           described. Policy
                                                                                              and a Resettlement
                           Framework (RPF) were prepared for TBIWRDP (integrating environmental and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessments and frameworks developed as part of the preparation of the physical interventions –
                           watershed development and flood management). As needed, they prescribe the preparation of
                           Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), Pest Management Plans (PMPs) and Resettlement
                           Action Plans (RAPs) for Component B subprojects by the responsible regional bureau. Gabions/
                           check dams for gully reclamation and flood management works will be designed by qualified
                           engineers. The ESMF also mandates including environmental and social issues in the development
                           of the Tana and Beles Sub-basin Integrated Water Resource Development Plan during project
                           implementation (Component A), as well as the preparation of EAs and RAPs during the
                           preparation of capital investments for the second phase of the project (Component C - which was
                           canceled in the third restucturing).

                           The borrower has limited capacity to implement safeguard policies, though the regional
                           environment bureau (EPLAUA) has staff trained and experienced in the relevant disciplines and
                           procedures. As described in the ESMF and RPF, TBIWRDP will provide training and capacity
                           building to support implementation of the safeguards instruments, especially for Components B
                           and C. On Component A, TBIWRDP will provide long-term technical assistance to support the
                           plan development process, in particular its environmental and social aspects.

                           The ESMF/RPF documents were disclosed in the Bank and in the country on February
                           8, 2008.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Preparation of the sub-basin plans in Component A will be a highly consultative process on all
                           dimensions of the plan, including environmental and social issues. This process will include
                           government and private stakeholders at the national, regional and local levels. The development of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           sub-projects in Component B will also involve consultations with local people during sub-project
                           planning, design and implementation, including the safeguards aspects. The social analysis
                           completed for the flood and watershed activities involved participatory methods and ensure that
                           project design takes into account the different needs of community sub-groups. M&E will also be
                           done through beneficiary participation to ensure adequate consultation for future investment. The
                           safeguards instruments have been developed through consultation and have been disclosed as
                           required.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank
                           Date of submission to InfoShop
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                          Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process


                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                              Date of receipt by the Bank
                              Date of submission to InfoShop
                            "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Comments:
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS


                                                                        Page 8 of 9
                         Task Team Leader: Catherine Signe Tovey
                         Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 18-Sep-2014
                         Coordinator:
                         Practice Manager/   Name:                               Date:
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              Page 9 of 9
