                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC7613

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Africa                           Project ID:      P147674
                            Project Name:       Regional Sahel Pastoralism Support Project (P147674)
                            Task Team           Christian Berger
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           12-Jan-2015                      Estimated        15-Apr-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTA1                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Animal production (60%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%)
                            Theme(s):           Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Regional integration (20%), Rural
                                                policies and institutions (20%), Other environment and na tural resources
                                                management (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    250.00                      Total Bank Financing:        250.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   250.00
                              Total                                                                         250.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           17.     The proposed Project Development Objective is “to enhance livelihood resilience of
                           pastoralists in cross-border drought prone areas of selected countries”. This will be achieved through
                           a combination of (i) policy reforms, (ii) capacity building, and (iii) investments.

                           18.     The resilience of a household depends primarily on the options available for making a
                         living . Livelihood resilience under PRAPS is defined as: (i) sustained and maintained assets of
                         pastoralists; (ii) sustained and maintained means of making a living; and (iii) strengthening of
                         livelihood activities and income.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         19.      Project Beneficiaries: the main beneficiaries will be pastoralists in Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali,
                         Mauritania, Niger and Senegal; some specific trans-boundary geographic areas will be prioritized in
                         each of these six countries. It is expected that the project will directly benefit 800.000 households
                         (110,000 in Burkina Faso, 150,000 in Chad, 130,000 in Mali, 160,000 in Mauritania, 150,000 in
                         Niger and 100,000 in Senegal) whose livelihoods mainly rely on pastoral activities, including but not
                         limited to livestock keeping, processing or marketing. Secondary beneficiaries will be services
                         providers (both public and private), as well as national and regional institutions. The RECs
                         (ECOWAS/WAEMU) and CILSS will be major institutional beneficiaries of this project, aside of the
                         OIE/CRSA (Regional Animal Health Center, based in Bamako) and other regional coordinating
                         partners at technical level. It is expected that the PRAPS, together with other major partners (EU
                         cooperation, AFD, Arab funds,…), will align to strengthen coordination and monitoring capacities
                         within the Sahel under the harmonized approach of the AGIR partnership.
                         C. Project Description
                         22.     The Nouakchott Declaration on Pastoralism is the cornerstone of PRAPS and sets the higher
                         level objective of “securing the lifestyle and means of production of pastoral populations and
                         increasing the gross output of livestock production by at least 30 percent in the six Sahel countries
                         over the next five years, with a view to significantly increasing the incomes of pastoralists within a
                         period of 5 to 10 years”.

                         23.      The Declaration calls for ambitious collective commitments of all stakeholders to: (i) make
                         progress towards a medium-term program of action, (ii) build a solid alliance by pooling expertise
                         and resources together, (iii) create a multi-actor platform to enhance the existing frameworks for
                         concerted action, (iv) accelerate the formulation, financing, and implementation of national, multi-
                         country, and cross-border programs. Also, it underlines critical modes of action: (i) act under the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         political leadership of ECOWAS / WAEMU (plus Chad and Mauritania), with operational
                         management under the technical arm of CILSS, (ii) seek complementarities and alignment of support
                         towards national priorities (determined through participatory and inclusive mechanisms), (iii) put
                         emphasis on the regional dimension of actions to be carried out in priority and comply with the
                         subsidiarity principle, and (iv) engage on the long term.

                         24.      The Nouakchott Declaration considers three simultaneous lines of action encompassing (i)
                         institutional supports, (ii) political reforms, and (iii) strategic investments. It also elaborates on the
                         main technical pillars and scope of operational programs: i.e. (1) Enhancing production services, (2)
                         Improving the competitiveness of the livestock sector and market access, and (3) Strengthening the
                         security of the assets, rights, and lifestyles of pastoral people, and providing access to basic services,
                         and political inclusion.

                         25.      On this basis, the World Bank has expressed its willingness to jumpstart the formulation of a
                         regional project in order to meet the objective of making rapid progress in securing pastoral
                         activities, increasing the economic weight of the livestock sector, and sustainably raising the incomes
                         of Sahel pastoral groups. As a direct follow-up and with World Bank support, the CILSS organized a
                         regional workshop in January 2014 to engage momentum for PRAPS preparation and agree on the
                         project concept.
                         26.     PRAPS will be a US$250 million program to support/scale-up selected activities within the
                         six countries that have already proven their capacity to support pastoralist groups and enhance their
                         regional integration, and that are recognized throughout the region to show potential for significant
Public Disclosure Copy




                         spillover effects. The program will build a solid alliance for pastoralism support by pooling the
                         expertise and resources of various actors (bilateral and multilateral technical and financial partners,
                         governments, the private sector, and pastoral civil society organizations). This support will be
                         aligned with and complement country priorities, while also taking into account the regional dynamics
                         of actions to be carried out; this will be achieved in full compliance with the subsidiarity principle.
                         The program will also enhance the existing frameworks for concerted action, in order to create/
                         consolidate a multi-actor platform enabling sustainable actions for the promotion of pastoralism.

                         27.      In order to meet already identified challenges and take advantage of future opportunities, it is
                         essential to hasten the pace of evolution in sector policies aimed at (i) strengthening the regional
                         economic integration organizations (WAEMU/ECOWAS) in their role as facilitators and regulators
                         of cross-border movements and trade, (ii) applying revised or new land-ownership frameworks that
                         secure access to resources, (iii) systematically including the concerns of pastoral populations in
                         decentralization legislation, (iv) bringing coastal countries (market outlets) into discussions on
                         pastoral policies, mobility, trade issues for animals and their products (including imports) and on
                         sector taxation.

                         28.       Key problems addressed: the PRAPS intends to address coherently a set of fundamental
                         problems weakening the resilience of pastoral groups and impeding the development of pastoralism
                         production systems. Aside from the low reliability of some basic data regarding pastoralism in the
                         Sahel, the key problems identified are: (i) weak productivity due to inadequate access to services and
                         inputs essential to pastoral system (including veterinary services, water availability & weather data,
                         herd and rangeland management practices, nutrition and genetics, credit, market information and
                         advisory services adapted to mobile communities); (ii) lack of national and regional level
                         cooperation, particularly for disease control, cross-border movements of herds and flocks, and trade
                         facilitation; (iii) lack of recognition and of protection of the fundamental concept of mobility,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         including weak property rights and land tenure security; (iv) increasing vulnerability due to increased
                         risks (climate change, animal diseases including zoonoses, economic hazards, conflicts/security); and
                         (v) lack of access to basic services (health, education) and social safety nets.

                         29.    Project Description: in compliance with Client countries’ NAIPs, the ECOWAP/RAIP, and
                         the AGIR roadmap, it is envisaged that the proposed PRAPS will have the following five
                         components:

                         (i)      Component 1: Enhancing production services for Animal Health (indicative US$60 million).
                         Drawing upon the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE) extensive preparatory work with
                         each of the 6 countries and at ECOWAS regional level , Bank support will help provide critical
                         animal health services by: (a) strengthening Veterinary services (public and private) through
                         investments, trainings, better organization, legislation and structuring assistance, with a particular
                         emphasis on actions impacting cross-border trade; (b) promoting sub-regional cooperation with
                         regard to animal health; (c) gradually bringing national veterinary services up to the standards of the
                         OIE; (d) strengthening regional harmonization and cooperation in surveillance and control of
                         regional trade-related priority diseases (including undertaking region-wide major vaccination
                         campaigns). This includes accelerating reforms to ensure improved governance of animal health
                         services to producers (including improving cost recovery and strengthening the role of the private
                         sector). Operators involved in providing these services will be strengthened in their ability to meet
                         producer demand in terms of quality and quantity.

                         Under the overall PRAPS coordination executed by CILSS, the Regional Animal Health Center
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (CRSA-Bamako) will be coordinating activities for Component 1, with technical assistance from the
                         OIE
                         (ii)     Component 2: Enhancing production services for Natural Resources Management (indicative
                         US$60 million). This component will support some of the below clusters of action (to be determined
                         during project preparation), specifically where Bank assistance would provide a critical advantage or
                         be particularly sought:
                         a.       Advisory support and action-research, which should rely on existing public structures while
                         making the most of the potential of private structures. Strengthened extension services will make it
                         possible to disseminate advice about the sustainable management of pastoral resources (including the
                         use of information technologies for early warning systems, the dissemination of technical itineraries
                         providing innovative rangeland management), improve livestock husbandry practices (possibly also
                         including animal genetics and feeding/nutrition), and/or enhance the complementarity between the
                         pastoral systems and the more input intensive livestock fattening systems.
                         b.       Support to the management of transhumance corridors, enhanced organization of rangeland
                         users, and conflict resolution mechanisms.
                         c.       Support to economic investment in local production (through improved temporary shelter for
                         transhumant livestock and breeders, for example).
                         d.       Access to water, via significant investments in pastoral hydraulics based on locally
                         negotiated master plans, while carefully taking possible impacts on pasture management into
                         account.
                         This also includes accelerating reforms to ensure improved governance of critical natural resources
                         and of services to producers (including improving cost recovery, strengthening the role of the private
                         sector, as well as ensuring management and coverage of the maintenance costs for all equipment,
                         according to best practices). Organizations involved in providing services will also be strengthened
                         in their ability to meet producer demand in terms of quality and quantity.
                         Based on the type of activities to be carried out, the most relevant regional technical operator will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         determined during PRAPS preparation to oversee Component 2, under the overall PRAPS
                         coordination executed by CILSS.

                         (iii)     Component 3: Improving livestock sector competitiveness and market access (indicative US
                         $40 Million). In order to take full advantage of the increased demand for animal products, the
                         program will seize possible productivity gains and encourage the fair and equitable sharing of the
                         added value within the animal value chains. In particular, this may involve (activities to be
                         selectively determined during project preparation):
                         a.        Strengthening all actors along the value chains (including farmers’ organizations and their
                         umbrella organizations, traders' associations, market managers, butchers’ and tanners’ associations,
                         etc.), as well as coordination among actors, in particular by establishing or strengthening sustainable
                         inter-professional organizations with the common goal of increasing the efficiency of every actor and
                         improving the quality of end products.
                         b.        Assistance in making structural investments in infrastructure all along the value chains, in
                         particular as concerns the transport of animals and animal products, updating sanitary standards and
                         processing methods (slaughtering, butchering, and preserving the cold chain). Private sector
                         commitment (through co-financing and management) will be systematically sought, with the same
                         common goal of increasing profit margins and improving product quality.
                         c.        Developing regional cooperation to facilitate trade in animals and animal products,
                         monitoring cross-border movements, issuing health certificates, establishing a suitable and regionally
                         harmonized fiscal system, facilitating trade of goods and services (through mobility rights), and
                         national compliance with regional legislation.
                         d.       Re-activating the technical and organizational dynamics of innovation for collecting,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         processing, and preserving animal products by means of private investment assistance, in particular
                         for the purpose of creating downstream value chain jobs.
                         e.       Facilitating access to new remunerative markets by promoting awareness of these markets
                         (conducting research, monitoring flows, observing prices, developing information systems, and
                         encouraging mobile phone operators to cover the entire pastoral area), and by supporting
                         stakeholders’ training in order to reach new export markets (increased awareness of trade norms and
                         rules related to the export of animal products, etc.).
                         Based on the type of activities to be carried out, the most relevant regional technical operator will be
                         determined during PRAPS preparation to oversee Component 3, under the overall PRAPS
                         coordination executed by CILSS.

                         (iv)     Component 4: Strengthening the security of the assets, rights, and lifestyles of pastoral
                         people, and providing access to basic social services and political inclusion (indicative US$60
                         Million). To this end, the project will select activities within the following cluster, generally aiming
                         to (to be determined during project preparation):
                         a.       Operationalize early warning and rapid intervention systems by (a) improving existing
                         information and early warning systems; (b) creating indicators specific to pastoralism; and (c)
                         preparing emergency intervention plans (including monetary reserves and feed stocks).
                         b.       Promote the diversification of income sources for pastoral populations, in particular by
                         implementing specific measures promoting women, the youth, and refugees/IDPs through training
                         programs, micro-investment, and/or access to credit.
                         c.       Strengthen the management of conflicts (through prevention and resolution) related to access
                         to resources (including rangelands, water, and land tenure), not only by acknowledging local
                         authorities and local negotiation, but also by speeding-up development and enforcement of legal
                         frameworks (such as pastoral codes and land tenure reform).
                         d.       Promote approaches based on rights, in particular for access to land tenure, for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management of rangelands, and for mobility, but also social services so as to ensure pastoral mobility
                         and the sustainable use of natural resources for pastoral purposes.
                         e.       Accelerate the political inclusion of pastoral groups through: (a) mainstreaming of
                         pastoralism in development policies, projects, and programs; (b) the recognition of the legitimacy of
                         traditional pastoral institutions; (c) the inclusion of pastoralists in participatory and collaborative
                         decision-making processes set-up by the decentralized local authorities.
                         f.       Increase the access of pastoral populations to basic social services (including human health,
                         education, and drinking water) via an ambitious program technically adapted to mobile populations,
                         and by taking account the needs of pastoral groups, particularly those of women and children
                         (including refugees and IDPs).
                         Based on the type of activities to be carried out, the most relevant regional technical operator will be
                         determined during PRAPS preparation to oversee Component 4, under the overall PRAPS
                         coordination executed by CILSS.

                         (v)       Component 5: Project management/administration and capacity building at regional and
                         national levels (indicative US$30 Million). This component would focus on all aspects related to
                         overall project management, including fiduciary aspects, M&E, knowledge management,
                         communication and the monitoring of safeguards mitigation measures. It will also care for some
                         critical cross-cutting institutional strengthening and training needs identified at national and regional
                         levels, on top of specific technical capacity building activities undertaken within the above four
                         technical components.
                         a.       National level Project Management, Institutional Support/Capacity Building, M&E,
                         Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication: the Ministries in charge of implementing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the project in the six countries will each host a National Project Coordination Unit (N-PCU). The
                         PRAPS will support staff salaries, operating costs and key national studies aiming at preparing or
                         documenting PRAPS’s intervention, as well as inter-ministerial cooperation. At national level, M&E
                         activities will include regular monitoring of implementation performance and results, annual
                         outcome evaluations, annual thematic studies, technical audit of infrastructures, and case studies.
                         Some cross-cutting specific training may also be done at national level .
                         b.       Regional level Coordination/Management, Institutional Support/Capacity Building, M&E,
                         Learning, Knowledge Management and Communication: the PRAPS will help build capacities at
                         ECOWAS/WAEMU and provide technical and investment support to enhance provision of overall
                         coordination services by CILSS (and possibly other cross-cutting regional institutions or
                         organizations relevant to pastoralism development). The project will also assist in supporting a
                         greater engagement and coordination of the six countries into the relevant regional decision and
                         policy-making processes on dry lands and pastoral areas, as well as among regional public and non-
                         public organizations (i.e., livestock traders, pastoralists associations). M&E, cross-cutting knowledge
                         sharing and communication activities will also be supported by PRAPS at regional level. As much as
                         possible, training and learning activities will be done through the development of regional curricula
                         and will be cross-country executed, supported by CILSS and other accredited regional technical
                         bodies.

                         30.      Selection of national projects. Criteria for selecting specific country initiatives would
                         include: (i) proposed activities are among national priorities (part of AGIR resilience roadmap, for
                         example) with proven potential for sub-regional spillover; (ii) clear alignment with regional priorities
                         as defined by the countries themselves; (iii) proven potential to address both immediate and long-
                         term sub-sector needs; and (iv) demonstrated interest by the host country to further scale-up and
                         sustain the activities. Application of the subsidiarity principle will lead to undertake some activities
                         at regional level only.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         31.     Lessons learned to do business differently. The Bank has some history of supporting
                         pastoralism and the livestock sub-sector in the Sahel and worldwide. This has already provided
                         valuable experiences to guide future possible investments, policy reforms and institutional
                         development initiatives. The PRAPS builds upon another sister operation in East Africa , and will
                         soon benefit from a major ESW work on resilience and drylands.

                         32.      Some ICR lessons deriving from past experience include the ability to be adaptive to long
                         term climate change with short term emergency capacity response (i.e. respond to a crisis or drought/
                         emergency), but also integrating conflict resolution into an NRM project component (not making it a
                         stand-alone activity). Also, due to built-in complexity (6 countries) and a vast geographic area where
                         insecurity is a concern, the project calls for sufficient time for activities to be noteworthy and deliver
                         results; this is why the PRAPS expected duration will be 6 years, taking into account that the first
                         year will be mostly devoted to set up and installation of the various teams and MoU involved, both at
                         national and regional level.

                         33.     Another important lesson is that any regional project brings in challenges for reporting when
                         it comes to linking outputs to financing, and the team will ensure that PRAPS tackles these issues
                         adequately. Also, a regional approach requires being innovative and flexible. Recent experience and
                         lessons learned over the last 10 years from development partners (such as AFD, the Swiss
                         Cooperation and others) involved in operations in the Sahel will be taken into account for PRAPS
                         preparation and implementation, as well as possible interactions with other regional operations
                         outside of Africa (e.g. in the case of Mongolia).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         34.      There is a high level of consensus among pastoralism experts and practitioners that the sub-
                         sector requires: (i) an enabling environment (policies, enforced regulations and functioning
                         institutions) which is considered essential for transformation; (ii) functioning national institutions
                         interacting together (public, private & associative) and regional institutions for trans-boundary
                         cooperation (trans-boundary policy definition and enforcement, diseases control, resources
                         management and trade facilitation); (iii) secured existing natural resources (rangeland, water) and
                         animal capital (disaster risk management: diseases, climate/drought); (iv) looking for
                         complementarities between extensive, mixed crop/livestock and semi-intensive production systems;
                         (v) differentiated approaches of the same topics for different production systems (i.e. enhancing
                         productivity per ha in mobile systems, as compared to productivity per animal in sedentary systems) ;
                         (vi) accessing markets (domestic, sub-regional) being critical through a value chain development
                         approach.

                         35.      Government and Donor Coordination. The Nouakchott Declaration set an ambitious but
                         achievable commitment, i.e. the establishment of a Sahel Coalition for Pastoralism, coordinated by
                         CILSS and under the political umbrella of ECOWAS/WAEMU (plus Chad and Mauritania). The
                         coalition aims to spearhead implementation of the pastoralism dimension of the Global Alliance for
                         Resilience Initiative while building on the principles of the N’Djamena Declaration in 2013. It also
                         calls for technical and financial partners to respond to Governments and RECs’ requests to mobilize
                         their resources at the appropriate level and for the required period of time in support of pastoralism in
                         the Sahel and, more generally, of livestock production in the sub-region. The TFRP prefigures
                         PRAPS’ Regional Steering Committee. It is expected that PRAPS implementation will have a
                         catalytic effect on additional support (strong leverage for pastoralism & livestock development) and
                         Donor Coordination.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         36.    Project financing. The Bank is considering contributing about US$250 million for PRAPS
                         implementation, cumulating IDA resources at national and regional levels. Partnerships are
                         envisaged with other donors at both regional and national levels. France has already been approached
                         and showed interest (particularly for complementary support in Chad, Mali, and Niger), as well as
                         Arab funds and the EU (through resources of the 11th European Development Fund).

                         37.     The PRAPS will be structured as a Series of Projects (SoP), through an Investment Project
                         Financing (IPF) for each of the participating countries, which will include a regional overhead at
                         CILSS. As part of the regional eligibility criteria, the PRAPS will avoid funding national-level only
                         investments with World Bank regional resources; instead, it will emphasize funding investments with
                         regional spillovers.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will be implemented in six countries: Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania, Niger and
                         Senegal. Detailed locations of project activities are not yet known, and will be identified during
                         project preparation / implementation.
                         Pastoralism in the Sahel region is however taking place in agro-climatically restricted territories with
                         typical severe physical characteristics: generally poor soils, scarce vegetation, low rainfall, recurrent
                         droughts and occasional floods. The Sahel will undoubtedly be one of the world’s regions most
                           seriously affected by climate change, with major impacts on the availability of water and forage
                           resources.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The proposed project is a regional one to be implemented in six different countries, and the
                           borrower’s institutional capacity for safeguard policies varies from one country to another. Some of
                           the countries have relatively mature environmental ministries and agencies, sufficient staffing and an
                           adequate regulatory framework, while other country institutions are relatively young, understaffed
                           and the legal framework missing important elements (annexes, executive regulations, etc.). The
                           regional structure of the project does however envisage that the Interstate Committee for Drought
                           Control in the Sahel (CILSS) will have an overall operational management responsibility from a
                           technical view point. The Committee has the necessary technical knowledge and expertise in
                           environmental and social issues in the region and, as such, has the technical capacity to identify and
                           flag any safeguards related concerns to the implementation of the safeguards instruments for
                           national-level investments, should any arise during project implementation. The Project also
                           envisages regional training activities to be coordinated and supported by CILSS and other competent
                           bodies, and training Safeguard Policies will be among those activities

                           Each country will be requested to nominate a Safeguards Focal Point at the early stage of
                           preparation, who will be working in close collaboration with the Project’s safeguards specialists. The
                           Safeguards Focal Points will oversee the preparation of the safeguard documents, liaise with local
                           consultants, provide the necessary inputs, and coordinate the organization of the necessary
                           consultations with key concerned stakeholders and the in-country disclosure of the safeguards
                           instruments.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Abdoul Wahabi Seini (AFTSG)
                           Dahlia Lotayef (AFTN2)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The Project is proposed to be classified as
                           BP 4.01                                              environmental category B due to the fact that
                                                                                potential environmental and social impacts
                                                                                related to livestock management, value chains,
                                                                                and NRM are expected to be local, site-specific
                                                                                and easily manageable. These impacts are also
                                                                                expected to be largely outweighed by the
                                                                                proposed improved governance of the critical
                                                                                natural resource. An ESMF will be prepared,
                                                                                consulted upon and disclosed before appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes              Although the project is not expected to
                                                                                intervene in any critically important natural
                                                                                habitat, the exact sites of the proposed
                                                                                investments are not yet known. The impacts of
                                                                                severe climate conditions, insecurity and
                                                                                conflicts situations may lead to expanding
                                                                                                                                 activities in areas requiring specific
                                                                                                                                 management considerations. The ESMF will
                                                                                                                                 include proposed mitigation measures for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 impacts on natural habitats.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            The project does not involve forests or foretsry.

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           Yes                           The Project will mainly promote the use
                                                                                                                                 Integrated Pest Management (IPM) techniques
                                                                                                                                 as opposed to pesticides, but pasture protection
                                                                                                                                 or veterinary services and the fight against
                                                                                                                                 vector-borne diseases may necessitate the use of
                                                                                                                                 chemicals. A Pest Management Plan will be
                                                                                                                                 developed and integrated in the ESMF.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   TBD                           The project is not expected to affect or involve
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         physical cultural resources. Triggering of the
                                                                                                                                 policy will be confirmed closer to appraisal. If
                                                                                                                                 the policy is triggered, the ESMF and work
                                                                                                                                 contracts will include chance-find procedures.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                                                                                 area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           This policy is applicable because the project
                                 4.12                                                                                            investments may support interventions that
                                                                                                                                 could entail land taking or limiting access to
                                                                                                                                 land and other resources. An RPF will be
                                                                                                                                 developed for the six countries. It will be
                                                                                                                                 consulted upon and disclosed before appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project does not involve dams.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Jul-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      As the exact activities and their respective sites are not yet identified an Environmental and
                                      Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared outlining the principles, rules and
                                      procedures to screen, assess, manage and monitor the implementation of the environmental and
                                      social mitigation measures. An Integrated Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be also be developed
                                      and integrated with the ESMF. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will also be prepared.
                                      The project will prepare and disclose these documents at Infoshop in compliance with the Bank’s
                                      Operational Policies and Procedures.

                                      Tentative date for launching these studies is beginning of April 2014.



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:   Name: Christian Berger
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 07-Mar-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Martien Van Nieuwkoop (SM)    Date: 14-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
