                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA1015
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Solomon Islands                    Project ID:    P149282
                            Project Name:      Solomon Islands Rural Development Program II (P149282)
                            Task Team          Erik Caldwell Johnson
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          18-Aug-2014                        Estimated   20-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSURR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (40%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
                                              (25%), General public administration sector (20%), Agr icultural extension and
                                              research (15%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural markets (30%), Rural policies and
                                              institutions (20%), Participation and civic engagem ent (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      45.60           Total Bank Financing:                  9.00
                            Financing Gap:           13.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       7.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              5.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                4.00
                              AUSTRALIA Australian Agency for International
                                                                                                                        12.00
                              Development
                              International Fund for Agriculture Development                                             4.60
                              Total                                                                                     32.60
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?


                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         2. Project Development Objective(s)
                         The proposed development objective for the project is to improve access to basic services in rural
                         areas and the production and productivity of farmers.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         Component 1 – Community Infrastructure and Services. The Project would retain all the community-
                         driven development mechanisms developed and refined during the first phase of the RDP with a
                         number of minor modifications based on implementation lessons and evaluation findings. The
                         subcomponents are:

                         •        Community Development Grants will be delivered in two cycles covering all 172 rural
                         wards. Ward grants will normally be disbursed to communities for agreed priority sub-project(s) in
                         two tranches, the second of which will be a “progress-based disbursement” based on the verified
                         achievement of an agreed milestone from the project work plan. The menu of eligible and ineligible
                         sub-projects types will remain the same as for RDP I, but an effort will be made to ensure that
                         communities understand the full range of options, in particular public economic activities, capacity
                         building and training, very little of which has been prioritized under RDP I.
                         •        Community facilitation and capacity development will continue to provide community level
                         support by Community Helpers (CHs), but approximately half of these CHs will be converted to
                         Technical Community Helpers (TCHs) who will provide engineering and technical services. A
                         partnership with local training providers will be formed to deliver training for CHs, and intensive
                         technical training for TCHs. A pilot social accountability activity utilizing Community Scorecards
                         and drawing on the facilitation skills of Community Helpers will also be carried out focusing on the
                         quality of services delivered by RDP-financed facilities, and beginning with the education sector in
                         collaboration with the Ministry of Education and Human Resource Development.
                         •        Provincial support will be provided mainly by way of Provincial Support Unit (PSUs) in
                         each province and by leveraging the resources and systems of Provincial Government, Constituency
                         Development Offices, and line ministries with staff operating at the provincial level.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Rural infrastructure disaster recovery and resilience support will be provided to the
                         communities in Guadalcanal most badly affected by the April 2014 flash floods. Disaster
                         assessments will be used to identify the most affected communities and each of these communities
                         will receive grants to repair or rebuild damaged infrastructure which receives the highest priority by
                         the community.

                         Component 2 – Agriculture Partnerships and Support. This component aims to increase agricultural
                         production and productivity through improved, climate resilient farming practice, diversification and
                         commercial activity. The subcomponents are:

                         •        Agriculture partnership grants will promote the development of stronger, more profitable,
                         alliances between private sector agribusinesses and smallholder farmers. Such partnerships will
                         provide for financing, business development services, market linkages, capacity building and policy/
                         institutional support. Partnerships must include smallholders and measures that assist them to
                         improve their productivity and connection to markets in order to qualify for support. Partnerships
                         may also include agricultural input suppliers, traders, agents, financial institutions, service providers,
                         government agencies, NGOs, CSOs, transporters, processors, exporters and end-users. Partnerships
                         may be based on one or more agricultural or livestock commodities.
                         •        Agriculture Supplemental Equity Facility (ASEF) grants will re-activate the SEF activity
                         which was created under RDP I. The facility would be accessed through the commercial banks for


                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                         projects in which the borrower contributes 20% of the cost, and the bank is prepared to lend 60%.
                         The remaining 20% will be financed by a SEF grant to the borrower. Eligibility would be limited to
                         enterprises engaged in the agriculture sector (broadly defined, including primary production as well
Public Disclosure Copy




                         as other activities in the value-chain).
                         •        Agricultural commercialization will strengthen the enabling environment for development of
                         the agricultural sector through support to the ongoing Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAL)
                         restructuring and capacity building process, direct support to farmer groups (in particular, women
                         farmers), improved industry coordination, and adaptive research (focused mainly on cocoa and
                         coconut).
                         •        Agriculture and livestock disaster recovery and resilience will help to replace agriculture and
                         livestock assets (in particular, pigs and poultry), repair or replace agriculture and livestock
                         infrastructure in Guadalcanal communities affected by the April 2014 flash floods. This activity will
                         also develop and deliver training and awareness building materials on climate and disaster resilient
                         farming practices to farmers in all provinces through MAL’s extension services.

                         Component 3 – Program Management. Most of the management activities and associated costs that
                         are specific to each component would be managed within those components. Only core, cross-
                         component management functions would remain under this overarching component including:
                         overall program management, finance, procurement, overall M&E/MIS, and environmental
                         safeguards.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in the 9 provinces including: Makira, Isabel, Guadalcanal, Central,
                         Choiseul, Malaita, Western, Temotu and Rennell and Belona. Choiseul and Temotu are small
                         provinces with a population of approximately 20,000 each and Rennell and Belona have a combined
                         population of approximately 3,000; all four island groups are remote from the capital city, Honiara;
                         while Malaita is the most populated province (population approximately 120,000) and centrally
                         located, and Western province has a population of approximately 60,000.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Ly Thi Dieu Vu (GURDR)
                         Ross James Butler (GURDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The type and scale of physical investments under
                          BP 4.01                                             RDP II will be similar to those implemented in
                                                                              RDP. Under component 1, the potential negative
                                                                              environmental and social impacts related to
                                                                              development of small-scale infrastructure are
                                                                              mostly at small scale, short term and manageable.
                                                                              Under Component II, potential negative impacts
                                                                              associated supports provided to agricultural sector
                                                                              would be the main concerns, particularly when
                                                                              pesticide is supplied to growers, under component
                                                                              2. An Environmental and Social Management
                                                                              Framework (ESMF) was prepared in 2007 and is
                                                                              being implemented in RDP. As the design of



                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                                                                         RDP II is very similar to that of RDP, the existing
                                                                         ESMF has been updated taking into account the
                                                                         lessons learnt from RDP implementation for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         application for RDP II. As the Project may
                                                                         support the purchase of pesticides or leads to
                                                                         increase use of pesticides, a pest management
                                                                         plan has been prepared as part of the updated
                                                                         ESMF.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           RDP II will be implemented in 9 provinces with
                                                                         various types of small-scale infrastructure.
                                                                         Environmental screening introduced in the ESMF
                                                                         ensures project siting avoids critical habitats, and
                                                                         negative potential impacts on other natural
                                                                         habitats such as streams, lakes etc. will be
                                                                         mitigated.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            The size of sub-project sites will be very small
                                                                         and located within existing communities,
                                                                         deforestation for infrastructure development will
                                                                         not happen in RDP II. Component II mainly
                                                                         involves support to farming techniques with the
                                                                         aim of improving productivity of existing
                                                                         plantations rather than expanding the existing
                                                                         cultivation areas. Therefore, the activities under
                                                                         Component II of RDP II are not envisaged to
                                                                         affect forest, forest health and forest-dependent
                                                                         communities.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           Under Component 2, grant recipients may
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         purchase chemicals for enhancing cocoa, coconut
                                                                         or other crop production. The Pesticide
                                                                         Registration Advisory Committee (PRAC), which
                                                                         advises the Registrar, will continue to be used to
                                                                         control pesticide imports, distribution, sale and
                                                                         use. Enforcement of the regulation is the
                                                                         responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture and
                                                                         Livestock. The ESMF includes a Pest
                                                                         Management Plan to ensure safety for humans
                                                                         and the environment associated with the transport,
                                                                         storage, handling and disposal of agricultural
                                                                         chemicals including packaging materials.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           Subproject siting will avoid known physical
                         BP 4.11                                         cultural resources such as structures of spiritual
                                                                         value to communities, objects and structures
                                                                         having high landscape values etc. Chance Find
                                                                         Procedures will be included in the ESMF to
                                                                         address the cases where objects are found during
                                                                         ground excavation.



                                                                 Page 4 of 10
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes           The investments under RDP II, will be carried out
                                                                        in 9 provinces in which Indigenous Peoples are
                                                                        the overwhelming majority of project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        beneficiaries as known for Solomon Islands.
                                                                        Therefore, a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan is
                                                                        not required, but provisions responding to the
                                                                        policy are incorporated into overall project
                                                                        design.

                                                                        The ESMF and Project Implementation Manual
                                                                        currently being used for RDP I will continue to be
                                                                        applied, including an inclusive, participatory
                                                                        community needs assessment process, screening
                                                                        criteria, and forms to document broad community
                                                                        support and consensus on priority sub-projects.
                                                                        Community consultations will be facilitated and
                                                                        documented by suitably qualified personnel in the
                                                                        Project Management Unit. Ongoing monitoring
                                                                        and community consultations by such personnel
                                                                        will assess whether broad community support is
                                                                        maintained during implementation.

                                                                        Each sub-project will be identified and driven by
                                                                        the recipient community which will ensure that
                                                                        Free, Prior and Informed Consultation will be
                                                                        built into each sub-project conception and
                                                                        development and that the subproject will provide
                                                                        benefits that are culturally appropriate to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        people. In addition to the agreed criteria in the
                                                                        ESMF, the community driven nature of the sub-
                                                                        projects will further serve to ensure compliance
                                                                        with OP/BP 4.10.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No            The sub-projects are identified and driven by the
                         4.12                                           recipient communities. Screening criteria
                                                                        including undisputed access to land for the
                                                                        purposes of executing the sub-project are
                                                                        prerequisites to inclusion of sub-project in the
                                                                        program. Land to be used for subproject
                                                                        construction will be voluntarily donated and
                                                                        recorded through signatures by the appropriate
                                                                        customary landowners to a Land Commitment
                                                                        Letter. The process will follow provisions of the
                                                                        Final Draft PIC Voluntary Land Donation
                                                                        Protocol that includes the required and
                                                                        appropriate supporting documentation. No
                                                                        involuntary resettlement as a result of the project
                                                                        is anticipated. Component 2 activities will not



                                                                Page 5 of 10
                                                                               include the conversion of land for the purpose of
                                                                               agricultural use.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No              The Project will not finance construction or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               rehabilitation of any dam. The project is also not
                                                                               dependent on any existing dam or dam under
                                                                               construction.
                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Social and environmental impacts or issues associated with the majority of Component I and II
                              subproject investments are not expected to be significant. They are expected to be temporary and
                              can be mitigated. The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Pest
                              Management Plan (PMP) applied under RDP I have been revised and will continue to be applied,
                              and incorporated into procedures within the Project Implementation Manual.

                             The potential impact of any subproject will depend on the nature, location and specific
                             characteristics of the investment. In most cases, adverse environmental impacts are expected to be
                             temporary and limited to the construction phase. They could include temporary disturbance of
                             drains or streams, noise and dust during construction, small-scale vegetation loss, and pollution
                             from inappropriate construction materials waste disposal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Most adverse impacts will be highly localized (construction work site), temporary, and easily
                              mitigated through appropriate siting of the sub-projects and good construction and operation
                              practices. The subproject screening process described in the ESMF, and the use of standard
                              construction practices and mitigation measures will ensure adequate mitigation of those risks.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              There are no long-term impacts anticipated due to the small scale and dispersed nature of the
                              planned activities.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              To minimize adverse impacts, a screening process and standard mitigation practices will be used.
                              The screening process will include considerations for alternative subprojects and/or alternative
                              siting as appropriate. The procedures to be followed are included in the ESMF. The project
                              promotes good agricultural practices, including disaster and climate resilience.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The project aims to address social and environmental issues through the planning and subproject
                              selection process for each Component. Guidelines for environmental assessment, including


                                                                       Page 6 of 10
                         screening for forests and natural habitats issues, of proposed subprojects and activities managed by
                         the communities and the private sector agribusiness partners have been developed and they are
                         integrated in the planning, selection, appraisal, monitoring and audit at the time of project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         completion.

                         With regards to Component 2, OP 4.09 the Pest Management Plan (PMP) which was implemented
                         under RDP I has been revised and included in the ESMF.

                         Indigenous Peoples: OP/BP 4.10 has been determined to apply. However, since virtually all of the
                         beneficiaries of the project are rural Solomon Islanders who are living on their ancestral lands and
                         are indigenous (as defined by the policy), the project documentation itself constitutes the
                         Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP). Relevant aspects include:

                         (a) Free, prior and informed consultations during preparation: ongoing community consultations
                         were carried out in all Provinces during implementation of RDP I and in preparation for RDP II.
                         Ongoing community subproject monitoring during RDP I and additional consultations for RDP II
                         have been carried out, including by national staff and in local languages, with separate discussions
                         with vulnerable groups (such as women and youth) also carried out.
                         (b) Free, prior and informed consultations during implementation: Most activities under both
                         Components the project are demand-driven and have to follow a rigorous process of identification,
                         appraisal and approval. Consultations will be systematically carried out as part of the project
                         design, and decision-making structures at the community level include representatives of
                         traditional authorities, women, youth and churches. The project will include a comprehensive set
                         of communication activities, with the use of various media to increase outreach (local radio
                         talk-talks, village-based facilitators, NGOs, pamphlets explaining safeguards policies and project
                         mechanisms, etc.) at all stages. This also includes complaint mechanisms and independent
                         monitoring of project activities and processes.

                         Involuntary Resettlement: This policy is not triggered as the project does not finance any activity
Public Disclosure Copy




                         that requires involuntary resettlement, and any “new” land acquisition is done only on a voluntary
                         basis. At the time of detailed subproject design and appraisal, a “Land Commitment Letter” is
                         prepared and signed by two members of the landowning family or clan as well the Chair and
                         Secretary of the Subproject Implementation Committee (SIC). Siting of new infrastructure is
                         voluntary so that existing assets that might be affected by such acquisition would also be governed
                         by the voluntary land commitment and the project would not pay compensation. The Land
                         Commitment Letter is contained in the ESMF.

                         Physical Cultural Resources: The objective of OP/BP 4.11, Physical Cultural Resources, is to
                         avoid, or mitigate, adverse impacts on cultural resources from development projects that the World
                         Bank finances. Cultural property includes monuments, structures, works of art, or sites of
                         significance, and are defined as sites and structures having archaeological, historical, architectural,
                         or religious significance, and natural sites with cultural values. This includes cemeteries,
                         graveyards and graves. The project poses limited risks of damaging cultural property since sub-
                         projects are identified by the communities themselves who are most likely aware of their own
                         cultural property in the area of operation. The Safeguard Screening, Monitoring and Audit Form,
                         which is included in the PIM, includes questions that assist the community in deter mining what to
                         do if cultural property is identified. While there have yet to be any “chance find” (when project
                         activities discover unanticipated cultural artifacts) events during the parent project, a simple set of
                         procedures have been incorporated into the PIM, and provided in the ESMF Supplement, in case

                                                                    Page 7 of 10
                           such events should occur during the construction of sub-projects during the period of additional
                           financing.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The borrower has demonstrated an effective ability to manage environmental and social safeguards
                           under RDP I. A qualified safeguard specialist is in the Project Coordination Unit who is
                           responsible for screening and resolving safeguard issues both prior to a sub-project being included
                           in the program and during sub-project implementation. Through RDP I, the Ministry of
                           Agriculture and Livestock has built its capacity to regulate agriculture-related environmental
                           safeguards, including the formation and regular convening of a Pesticide Registration Advisory
                           Committee (PRAC) to regulate the use of pesticides. Periodic training will be conducted for
                           safeguard and other project staff as well as for funding recipients under Components 1 and 2.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders in the project will be rural Solomon Islanders who are residents of the villages in
                           the wards and provinces covered by the project, specifically farming communities, with respect to
                           Component II. In addition to individual farmers and their associations and farmer groups,
                           stakeholders include agribusiness dealers, national research and extension service providers,
                           national and local institutions.

                           Community consultations are an integral part of the selection and appraisal of subproject activities.
                           Project beneficiaries will participate through public consultation meetings and discussions of local
                           development priorities, representation in ward development committees and provincial
                           development councils, and representation in the Subproject Implementation Committees (SICs).
                           No subproject will be selected that does not flow from this planning process. This includes the
                           social and environmental information, training and the screening process described in detail in the
                           ESMF. Village-based facilitators (Community-Helpers) are trained on the project's environmental
                           and social guidelines. Since environmental and social criteria will be fully integrated throughout
                           the planning, selection and appraisal process, stakeholder participation and information disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           will be assured at every stage of project implementation.

                           Prior to RDP II effectiveness, all safeguards procedures to be followed under the project will be
                           made available to concerned stakeholders through the provincial government in each province and
                           through MDPAC and MAL in Honiara. The EA/ESMF has been disclosed in country on August
                           15, 2014 (and in the Infoshop on August 24, 2014).
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        15-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     24-Aug-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Solomon Islands                                                    15-Aug-2014
                           Comments: Published in the main local newspaper, The Solomon Star, and available in the
                                         Ministry of Development Planning and Aid Coordination, Ministry of Agriculture
                                         and Livestock, and all provincial government offices.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         15-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      24-Aug-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Solomon Islands                                                     15-Aug-2014
                           Comments: As the majority of Solomon Islanders are indigenous a separate Indigenous Peoples
                                         Plan is not needed. The provisions of such a plan are incorporated into the design of
                                         the project and reflected in the Environmental and Social Management Framework.
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         15-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      24-Aug-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Solomon Islands                                                     15-Aug-2014
                           Comments: The Integrated Pest Management Plan is included as an annex to the Environmental
                                         and Social Management Framework.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice        Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated    Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?        Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                       Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a               Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources


                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Erik Caldwell Johnson
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                            Date: 03-Sep-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name:                                                Date:
                            Manager:




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
