                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE

o                 a                                                     Report No.: ISDSC 1131

3   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Dec-2014
    Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Jan-2015
    I. BASIC INFORMATION
      A. Basic Project Data

       Country:           Pakistan                        Project ID:      P151075
       Project Name:      CASA 1000 Community Support Program (P151075)
       Task Team          Salma Omar,Chaohua Zhang
       Leader(s):
       Estimated          30-Apr-2015                     Estimated        30-Sep-2015
       Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
       Managing Unit: GSURR                               Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                          Instrument:
       Sector(s):         Other social services (40%), Other Renewable Energy (20%), General water,
                          sanitation and flood protection sector (20%), Sub-national government
                          administration (20%)
       Theme(s):          Participation and civic engagement (40%), Rural non-farm income generation
                          (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%), Other soc ial development
                          (20%)
       Financing (In USD Million)
       Total Project Cost:      10.00                    Total Bank Financing:           0.00
       Financing Gap:                0.00
          Financing Source                                                           Amount
          Borrower                                                                       0.00
          Community and Capacity Development Support Program                           10.00
          Total                                                                        10.00
       Environmental      B - Partial Assessment
       Category:
       Is this a          No
       Repeater
       project?

      B. Project Objectives
      The Project Development Objective is to support local development through improved access to
      social services and infrastructure for communities living in the Corridor of Impact of CASA 1000
    Transmission Line, thereby generating local support for the construction and long term operation of
    CASA 1000 Transmission Line Project.
    C. Project Description
0
U   Project Concept:
    The Community Support Program (CSP) comprises the third Component of the CASA-1000
    Electricity Transmission Project. The CSP will be implemented by all participating countries of
    CASA-1000 - Pakistan, Afghanistan, Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan. The Afghanistan CSP has
    been approved by the World Bank's Board in March 2014 while those for Kyrgyz Republic and
    Tajikistan will be prepared at a later stage. The four CSPs are linked in their common approach to
    share benefits with the local communities and gain their trust to ensure that the Transmission Line is
    seen as beneficial to them rather than as an intervention viewed with suspicion.

    In Pakistan. the CSP will be financed through a CASA Trust Fund that is operational but not funded
    yet. In case, this Trust Fund is not available to finance the Project, an IDA credit will be sought.

    In Pakistan, the Transmission Line (TL) will pass through approximately 70 km of territory across
    Khyber Agency in Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) and Frontier Region Peshawar in
    Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province (KP) before connecting to a grid station in the vicinity of Peshawar.
    The CASA 1000 Electricity Transmission and Trade Project has designed mechanisms and measures
    to manage the overall security risk for the line construction and operation in the longer term. In
    addition, the CSP will help gain local community support and improve the operating environment for
    the project through local development assistance and benefit-sharing arrangements under CASA
    1000.

    The World Bank's engagement in a range of community-related interventions under various projects
    in several countries including Pakistan has demonstrated the benefits of social support that can
    provide safe access and better operating environment to infrastructure projects as well as contributing
    to local development. Within Pakistan, several projects have included community-based
    interventions to meet the development priorities of local communities who would otherwise be left
    out of project benefits. These interventions have led to strong local support for the infrastructure
    investments. The CSP builds on these experiences by initiating community engagement and
    interventions before the CASA 1000 construction phase begins so that communities are both
    informed and involved in the Project from the outset.

    Project Context:

    The local population of Khyber Agency consists of mainly Afridi and Shinwari tribes. They live in
    their own clearly defined territories or daftar (literally estate) typically delineated by watershed
    boundaries. The constituent sub-groups of these tribes also have a share in the respective tribal daftar
    or estate. In turn each major family or tabar has a share in the dafter of its khel or clan, which then
    distributes individual fields amongst all male adults as their share known as bukhra. Women do not
    have a share.

    FATA is governed under the Frontier Crimes Regulations, which ascribes collective responsibility to
    a tribe or a clan when any of their members act in a hostile or unfriendly manner towards the
    Government or towards persons residing in the settled areas. The people live under their own land
    tenure system, customs and laws, primarily regulated by an accepted code of honor and conduct, the
    Pukhtoonwali. Important tenets of this code include, revenge (badal) and hospitality (melmastia).
    Revenge is an obligation for the entire clan to seek to redress the harm caused to any one of its
    members by conducting action against the person inflicting the harm or anyone else from that
    person's clan. Hospitality is connected with protection of the guest. Anyone can claim asylum from
    the host irrespective of their previous relationship.
o

    The collective Jirga or council with representation from all constituent sub groups adjudicates
    amongst the constituent groups or makes all the decisions regarding collective matters. The Jirga is
    an assembly comprising of all members and interests of the community, either directly or through
    representation chosen at the spur of the moment, or of all the stakeholders of a particular issue for
    which it is convened. A Jirga adjudicates, keeping the standards of Pukhtunwali and the Pashtun
    customs in view, on any matter that concerns either individuals or the collectivity. It takes decisions
    on the basis of consensus and customarily has the sanction of the community to get its decisions
    implemented.

    The local culture is marked by extremely low visibility of women in public life, or in local or district
    level markets. The tribal inheritance law or rules do not provide a share in the inheritance to women.
    The tribal tradition puts the entire burden of water collection and use, housekeeping, child care and
    management of the house as the responsibility of women. Women seem to be able to move within the
    confines of the village estate, collecting fire wood, fodder for animals, drinking water collection but
    they always move with male or female children from their own family or immediate relatives. In the
    entire FATA region it is not a norm for women to directly participate and express their views in
    community meetings. The conservative traditions and social restrictions are major barriers.

    23.      The Political Agent (PA) holds the key in any political or development activity funded by the
    government or any other agency in the tribal areas. The PA works as the coordination officer of the
    Federal Government in the Federal Administrative Tribal Area (FATA). PA officer steers all
    development activities, deals with the tribal Maliks and political leaders. The PA is also responsible
    for the security of all operating departments and their staff in the Agency. He regulates the Frontier
    Crimes Regulation which places 'collective responsibility' on the community for any attrition
    against state personnel, transportation, and installation in their area. For development activities he is
    responsible to approve, assess and certify the relevance of projects.

    A background study was conducted under CASA-1000 to assess the situation of local communities
    along the route of the TL. The study developed a socioeconomic profile of the population along the
    corridor, disseminated basic project information, carried out consultations with the communities over
    their development challenges and priorities and assessed local expectations from the project. The
    study identified the total population in the Transmission Line route to be around 0.114 million people
    consisting of roughly 8,650 households. The estimated population in the COI is approximately
    68,000, which translates into roughly 60% of the population of the TL route. The study conducted an
    assessment of 13 of 27 villages falling within the entire route of the TL.

    The household survey conducted for this study revealed a low literacy rate (37% overall) with most
    of this (93%) classified as functional literacy. There is a wide gender gap in literacy with male
    literacy at 59% and female at 14%. Using the community's own wealth ranking criteria, the survey
    estimated that 62% of the sample population to fall within the low income (49%) and very poor
    (13%) category. Income sources are diversified with main sources being agriculture (16%
    households), business and self-employment (27%), public sector employment (11 %), private sector
    employment (11 %) and other (12%). About 2% households have no sources of income.
     Provision and availability of electricity was identified as one of the major issues by residents in the
     household survey. All villages currently are connected with the national grid and officially declared
     as "electrified or connected". However, the term "connected village" does not necessarily mean that
     all households are served with the service or benefit from electricity on a continuous basis.
O
     Shortages, stoppages of electricity supply and low voltage were the major issues raised by the
     residents. Low voltage in peak hours (5-10 pm) is reported as a major problem especially during the
     hours when households need electricity the most for lighting, cooking, heating in winter and electric
     fans during summer evenings. As the area consists mostly of barren hills and is deficient in
     fuelwood, majority of women use electric heaters, when possible, or dung cakes for cooking.
     Shortage and low voltage of electricity in the peak hours causes great problems for women at
     household level.

     Provision of safe drinking water and sanitation were other issues raised by the households. The
     current average in-house availability of safe drinking water in the COI villages is 57%. During the
     background study, both men and women emphasized access to safe drinking water as a major
     priority. Only 24% of the households reported in-house pour flush latrine. Alternatively women and
     children use pit latrines and men use open fields.

     Project Description:
     The proposed project will consist of interventions along the following components:

     (i)      Component 1: Social mobilization (US $ 1.5 million): The social mobilization process will
     need to first identify the constituent sub-groups of the village in the COI and work with them as
     CASA Village Committees. A similar approach would need to be followed in the village settlements
     within the TL route that lie in Peshawar District. Village level organizations will be strengthened and
     trained to iden tify and oversee energy and community infrastructure interventions. The women in
     the project area will be carefully approached during the initial stages through women social
     mobilizers to seek their opinions and priorities. Deliberations with the CASA Village Committees
     would need to be regularly shared with women in the households and validated.
o


     The social mobilization approach will ensure that the communities are informed about the Project
oi   and support the design and implementation of the TL. Community level organizations will be an
     important channel for consultations, information-sharing and long-term engagement under the CSP.

     (ii)    Component II: Community infrastructure and services (US$7 million): This component will
     focus on providing access to small infrastructure and making it operational.

     a.       Sub-component 2 (a) - Energy security (US$ 2 million): A range of energy related
     interventions will be undertaken in collaboration with the communities to address their energy needs.
     This will include interventions such as solar energy - successfully implemented in other off-grid
     villages in FATA- as well as other interventions where feasible. Energy needs will be met primarily
     at the household and community level but livelihoods related energy needs will also be addressed
     where clusters at an economic level can serve as channels for infrastructure maintenance. Other
     interventions may include energy conservation measures related to cooking and heating needs.

     b.       Sub Component 2 (b) - Community infrastructure (US$ 4 million): The communities also
     identified the need for clean drinking water, sanitation and schools as other priorities. The project
     will identify suitable schemes at the village and cluster level. Initial consultation with communities
     has identified about 5 schools for girls and 7 water supply schemes for quick investment. Further
    schemes will be assessed and approved in consultation with the communities. As far as possible,
    existing schemes will be rehabilitated and community arrangements created for sustainable O&M. A
    percentage of funds available for each village will be allocated to infrastructure schemes identified
    by women.
o

    c.        Sub Component 2 (c) - Support for services, inclusion of other communities and other
    priority needs (US $ 1 million): Under this sub-component the Project will invest in operationalizing
    services that are critical for functionality of community infrastructure. Background studies identified
    issues such as the existence of schools but with no teachers assigned by the education authorities.
    Such services will be operationalized in association with other development partners such as PPAF
    partners operating in the area while efforts are made to ensure continuation of sources through
    requisite government departments. Other interventions will include measures to facilitate access to
    services e.g. transport and other needs. Further, priority asset building measures will be undertaken
    for extremely poor people, particularly those who relocate back to their homes. Other interventions
    related to relocation of displaced people will be also be considered within the resource constraints.
    The Project will also consider extending its interventions to communities outside the COI according
    to availability of funds and to ensure wider benefit sharing and social cohesion. Clear criteria will be
    developed for this extension. Other efforts for wider benefit sharing will consist of close
    coordination with other MDTF projects and interventions by development partners to ensure that
    duplication is avoided and communities outside the COI also continue to be served by development
    interventions. This component will be flexible and will assign funds on a demand basis according to
    critical and emerging community needs.

    (iii)    Component 3 -Project Implementation Support, coordination and communication (US$ 2
    million): This will include a range of functions for not just Project Management, monitoring and
    evaluation but also (i) communication at all levels including with local communities, other
    stakeholders and CSPs across participating countries (ii) coordination, lesson learning and synergy of
    interventions with other CSPs, with implementation entities for CASA: 1000 Transmission Project
    and with other development partners, projects operating in KP and FATA and other initiatives (iii)
    design of financial mechanisms for supporting community-related interventions after the construction
    phase and (iv) third party validation.
    D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
    analysis (if known)
    The project will be located partly in Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) and partly in the
    province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP). The Transmission Line route will cover about 71 km divided
    into roughly three sections:

    *        Section A: Shiekh Mohammad Grid Station to Bara - About 20km, a peri-urban area located
    south-west of Peshawar town. This section is well connected to Peshawar through roads and has a
    better access to services that other sections.
    *        Section B: Jamrud to Haji Ayub Kaley - Around 30 km stretch dominated by the Afridi tribe.
    Largely barren terrain. Main livelihood is transport. The area faces acute water shortages as well
    frequent and long electricity outages.
             Section C: Shiekwal to Torkham - Around 20 km stretch of land partly dominated by the
    Shinwari tribe.

    From the border with Afghanistan the transmission line corridor follows along the foot of the
    mountainous Torkham-Jamrod road. After 55 km it enters a region of flatter topography and
      agricultural areas and finally terminates at Sheikh Muhammadi sub-station in Peshawar. The area is
      generally very dry and poorly vegetated with low biological diversity due to the shortage of water,
      limited rainfall, poor soil and decades of over exploitation by communities. Other than the Bara
      River there are no perennial water bodies within the area. The hills along and in the area are bare,
O
      rocky, precipitous and irregular. Due to overgrazing and excessive exploitation the sparse vegetation
      consists of bushes and shrubs with virtually no important species of trees. The bushes and shrubs do
      provide forage and firewood but are exploited at a pace no longer sustainable resulting in a decline of
      diversity and palatable forage for livestock. No rare or endangered floral species are known to be
      present in the area.
      Preliminary social assessment of 13 out of 27 settlements located in the Project area of the
      Transmission Line indicate that livelihoods among stakeholder communities are classified as
      agriculture (16%), business and self-employment (27%), public sector employment (11 %), private
      sector employment (11 %) and other (12%).

      Stakeholder engagement, communication and grievance reporting regimes would have to be
      additionally sensitive to the social profile of the area and effort would be needed to bring the
      stakeholders on board in terms of compliance with the environmental mitigation measures. Capacity
      building will be needed both with the project proponent and among the stakeholders in order to
      ensure compliance with safeguard requirements.
      The area is not known to be inhabited by Indigenous People. There are no known Cultural/Physical
      Resources in the area. The Project is expected to undertake small-scale land acquisition for
      community infrastructure and energy projects but no involuntary resettlement/land acquisition is
      expected to take place. Land ownership in FATA is on tribal basis. No formal system of land
      ownership or transfer process is in existence. Land issues as well as access is negotiated with the
      relevant tribal elders through the office of the Political Agent. Land will be donated by the
      community for infrastructure schemes and procedures will be in place to ensure that this is done on a
      truly voluntary basis. Third Party Monitoring will be used to assess the implementation of safeguards
      in the Project.
      E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
      An Environment and Social Cell (ESIC) in NTDC will oversee project safeguards compliance from
      the borrower's side. The ESIC has experience of safeguards compliance on a number of large donor-
      funded infrastructure projects. However the Cell is understaffed and short on capacity and resources.
      A capacity building program will be developed and implemented under the overall remit of
      CASA-1000 Project to increase the strength and resource availability at the level of the ESIC to
      ensure satisfactory compliance. At the FATA/KP level, several Bank projects are under
      implementation under the Multi Donor Trust Fund for KP, FATA and Balochistan. These projects
      have led to improved capacity within the respective governments to address social and environmental
      safeguard issues. However, continued effort is needed both at the government and wider stakeholder
      levels on implementation and monitoring of safeguards issues.
      F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
      Mohammad Omar Khalid (GENDR)

    II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
      Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
      Environmental Assessment         Yes            The project activities particularly under Component
      OP/BP 4.01                                      II may potentially cause low to moderate level of
                                                                                                  negative environmental and social impacts.
                                                                                                  Therefore the OP 4.01 is triggered.
         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                   TBD                        Currently very little information is available on the
                                                                                                  baseline environmental conditions and state of the
                                                                                                  natural habitat.
          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                          No                          No forests are known to exist in the area. Moreover,
                                                                                                  the schemes will be implemented within the
                                                                                                  communities where natural habitat has already been
                                                                                                  modified.
          Pest Management OP 4.09                                     No                          No agriculture related activities are foreseen under
                                                                                                  the Project
          Physical Cultural Resources                                 No                          No known physical/cultural resources exist in the
          OP/BP 4.11                                                                              Project area. However, a procedure for chance finds
                                                                                                  will be included in the ESMF
          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No                          There are no indigenous people living in the Project
          4.10                                                                                    area
          Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                 TBD                        No involuntary resettlement                          is likely to take place.
          BP 4.12                                                                                 Land will be donated by the                          local communities
                                                                                                  according to Bank approved                           procedures. During
                                                                                                  appraisal, this aspect will be                       further assessed.
          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                          No dams related construction is expected to take
                                                                                                  place.
          Projects on International                                   No                          No international waterways are located in the Project
          Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                    site
          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                       The Project is located in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and
          BP 7.60                                                                                 Khyber Agency (in Federally Administered Tribal
                                                                                                  Areas) which are not disputed areas.


O
    III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
         A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Apr-2015
         B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
            The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
              Potential completion date for ESMF - 27th February 2015
    IV. APPROVALS
          Task Team Leader(s):                            Name: Salma Omar,Chaohua Zhang


         Approved By:
          Regional Safeguards                             Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                                                                     Date: 22-Dec-2014
          Coordinator:
          Practice Manager/                               Name: Maria C. Correia (PMGR)                                                                      Date: 06-Jan-2015
          Manager:




    Reminder. The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoSihop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
    form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
