                  INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                           CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                      Report No.: ISDSC9631

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Nov-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
  A. Basic Project Data

   Country:            Armenia                          Project ID:      P146199
   Project Name:       Electricity Transmission Network Improvement Project (P146199)
   Task Team           Artur Kochnakyan
   Leader:
   Estimated       19-Jan-2015                          Estimated         30-Mar-2015
   Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
   Managing Unit: GEEDR                                 Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                        Instrument:
   Sector(s):          Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
   Theme(s):           Infrastructure services for private sector development (80%), Other urban
                       development (20%)
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:           67.00                Total Bank Financing:          50.00
   Financing Gap:                 0.00
     Financing Source                                                              Amount
     Borrower                                                                       17.00
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                          50.00
     Total                                                                          67.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a           No
   Repeater
   project?

  B. Project Objectives
  The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to increase the reliability of the electricity
  supply in the project areas and strengthen the institutional capacity of HVEN.
  C. Project Description
  The project will have two components: Component 1: Strengthening of the Power Transmission
  Network and Component 2: Technical Assistance
Component 1: Strengthening of the Power Transmission Network. This component will finance:

(a) Rehabilitation of the substation of Yerevan Thermal Power Plant (TPP): The substation is owned
by Yerevan TPP and was commissioned in 1965. It served for evacuation of power from the seven
gas-fired thermal units with total installed capacity of 590 Megawatt (MW). In 2010, the Yerevan
TPP also commissioned the modem and efficient Combined Cycle Gas Turbine (CCGT) station with
243 MW of installed capacity. The substation is located in the city of Yerevan on the territory of the
Yerevan thermal power plant (TPP). The substation was commissioned in 1965 and requires urgent
rehabilitation to allow for reliable evacuation of the power generated by the modem and efficient
combined cycle gas turbine plant, which accounts for almost 23% of total annual electricity
generation in the country.

The rehabilitation and restoration of Yerevan TPP substation will include, but not limited to:

*        Restoration and expansion of 220 kV OSY (Open Switch Yard);
*        Installation of two 220/110 kV MTRs (main transformers) and two 110/35 kV MTRs;
*        Complete rehabilitation of 110 kV OSY except some recently installed equipment for GTCC
(Gas Turbine Combined Cycle), which will be diverted;
*        Complete conversion of 35kV OSY to ISY (Indoor Switch Yard) with cubicles and an
associated building;
*        Installation of SCADA (Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition) and replacement of PRs
(Protection Relays) with open architecture, and replacement of house transformers and Alternating
Current/Direct Current (AC/DC) system;
*        Construction of a new building for control rooms in OSY;
*        Construction of 220kV transmission line from 220kV OSY to cut-in location at 220kV
Musaler line (Armenian NPP - Marash SS) with 2km length.

(b) Rehabilitation of Ashnak substation: The substation is owned by HVEN and was commissioned
in 1983. The substation is located nearby the city of Talin in the Aragatsotn marz (region) and is
critical for ensuring reliable power supply to customers in Western and North-Western parts of
Armenia. Its safe operation is also important for reliable evacuation of power generated at nuclear
power plant.

The rehabilitation of Ashnak substation will include, but not limited to:
*       Complete rehabilitation of 220 kV OSY and 110kV OSY;
*       Replacement of two 220/110/10 kV MTRs having boosting transformers with two new
MTRs having boosting transformers;
*       Complete rehabilitation of 10 kV cubicles and an associated building;
*       Installation of SCADA and replacement of PRs with open architecture, and replacement of
house transformers and Alternating Current/Direct Current (AC/DC) system;
*       Construction of a new building for control rooms.

(c) Full or partial replacement of Lori 220 kV overhead transmission line (OTL): The OTL is owned
by HVEN and was commissioned in 1968. It has a length of around 50 km and runs from the
Alaverdi-2 220/110 kV substation in the North to Vanadzor-2 220/110 kV substation located in
Vanadzor city. This OTL is critical for reliable electricity supply to consumers in the North-Eastern
part of Armenia, including large industrial enterprises. Moreover, Lori OTL is important for power
exchange via 220 kV network between Armenia and Georgia.
    The full replacement of Lori line will include construction of an entirely new line mostly within the
    same corridor/right-of-way, which is 50 m in width. The route will be prepared under the ongoing
    feasibility study. In case the feasibility study suggests that only partial replacement is needed, then it
0
    will assume complete replacement of only some sections of the line. After the new line is
    commissioned, the old line will either be dismantled or retained as a back-up line.

    (d) Full replacement of Toumanyan-1 and Toumanyan-2 110 kV OTLs: Toumanyan-1 and
    Toumanyan- 2 (Toumanyan-1, 2) OTLs have a length of around 3 km and run from the Alaverdi-2
    substation to Alaverdi- 1 substation located in Alaverdi town in the North of the country. Those lines
    supply power to large electricity consumers in the North-Eastern part of Armenia. Those lines use
    one set of towers. The full replacement will include construction of an entirely newline mostly within
    the same corridor/right-of-way. The route will be prepared under the ongoing feasibility study.

    Component 2: Institutional strengthening of HVEN and support to Yerevan TPP to implement the
    project.This component will finance:

    (a)       Long-term expansion plan for transmission network considering the generation expansion
    plan of the Government, including load flow and stability studies.
    (b)       Development and adoption of a methodology for prioritization of investments in
    rehabilitation of power transmission network, which will also include an economic framework based
    on cost-benefit analyses.
    (c)       Development and adoption of standardized design templates for substations and power
    transmission lines to avoid versatile solutions offered by various vendors. This will help to avoid
    technical incompatibility issues and will make the operation of the power transmission system more
    reliable.
    (d)       Purchase and operationalization of internationally recognized power transmission line design
    software to allow HVEN to prepare and review transmission line designs in-house.
    (e)       Training to HVEN staff on technical, fiduciary, and safeguards aspects of power
O
    transmission project preparation and implementation.
    (f)       Construction of back-up dispatch center to be used in case of emergencies by the Electric
    Power System Operator (EPSO).
    (g)       Construction of a new administrative building for HVEN.
    (h)       Implementation support to HVEN in technical supervision and other aspects of project
    implementation.
    (i)       Project audits.
    ()        Training to Yerevan TPP staff on technical, fiduciary, and safeguards aspects of power
    transmission project preparation and implementation.
    (k)       Implementation support to Yerevan TPP in technical supervision and other aspects of project
    implementation.
    (1)           Technical, economic/financial structuring studies and other technical assistance required
    for preparation of the new CCGT project at Yerevan TPP.
    D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
    analysis (if known)
    (a) Yerevan TPP substation: The substation is located on the territory of the Yerevan TPP and the
    territory of the substation is fenced. The substation is accessible from the road which passes nearby
    the Yerevan TPP. The land around the substation carries no vegetation. There is limited agricultural
    activity to the East of the substation.
    (b) Ashnak substation: The substation is located nearby the city of Talin in the Aragatsotn marz
    (region) and is critical for ensuring reliable power supply to customers in Western and North-
    Western parts of Armenia. The territory of the substation is fenced. It is accessible by a main road,
O
    which passes nearby the facility. The vehicles can enter the substation using the small road
    specifically constructed for accessing the substation from the main road. The land around the
    substation is used for agricultural activities.

    (c) Lori 220 kV OTL: The line runs from the Alaverdi-2 220/110 kV substation in the North to
    Vanadzor-2 220/110 kV substation located in Vanadzor city. The line runs mostly through the slope
    of a hill and grazing land. At one of the sections, the line runs close to houses in a small village,
    however, at a safe distance (based on visual inspection). There is enough land/area to divert the route
    of the line if needed during the detailed design phase.

    (d) Toumanyan-1, 2 OTL: The line runs from the Alaverdi-2 substation in the North to Alaverdi-1
    substation located in Alaverdi town in the North of the country. The line is very short and uses a
    small number of towers passing through a gorge and then running over a rugged terrain to the final
    destination.

    (e) New administrative building of HVEN: The new building will be located near the existing
    headquarters in the city of Yerevan. The land plot for the potential new building is already owned by
    HVEN and is fenced across the circumference.

    (f) Construction of a back-up dispatch center for the power system. The construction will take place
    within the footprint of existing facility. The territory, where the potential back-up dispatch center,
    will be located is entirely fenced and has an access road from a free-way.

    Some parts of the target infrastructure are placed in towns, some - in the rural settlements, and many
    sections of the OTLs pass over pastures, gorges, and cultivated land plots. None of the known project
    sites are outside the footprint of the existing infrastructure. The physical environment along the
    existing corridors of OTLs is not particularly sensitive or vulnerable, at least not by the construction
    and operation of a transmission line, if due diligence measures are included into design, construction
    and operation of the line. Many of the long term environmental impacts have already occurred (e.g.
    landscape aesthetics, habitat segmentation, bird flight routes, electromagnetic emissions, noise,
    necessity for tower access roads) and will not be significantly influenced by the new line
    construction.

    Currently, the exact land acquisition and resettlement requirements are unknown as the exact location
    of the towers and access roads will not be specified until detailed design is prepared. For the most
    parts the OTLs will be within the existing right-of-way with some bypasses expected to go through
    the community/state-owned land.
    E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
    The project will be implemented by HVEN (for Ashnak substation, Lori OTL, and Toumanyan-1, 2
    OTLs) and Yerevan TPP (for substation at Yerevan TPP).

    HVEN is also the implementing agency for the ongoing Electricity Supply Reliability Project
    (ESRP), under which itwill receive capacity-building on managing environmental and social aspects
    of its activities. HVEN uses consultant services for day-to-day supervision of safeguards under
      ESRP, and also plans to hire a safeguards specialist acceptable to the Bank. Specific implementation
      arrangements for safeguards under the proposed project will be determined during preparation.

      Yerevan TPP has not previously been involved in implementation of a Bank-supported project and
      does not currently have in-house safeguards capacity. Specialist consultants will be hired for the
      project duration to support Yerevan TPP on supervision and oversight of safeguards issues.
O
      F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
      Darejan Kapanadze (GENDR)
      Sarah G. Michael (GSURR)
      Jennifer Shkabatur (GSURR)

    II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
      Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
      Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project is not expected to have significant
      BP 4.01                                             irreversible impact on the natural environment,
                                                          because all proposed works will be undertaken
                                                          mostly within the footprint of the existing
                                                          infrastructure (with exception of bypasses for
                                                          OTLs that may be done to divert the line
                                                          sections away from settlements). Rehabilitation
                                                          of substations may result in generation of
                                                          hazardous waste, such as replaced acid batteries
                                                          and used transformer oils containing CPB.
                                                          Waste disposal is a generally challenging task in
                                                          Armenia due to lack of adequate infrastructure
                                                          and effective control mechanisms. Some types
                                                          of hazardous waste, including replaced acid
                                                          batteries, are being put in storage until the
                                                          Government finds acceptable and affordable
                                                          solutions for their permanent disposal. Site-
                                                          specific Environmental Management Plans
                                                          (EMPs) will assess safety of hazardous waste
                                                          storage facilities suggested for the beneficiary
                                                          substations, will describe any other potential
                                                          risks of their rehabilitation, and will
                                                          recommend mitigation measures most suitable
                                                          in the country context. Due diligence will
                                                          include review of safety checks and status of
                                                          environmental compliance of the Yerevan TPP
                                                          and Armenia's nuclear power generating
                                                          facility, because the project beneficiary
                                                          substations are part of the infrastructure
                                                          evacuating power from these facilities.

                                                          The replacement of target OTLs has the largest
                                                          potential for negative environmental impacts
                                            however they can fairly easily be mitigated and
                                            minimized by adhering to good construction /
                                            housekeeping practices. Rehabilitation of OTLs
o                                           will be carried out in a manner least harmful for
                                            the landscapes that they pass through. If OTLs
                                            or their individual parts are to be dismantled, the
                                            options for its disposal and/or recycling should
                                            be explored and described. Environmental and
                                            Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) report will
                                            provide information on the sensitive
                                            environmental receptors along the OTLs'
                                            alignment and EMPs will prescribe respective
                                            mitigation measures. These should include,
                                            among others, recommended engineering and
                                            technical means for decreasing impacts of
                                            OTLs' construction and operation on the
                                            movement of birds. The project is classified as
                                            environmental category B.
    Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    Not expected to be triggered based on visual
                                            inspection. ESIA report will provide all
                                            information required for the final decision.
    Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The transmission lines under the proposed
                                            project run mostly through open rangeland
                                            covered by grass and low shrubs.
    Pest Management OP 4.09           No    Pesticides are not likely to be required for
                                            vegetation control under the OTLs or any other
                                            purpose related to the construction or operation
                                            phases of the project. This will be confirmed
                                            and noted in the ESIA report.
    Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   No known physical cultural resources will be
    BP 4.11                                 affected by the project. A blue print of action in
                                            case of chance finds will be provided in the
                                            EMPs.
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   As land use, acquisition or resettlement may be
    4.12                                    required during rehabilitation of the OTLs, OP
                                            4.12 is triggered. Substation upgrading is
                                            expected to take place within the existing fenced
                                            footprint of the current substations. A
                                            Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the
                                            project will be prepared. The RPF will provide
                                            detailed guidance and criteria for the
                                            development of site-specific Resettlement
                                            Action Plans (RAPs), which would be prepared
                                            and implemented prior to commencement of
                                                                                                          any investments where resettlement or land
                                                                                                          acquisition was required. The RPF will be
                                                                                                          included as an annex to the project's Operational
                                                                                                          Manual and disclosed in the InfoShop.
          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No
O
          Projects on International                                         No                            The project will have hydrological impacts
          Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            neither on national or international surface
                                                                                                          waters nor on groundwater resources.
          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
          7.60

    III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
         A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Dec-2014
         B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
            The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
              Site-specific ESIA reports and EMPs, or checklist EMPs (for lower-risk activities such as
              construction of new administrative building and back-up dispatch center) and a RPF will be
              prepared, disclosed, and consulted with all relevant stakeholders and finalized before appraisal
              (January 12, 2015).
    IV. APPROVALS
          Task Team Leader:                            Name: Artur Kochnakyan


         Approved By:
          Regional Safeguards Name: Nina Chee (RSA)                                                                                                       Date: 13-Nov-2014
          Coordinator:
          Practice Manager/                            Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (PMGR)                                                                      Date: 06-Dec-2014
          Manager:




    Reminder. The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
    form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
