                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                           ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                   Report No.: ISDSA12232

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Feb-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Jordan                          Project ID:    P153987
                                                     Parent         P132314
                                                     Project ID:
   Project Name:     JO-MSME Development for Inclusive Growth (P153987)
   Parent Project    MSME Development Project for Inclusive Growth (P132314)
   Name:
   Task Team         Sahar Ahmed Nasr
   Leader(s):
   Estimated         23-Feb-2015                     Estimated   04-May-2015
   Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    GFMDR                           Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                     Instrument:
   Sector(s):        SME Finance (50%), Microfinance (50%)
   Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (100%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:       100.00              Total Bank Financing: 100.00
   Financing Gap:              0.00
     Financing Source                                                                  Amount
     Borrower                                                                             0.00
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                              100.00
     Total                                                                              100.00
   Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)



                                           Page 1 of 6
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The objective of the Project is to contribute to the improvement of access to finance for micro,
   small and medium enterprises in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


 3. Project Description
The proposed operation’s development objective is to contribute to an improvement in access to
finance for MSMEs in Jordan and ultimately expand employment opportunities through private
sector development. The recent development in the regulatory space within the financial system that
brought MFIs under the supervision of CBJ will expand the outreach further under the proposed AF
since MFIs will be able to directly access the funds from CBJ towards end beneficiaries. Focus on
expanding the PFI base and MFIs, underserved governorates, and start-ups, has been demonstrated.
The additional loan will ensure wider participation of MFIs, whose client base, are women, start-up
businesses and entrepreneurs. Direct lending from CBJ to MFIs will reduce the interest rate on these
business clients and ensure support to these segments that have shown effectiveness and viability in
terms of job creation, poverty alleviation and presence in the governorates.

In doing so, the operation will ultimately create sustainable private sector jobs, support
entrepreneurship, reduce poverty and contribute to economic growth. The project will also, both
directly and indirectly: (i) strengthen the link between the financing and performance in achieving
sustainable, more inclusive access to finance; (ii) support new approaches to extend MSME finance
on a larger scale; (iii) enhance the banking system capacity to evaluate the effectiveness of its MSE
support; (iv) improve the incentives for banks to expand into MSE lending; (v) design new financial
products, and Islamic products in compliance with Shari’ah; and (vii) ensure better opportunities for
the remote, rural and underprivileged areas to meet citizens’ needs with a special focus on
entrepreneur startup MSMEs, women and youth, and to reinforce existing businesses and establish
income-generating projects with the objective of achieving sustainable and balanced development.

The proposed operation will be a Financial Intermediary Loan (as per the World Bank Operations
Policy Directive OP 8.30) in the amount of US$ 100 million to supplement the base US$ 70 million.
The Bank loan will be a three-tier lending operation channeled through the CBJ—the envisioned
project implementing entity—which will be responsible for communicating the features of the loan
to the financial intermediaries and negotiating loan contracts. The financial intermediaries will then
on-lend to the end beneficiaries (MSMEs).

The operation will be comprised of two main components: a line of credit for microenterprises, and
another for small and medium enterprises. The allocation of funds between the two components will
be determined based on market demand.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented nationwide with focus on all Jordanian governorates.

 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                                             Page 2 of 6
  Hana Salah (GSURR)

   6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
   Environmental Assessment       Yes          The ESMF includes a project screening process to
   OP/BP 4.01                                  reject any subprojects with natural habitats, forest,
                                               cultural resources and/or pest management
                                               applicability. Funded microprojects may include
                                               common negative environmental impacts such as
                                               waste, wastewater, dust, and noise generation, as
                                               well as traffic deviation, and/or occupational health
                                               and safety. It is anticipated that for most sub-
                                               projects with negative impacts identified,
                                               implementation of EMP generic guidelines, or
                                               preparation and implementation of subproject-
                                               specific Environmental and Social Management
                                               Plans (ESMPs), will be sufficient.
   Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No

   Forests OP/BP 4.36             No

   Pest Management OP 4.09        No

   Physical Cultural Resources    No
   OP/BP 4.11
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No
   4.10
   Involuntary Resettlement OP/   No           Population relocation and involuntary land
   BP 4.12                                     acquisition will be prohibited for financing by banks
                                               or other micro-finance institutions to the end
                                               beneficiaries through a negative list in the Operations
                                               Manual. In addition, any construction resulting in
                                               restriction to access of legally designated parks and
                                               protected areas will also be prohibited for financing
                                               by banks and other micro-finance institutions and
                                               included in the negative list in the Operations
                                               Manual. The OM will include a social assessment to
                                               determine any potential safeguards implications and
                                               actions
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No

   Projects on International      No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
   BP 7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management


                                           Page 3 of 6
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
  and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
  Social. The borrower, CBJ, social safeguards institutional capacity has been assessed. Further
  training will be given as needed.

 For a country where MSMEs comprise 97% of private enterprises, there is a huge potential to
 increase the percentage of female and youth entrepreneurship. This is an issue that deserves
 immediate and continuous attention. Although MFIs are targeting female and youth clients, it is
 imperative for a new approach to be implemented to move these two marginalized segments of
 society from the traditional context and sectors they are usually engaged in, into new, developed
 and innovative ones. It is a globally positively validated statement that when women do well, the
 economy does well.

 A social safeguards consultant will be hired to assist CBJ in assessing the social safeguards
 capacity of the banks and MFIs as part of the criteria of selection outlined in the Operations
 Manual. In addition, CBJ will continue to use the original Environmental and Social Management
 Framework (ESMF) developed for the parent loan to ensure social safeguards compliance of
 borrowing banks.

 CBJ will be responsible for additional training of banks and other micro-finance institutions with
 respect to social safeguards issues.

 Environmental. The list of proposed sub-projects, as well as the screening process and monitoring
 and reporting arrangements, will remain the same as the Parent Project. Financed activities in the
 parent project included: small commercial shops (selling pastries and sweets, dairy products,
 household goods, bedding, car accessories, used female clothes, fabrics), carpentry, commuter
 vans, child and special needs child daycare centers, small-scale chocolate production, and
 restaurants. As Additional Financing will involve more financial intermediaries beyond the current
 12 banks, the new banks will need training in the sub-project project screening process. This
 training needs to occur prior to the start of AF implementation. It should be noted that
 environmental safeguards’ performance in the parent project, although adequate to meet Bank’s
 policies, could benefit from additional implementation support.
 No major environmental issues are anticipated. Project activities are not expected to result in any
 potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. Nonetheless, the sub-projects may
 result in minor negative environmental impacts. Such impacts can be effectively mitigated through
 the implementation of the EMSF by CBJ, the proposed implementing agency.

 No additional safeguards are envisaged by the focus on underserved governorates and population
 segments (e.g. women). The current safeguards instruments have been satisfactorily applied in the
 Parent Project and no changes in the safeguards instruments are envisaged for the AF. The sub-
 project financed to date in the Parent Projects have been classified as having minor impacts, and
 have thus either not needed a sub-project EMP or have been able to implement a generic sub-
 project EMP.

 CBJ will need to ensure that the borrowing banks and MFIs apply the EMSF, including providing
 proof of subproject screening, as well as IDA funds will not be used towards the funding of any


                                           Page 4 of 6
 category A type sub-projects or other projects included in the negative list developed for the parent
 project.
 Borrowers institutional capacity for safeguard policies implementation will be assessed and
 supported by the engagement of the PIU at CBJ, in close coordination with the Ministry of
 Environment. The PIU must coordinate closely with the Ministry of Environment to ensure Banks
 and MFIs do not complete the loan procedure before lenders provide copies of relevant
 environmental and social clearances to be retained in their log book file on aggregated
 information, in compliance with the national EIA regulations and the ESMF.
 In terms of reporting on compliance with the ESMF, CBJ has on staff an environmental safeguards
 consultant to undertake an annual environmental compliance and performance audit, which the
 Governor of CBJ will share with the World Bank. In the Parent Project, CBJ reporting to the Bank
 has been quarterly; similarly, the Bank has performed safeguards supervision quarterly. The CBJ
 reporting includes detailed spreadsheets with the number of sub-projects, sub-project level
 classification, and sub-project EA category. This sub-project level information has been cross-
 checked with licensing request log books at the Ministry of Environment in order to ensure the
 client reporting is robust.

 The Parent Project was included in an Internal Audit Department (IAD) review of Financial
 Intermediary (FI) projects conducted in January 2015. Both client and Bank safeguards
 supervision has been satisfactory; the Bank team will improve in documenting and rating the
 Overall Safeguards Compliance and individual OP compliance in the ISRs for the AF..

 The MSMEs risk taking on debt for the first time, not understanding the risks of over
 indebtedness, nor having the know- how capacity to manage their loans. However, these risks
 were appropriately mitigated in the parent project. The banks that the CBJ lent under this project
 had the required experience lending to these groups and other micro-financial institutions. The
 additional financing project phase will attempt to engage directly with MFIs, who must overcome
 this risk through screening clients as per initial and follow-up training. In this manner, the MFIs,
 supported by the safeguards specialist, ensure that are no negative social impacts.

  CBJ will ensure that necessary capacity building on safeguards compliance is provided to the
  banks and MFIs to ensure that the needed documentation on compliance is provided or other
  means as needed in the chain of on-lending to micro enterprises. All training will be based on the
  environmental and social assessment details in the Operations Manual of the parent project, still
  relevant to the Additional Financing.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.



                                            Page 5 of 6
  B. Disclosure Requirements
   Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
     Date of receipt by the Bank                                      24-Oct-2012
     Date of submission to InfoShop                                   26-Oct-2012
     For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      ////
     Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
   "In country" Disclosure
     Jordan                                                           24-Oct-2012
     Comments:
   If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
   respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
   Audit/or EMP.
   If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
   OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    report?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Sahar Ahmed Nasr
   Approved By
   Practice Manager/    Name: Rolf Behrndt (PMGR)                           Date: 24-Feb-2015
   Manager:

                                             Page 6 of 6
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
