                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA7460
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Ethiopia                          Project ID:    P133613
                            Project Name:     Ethiopia Geothermal Sector Development Project (P133613)
                            Task Team         Raihan Elahi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         11-Apr-2014                       Estimated   29-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTG1                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other Renewable Energy (80%), Transmission and Distribution of Electricity
                                              (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       397.70           Total Bank Financing:  176.00
                            Financing Gap:            181.70
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     12.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                            26.63
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                           24.50
                              ICELAND Icelandic International Development Authority                                   3.50
                              IDA recommitted as a Credit                                                           149.37
                              Total                                                                                 216.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)



                                                                     Page 1 of 11
                         The Development Objective of Geothermal Sector Development Project (GSDP) is to develop
                         geothermal resource for electricity generation in Ethiopia.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project intends to develop geothermal resources in Ethiopia to generate electricity in two phases.
                         In the first phase, two potential geothermal sites, Aluto and Alalobad will be developed. These two
                         sites have been selected based on available investigation reports. In Aluto, in addition to 4
                         exploration wells financed by the IDA Cr. 4795-ET, another 22 wells of about 2000 to 2500 meters
                         each in depth will be drilled to produce geothermal steam. A steam gathering steam connecting all
                         active wells will also be supported under the first phase. In Alalobad, approximately 4 wells will be
                         drilled to explore the site and identify its resource potential. In order to support the drilling
                         operations and to allow Ethiopia to build capacity in upstream geothermal development, the project
                         will procure two modern drilling rigs with all accessories and spare parts at the first phase. The
                         project will also support the GoE in developing the legal, institutional and regulatory framework to
                         ensure sustainable geothermal development in Ethiopia. IDA and SREP funding will be utilized to
                         complete the first phase activities, considered to be the most risky phase of a geothermal project
                         development. GoE will have to secure funds for the second phase and is discussing with IDA, GoJ
                         and other development partners in this regard.

                         In the second phase of the project, the steam resources developed and identified in the first phase will
                         be used to generate electricity. Based on current investigation reports, the Aluto site is expected to
                         generate about 70 MW of electricity. In Alalobad, based on the results of the 4 exploration wells,
                         well-head generators will be installed in the second phase.

                         A.      Project Components

                         The proposed GSDP project consists of four primary components, designed to better define the
                         potential of Aluto and Alalobad geothermal sites and to facilitate overall development of geothermal
                         resources in Ethiopia. These components are: (i) Aluto geothermal site development, (ii) Alalobad
Public Disclosure Copy




                         geothermal site development, (iii) Drilling rigs, associated accessories and spare parts, and (iv)
                         Legal, institutional and regulatory framework development.

                         Component 1: Aluto Geothermal Site Development. (US$ 126.2 million: IDA US$ 92.2 million,
                         SREP US$ 24.5 million, GoI US$ 1.5 million, GoE US$ 8.0 million)

                         This component will finance goods and services including drilling consumables and associated
                         materials, the services of drilling contractors and a supervision engineer, to drill and test 22 wells and
                         design and construct a steam gathering system connecting the producing and injection wells with the
                         power plant. The IDA and SREP funds will jointly finance component 1. GoI and GoE will
                         respectively finance consulting services and project management activities of component 1 through
                         parallel financing.

                         The Aluto geothermal site is located in Oromia Regional State. The project site is about 200 km
                         South-East of Addis Ababa, and is conveniently located in between the Lake Ziway and Lake
                         Langano. A pilot power plant, established in 1998, has been generating approximately 3 MW of
                         electricity at this project site. Financing from IDA and SREP will be used for production drilling and
                         testing activities in order to establish the economic viability of the geothermal resources at the Aluto
                         geothermal site.


                                                                       Page 2 of 11
                         Component 2: Alalobad Geothermal Site Development. (US$ 25.8 million: IDA US$ 19.8million,
                         GoI US$ 2 million, GoE US$ 4.0million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will finance goods and services including drilling consumables, associated
                         materials, drilling contractors, supervision engineer, etc. to drill and test 4 wells. Financing from IDA
                         will be used for production drilling and testing activities in order to establish the economic viability
                         of the geothermal resources and finalize a feasibility study of the Alalobad geothermal site. The GoI
                         and GoE will respectively finance consulting services and project management activities under
                         component 2 through parallel financing.

                         The Alalobad geothermal site is located in Doubti Woreda, Afar Regional State. The project site is in
                         the North Eastern part of Ethiopia and is about 600 km from Addis Ababa. The Alalobad project area
                         is situated within the Tendaho Graben which is spread over an approximately 100 square kilometer
                         area, containing potentially several distinct geothermal reservoirs.

                         Component 3: Drilling Rig, Associated Accessories and Spare Parts. (IDA US$ 61 million)

                         This component will finance goods in particular two full size modern diesel electric drilling rigs with
                         all associated equipment, accessories for directional drilling and both over pressure and under
                         pressure drilling and a complete inventory of spare parts. The availability oftwo modern rigs will
                         allow for interchangeability of crews, minimize down time due to equipment failure and provide
                         equipment with capability that far exceeds that which is now available.

                         Component 4: Legal, Institutional and Regulatory Framework Development. (IDA US$ 3 million)

                         This component will finance consultancy services for the development of the Geothermal
                         Development Policy and related legislation as well as technical assistance and advisory services as
                         well as capacity building support to enhance the geothermal development capacity of stakeholder
                         institutions, including the EEP, the GSE and the MoWIE. This component will help Ethiopia
Public Disclosure Copy




                         promote private sector participation in geothermal development by building capacity in geothermal
                         technical issues, reservoir management, supervision, monitoring, pricing, licensing and concessions.

                         B.          Project Financing

                         In addition to IDA, the first phase of this proposed project will be co-financed by: the SREP, the GOI
                         and the GoE. The total available fund for the project is about US$ 216 million which meets the total
                         cost of first phase. The overall (first and second phase) project cost including the drilling of wells,
                         steam gathering system, power plant and transmission connection, for the two project sites is
                         estimated to be about US$ 398 million. Thus the second phase of the project would require additional
                         US$ 182 million. The GoE, after acquiring relevant information from the first phase development,
                         will secure financing for the second phase development from IDA, GoJ and other development
                         partners. In this connection, the GoJ has indicated its interest to extend a soft loan to the GoE of up to
                         US$ 110 million to finance the power plant of about 70 MW at Aluto project site.

                         C.      Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design

                         The project design incorporates lessons learned from the Bank’s substantial engagement in the
                         country, and more generally from the Bank’s wide experience with geothermal project development
                         globally. The experience of the exploration drilling in Aluto also benefitted the design of the

                                                                       Page 3 of 11
                         proposed project. GoE has decided to qualified and experienced drilling contractors under the
                         proposed project to operate the drilling rigs and drill 22 wells in Aluto..
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Public sector participation is critical to mitigate high upfront costs and risks associated with
                         geothermal development: Costs for exploration and drillings are significantly higher for geothermal
                         energy than costs associated with the development of other traditional and renewable energy sources.
                         The Bank has been supporting the GoE since 2010 in the development of its geothermal resources,
                         through investments in exploration and test drilling through the Energy Access Project Credit no.
                         37120. Furthermore, the Bank has also supported the GoE in mobilizing ‘risk capital’ to support the
                         development of the geothermal sector via the Scaling up Renewable Energy Program (SREP). For
                         the Aluto project site, the GoE plans to develop the site with public sector financing, including
                         constructing the planned 70 MW plant with financing support from GoJ. While for the Alalobad site,
                         the GoE is carrying out the upstream drilling activities with public sector financing, and has left the
                         decision open for now on the source of financing for the development of the downstream activities,
                         such as the power plant. The GoE is negotiating with private sector the development of the Corbetti
                         Geothermal Site, and experience and lessons learned from this project will help the GoE determine
                         how to develop the downstream activities in Alalobad.

                         Institutional and technical capacity is required for successful geothermal development: The learning
                         curve for geothermal technology is quite steep and successful development of the resource requires a
                         high degree of expertise. Based on the World Bank – Iceland Geothermal Compact, ICEIDA and the
                         Nordic Development Fund (NDF) jointly raised funds to provide appropriate advisory services and
                         technical expertise to help facilitate the development of the geothermal sector.

                         Reliable and accessible information is necessary for geothermal resource development: Information
                         and data on geology, volcanology, hydrology, geophysical surveys, geochemical studies, resource
                         temperature, chemistry and pressure, for example, are typically best developed and maintained at a
                         national level. The project will support the development of a national geothermal database that will
                         assist in promoting private sector participation through a licensing/concession process.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The location of geothermal fields is an important variable in the cost and development of the project:
                         Typically, many of the East African Rift Valley geothermal resources are located in protected or
                         rural areas and require additional costs and planning not only from a social and environmental
                         standpoint, but also for grid connection for power evacuation. The Project includes detailed plans for
                         environmental and social safeguard assessment, planning, and management, as well as resources
                         earmarked for associated facilities including power station, transmission lines, etc.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project would be located in two sites

                         (1) Alalobad-Tendaho: This site is located in the North Eastern part of Ethiopia Afar Region, within
                         the North East part of the main Ethiopian Rift valley and in Doubti Woreda. The area is
                         predominately a flat terrainand interrupted by scattered isolated volcanic hills, rising a few hundred
                         meters above the flat plain. This site is located in a geologically active zone with a history of
                         naturally occurring earthquakes and many fumaroles. The quality of the soil is generally not good for
                         agriculture and generally of low natural fertility, with the boron, chloride and arsenic values of the
                         soil very high. There are no persons living within the proposed project site.



                                                                      Page 4 of 11
                         (2) Aluto Langano: The drilling of the twenty two deep geothermal wells will be carried out near the
                         existing Aluto Langano Geothermal pilot power plant, which is in central-southern part of the main
                         Ethiopian Rift Valley, between Lakes Ziway and Langano in Oromiya Regional State, Adami Tulu –
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Jido- Kombolcha Woreda.

                         The proposed subproject activities will include: construction of access roads, drilling of deep
                         geothermal exploration wells, construction of drill pads, heat gathering system (from geothermal
                         wells to the power house), power plant construction including switchyard, installation of
                         transmission line from the proposed Aluto power plant to Adami Tulu substation, and building of
                         Substation construction at Adami Tulu. Although, there is no community living in the proposed
                         project area in Alalobad, however, potential impacts are identified related to the natural hot springs
                         that are found within the proposed project area—which has potential for tourist attraction; and
                         pastoralist communities use the hot spring as medicine for their cattle; and the project may affect the
                         path to the hot springs. For Aluto, the negative impact would include physical and economic
                         displacement as relate to temporary or permanent land acquisition that might differ during the
                         construction and operation phase of the project. The project will require land for the drilling of deep
                         geothermal wells, power plant construction and for transmission line and has prepared and consulted
                         upon Resettlement Policy Framework, with the required mitigation measures according to OP4.12
                         requirements. Further, the project has prepared and consulted upon a social assessment, within the
                         ESIA as it relates to vulnerable and undeserved groups meeting the OP 4.10 criteria. The findings of
                         the socially integrated ESIA, the process used in fostering free, prior, and informed consultations and
                         achieving broad community support, provision of grievance redress, and benefit sharing issues have
                         been elaborated and included in the project design.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Edward Felix Dwumfour (AFTN3)
                         Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             Triggering of this policy is predicated on the fact
                         BP 4.01                                              that some disturbances may occur to the
                                                                              biophysical environment, albeit differential and
                                                                              varying in scope depending on the site whether it
                                                                              is Aluto or Alalobad. At the Aluto site, it was
                                                                              observed that there is likely to be no significant
                                                                              environmental risk, and this is because the
                                                                              proposed project site is already heavily degraded,
                                                                              with only patches of stunted bushes and shrubs,
                                                                              predominantly Acacia spp., Ficus spp., Cordia
                                                                              africana, etc., which are neither endangered nor
                                                                              endemic. Fauna including avifauna is not a
                                                                              common feature of the Aluto area. Also, there are
                                                                              no sensitive ecological systems (e.g. lakes,
                                                                              national parks, wetlands, etc.) within the project
                                                                              influence. The proposed Alalobad site is
                                                                              biophysically arid in nature and contains only few
                                                                              stunted Acacia plants and pockets of grass growth
                                                                              within the faults. There is a manifestation of


                                                                      Page 5 of 11
                                                                         Prosopis juliflora invasion, predominantly at the
                                                                         many fumaroles. While there is no recording of
                                                                         any threatened fauna species inhabiting the Aluto
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         site, there are apparently sightings of wild
                                                                         animals such as bush duikers and gazelle that
                                                                         assemble around one of the magnificent
                                                                         fumaroles to drink water. It is feared that should
                                                                         drilling occur at the fumaroles and freshwater
                                                                         aquifers, wildlife survival may be compromised
                                                                         as the ecology of the drinking spots may change.
                                                                         Also, these fumaroles at Alalobad represent
                                                                         touristic attractions that are likely to be impacted,
                                                                         should test and production drillings target these
                                                                         areas.
                                                                         At both sites, it is evident that steam and
                                                                         hydrogen sulphide would be discharged into the
                                                                         atmosphere. Although the project is likely to
                                                                         generate effluent (sludge, drilling fluid chemicals,
                                                                         etc.), these may not pose any hazard to humans,
                                                                         animals and the physical environment as there are
                                                                         no streams or rivers in the vicinity of the drilling
                                                                         sites. There could be potential health and safety
                                                                         risks associated with drilling and production
                                                                         activities, storage and disposal of effluent, etc.
                                                                         The project has prepared detailed ESIAs for the
                                                                         two sites that have been disclosed both in-country
                                                                         and at the Bank's InfoShop. The propose
                                                                         mitigation measures have been appropriately
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         incorporated into the PAD.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           There are few natural habitats (fumaroles) at the
                                                                         proposed Alalobad site that could be impacted
                                                                         negatively by the drilling. The ESIA for the
                                                                         Alalobad site includes mitigation measures.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            Forests are not a common feature within the two
                                                                         proposed sites, and the project does not involve or
                                                                         affect forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project will not apply any agrochemicals or
                                                                         pest management measures.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           There are many areas in the Ethiopian lowlands
                         BP 4.11                                         and Rift Valley that contain cultural resources in
                                                                         the sense described in OP. 4.11. The ESIAs
                                                                         include measures for dealing with chance finds
                                                                         and avoiding cultural sites, where possible.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           The project has carried out in-depth consultation
                                                                         and conducted a Social Assessment as part of the
                                                                         ESIA with the project beneficiaries and project



                                                                 Page 6 of 11
                                                                               affected peoples, including identified vulnerable
                                                                               and marginalized groups, meeting the OP 4.10
                                                                               criteria. The project followed a process ensuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               free, prior, and informed consultations to achieve
                                                                               broad community support in its social assessment.
                                                                               Findings of the social assessment and proposed
                                                                               measures for ensuring these groups are involved
                                                                               in and benefit from the project are integrated in
                                                                               the ESIA and are reflected in the social appraisal
                                                                               section of the PAD and in the risk matrix and in
                                                                               the ESMP.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes             This OP/BP is triggered, based on the assumption
                            4.12                                               that implementation of project may potentially
                                                                               involve acquisition of land and/or restriction of
                                                                               access to communal natural resources. Alongside
                                                                               the ESIAs, a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                               (RPF) has been formulated,consulted upon and
                                                                               disclosed in-country and in the Infoshop.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No              The project does not involve dams.

                            Projects on International        No                N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed project activities will include: construction of access roads, drilling of deep
                              geothermal exploration wells, construction of drill pads, steam gathering system (from geothermal
                              wells to the power house), power plant construction including switchyard, installation of
                              transmission line from the proposed Aluto power plant to Adami Tulu substation, and building of
                              Substation construction at Adami Tulu.

                             Social Impact

                             For Aluto, the negative impact would include physical and economic displacement, which could
                             be temporary or permanent and might, differs during the construction and operation phase of the
                             project and either way, the project will require land for the drilling of deep geothermal wells,
                             Power plant construction, Transmission line, etc. Accordingly, the project has prepared and
                             consulted upon Resettlement Policy Framework, with the required mitigation measures for
                             compensation payment, replacement land, relocation of affected households, and livelihood
                             restoration activities, including provision of basic community development activities for affected
                             community etc.



                                                                       Page 7 of 11
                          Although, there is no community living in the proposed project area in Alalobad, two potential
                          impacts are identified related to the natural hot springs that is found within the proposed project
                          area; and since this area is within transhumance route, and pastoralist community uses the hot
Public Disclosure Copy




                          spring as medicine for their cattle; and since this area also has potential for tourist attraction, the
                          project has prepared required mitigation measures. Further, the project has prepared and consulted
                          upon an enhanced social assessment, within the ESIA, as it relates to vulnerable and underserved
                          groups meeting the OP 4.10 criteria.

                          Environmental Impacts

                           The environmental risks on both sites may involve minimal disturbance to vegetation through
                           clearing, minimal excavation for construction of buildings and workers’ camps, effluent discharge
                           and emissions of steam and gases. However, these seem insignificant, minimal and manageable. In
                           a consultative and participatory manner, the implementing agency has prepared and duly disclosed
                           detailed ESIAs, including appropriate mitigation/management plans for both sites. The ESMPs
                           have been adequately budgeted and incorporated into the project’s monitoring and evaluation
                           framework.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The overall long term indirect impacts of the project on both the biophysical and social
                           environments is expected to be positive as the use of geothermal energy and the expansion of
                           electricity access will reduce dependence on fossil fuel fired generation technology.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The installation of transmission lines and substation facilities will be aligned to minimize adverse
                           environmental and social impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Experience from previous Bank's operation, indicates that the borrower's institutional capacity is
                           weak and will have to improve to be able to manage the potential environmental and social
                           impacts of the project. To address this gap, the newly reconstituted EEP, has now a new
                           environmental and social Department with staff to handle both safeguards and other occupational
                           safety, and health related issues. The staff of this New Department has received safeguards
                           training and will continue to receive institutional capacity strengthening measures needed to
                           ensure proper follow up in the implementation of the project's safeguards instruments. The project
                           will hire or assign two dedicated safeguards officers from the new department to be responsible---
                           separately for the environmental and social aspects of the project. The social safeguards officer
                           will be responsible for implementing the social safeguards instruments and logging, tracking and
                           resolving grievances in timely manner. The project will carry out screening of project areas in line
                           with the project Resettlement Policy Framework and if the screening identifies the need for
                           physical or economic displacement, the project will carry out the required consultation and prepare
                           Resettlement Action Plan. The Borrower has conducted a Social Assessment (SA) within the
                           ESIA and an extensive stakeholder consultations with project affected persons to secure broad
                           community support. Additional social assessment will be conducted during project
                           implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                                                     Page 8 of 11
                           Extensive consultations have been conducted with key stakeholders, including the following:
                           Communities living around the proposed sites; kebele administration; woreda administration with
                           all the relevant woreda level sectoral offices; regional administration with all its relevant offices;
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and federal government including the Ministry of Water Irrigation and Energy; private sector;
                           community based organizations, consultants, and development partners. During the preparation of
                           the ESIA and RPF, the project management unit and consultants held consultation with the PAPs,
                           community elders and local officials and discussed the nature and scale of adverse impacts on their
                           livelihood in a transparent and direct manner and sought their participation in the project cycle; the
                           affected communities expressed their views with respect of the planning and implementation of
                           the drilling activity that will affect them directly; and their broad support for the project as well as
                           the local authorities agreed with the PAPs on various aspects of shared responsibility for the
                           smooth functioning of the project operations.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           18-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        18-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive           08-Apr-2014
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           17-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        27-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           18-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        18-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)           Yes [    ]   No [    ]   NA [     ]
                          report?

                                                                       Page 9 of 11
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?




                                                                    Page 10 of 11
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Raihan Elahi
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 22-Apr-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Lucio Monari (SM)                            Date: 22-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 11 of 11
