                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA7507

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Feb-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Feb-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Kenya                             Project ID:    P149019
                                                       Parent         P094103
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     Kenya Transparency and Infrastructure Project Additional Financing 2
                     (P149019)
   Parent Project    Regional Communications Infrastructure Project (P094103)
   Name:
   Task Team       Arleen Cannata Seed
   Leader:
   Estimated       31-Jan-2014                         Estimated   26-Mar-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit: TWICT                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        General information and communications sector (100%)
   Theme(s):         e-Government (60%), Decentralization (20%), Public expenditure, financial
                     management and procurement (20%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      30.00           Total Bank Financing:               30.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                       Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                              30.00
     Total                                                                                    30.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?



                                             Page 1 of 5
 2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The RCIP Program, the CIP 1,2,3 Projects and following CIP Projects have two overarching
   development objectives (i) to contribute to lower prices for international capacity and extend the
   geographic reach of broadband networks (the "connectivity development objective") and (ii)
   contribute to improved Government efficiency and transparency through egovernment
   applications (the "transparency development objective").
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


 3. Project Description
The second additional financing for the Kenya KTCIP project is proposed to enable scale up of some
activities under the project.
The AF2 for US$30 million will be used for complementing existing project activities and furthering
and deepening the reforms and improvements by undertaking related activities. Following the
approval of the new Kenya Constitution, there are now 47 counties which are devolved units of
government. These new counties provide an ideal opportunity for the county governments to partner
with governance strengthening institutions such as the World Bank. One of the areas identified by
government to strengthen the new devolved system of governance is ICT.           Recently a
comprehensive plan was undertaken by the Nairobi City County to further the development of the
capital through the judicious use of ICT. This has resulted in a plan which can now be both
implemented and further refined for each county.
The AF2 will fund two major components. The first is the implementation of two applications from
the ICT Transformation Roadmap for the Nairobi City County. The specific applications for Nairobi
will be further defined during project preparation but will likely be for an Integrated County
Management Tool for revenue collection and management and a Unified Communications System.
The second component will, using the Nairobi plan as a template, cascade the plan to at least 40 out
of the remaining 47 counties – with the appropriate consultation with each of the local government
entities and the drafting of documents specific to their development. Furthermore, this second
component will support 2 of the other 46 counties with funding for actual implementation of some
aspects of the plan.    The selection of the counties will be undertaken by the GoK with the
appropriate consultations and using criteria which have been developed by the team. In addition, the
counties will have an opportunity to select the applications which are deemed to be the most
efficacious, and there are considerable economies of scale which can be realized if the counties select
the same applications as in NCC. In discussions with both the NCC and the ICT Ministers of the
counties, it was stressed that all counties are concerned with identifying actions which prevent
leakages in revenues or which bring in new sources of revenue. In addition, the AF2 is expected to
work further on Statistics and Data, by expanding the Kenya Open data project to include the
counties.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Activities will benefit citizens throughout the country, as the project will potentially be working with
all the county governments. Most activities will be soft in nature. Limited physical activities will
include minor refurbishment of buildings in Nairobi but also throughout the country.

                                              Page 2 of 5
   5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
  Zarafshan H. Khawaja (AFTCS)
  Svetlana Khvostova (AFTSG)

   6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
   Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes
   BP 4.01
   Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

   Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

   Pest Management OP 4.09            No

   Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
   BP 4.11
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes              It is probable that land will have to be acquired
   4.12                                                for the structures at the landward ends of
                                                       connecting cables and for rights of way from the
                                                       sea to those structures.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

   Projects on International          No               The main cable will pass through international
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                marine waters and the connecting cables will
                                                       transit the territorial waters of at least eight
                                                       countries.
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The original project has prepared ESMF and RPF, which were disclosed in Kenya and in the Bank
     InfoShop in 2007. Since then, for Kenya AF operation, no additional safeguards instruments have
     been prepared, as the specific project activities have not required such instruments. The ESMF and
     RPF provide sufficient mechanism for screening the subprojects under the AF2.

    The activities proposed under additional financing for the project do not envisage significant
    potential adverse environmental and social impacts and will likely include minor refurbishment
    work of selected buildings and rooms, with no planned land acquisition or restriction of access to
    resources. Yet it is important to ensure the appropriate screening, review and appraisal process for
    subprojects in accordance with the project ESMF and RPF. During project implementation, as


                                               Page 3 of 5
  each subproject activity is defined and the site is selected, potential environmental and social
  impacts associated with the proposed activity will be identified using a sub-project screening form.
  Based on the screening findings, a simple ESMP and/or RAP may need to be developed and
  included in the subproject contracts.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  No long term impacts due to proposed project activities are anticipated.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The program-level ESMF and RPF have been published in-country as well as at the Infoshop in
  February 2007. The project has established a screening mechanism, where, upon identification,
  sub-projects are screened according to standard checklist. Monitoring & Evaluation officer for the
  project has overall responsibility to follow up on screening of sub-projects and their compliance
  with ESMF and RPF.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Potentially affected people may include ministry and county government staff, local communities.
  If, as a result of sub-project screening, the project-specific ESMPs and/or RAPs are developed,
  they will undergo public consultations with project stakeholders and get disclosed.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06-Feb-2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Feb-2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Kenya                                                            13-Feb-2007
  Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06-Feb-2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Feb-2007
"In country" Disclosure
  Kenya                                                            03-Feb-2007
  Comments: none
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
N/A


                                            Page 4 of 5
  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
   OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    report?
    If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
    Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the credit/loan?
   OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
    Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Sector Manager review the plan?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Arleen Cannata Seed
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                         Date: 11-Feb-2014
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Randeep Sudan (SM)                                Date: 11-Feb-2014




                                               Page 5 of 5
