                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA2926
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Samoa                               Project ID:    P143408
                            Project Name:      Samoa Aviation Investment Project (P143408)
                            Task Team          Christopher J. De Serio
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          09-Dec-2013                         Estimated   28-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASNS                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Aviation (85%), Public administration- Transportation (15%)
                            Theme(s):         Regional integration (80%), Administrative and civil service reform (10%),
                                              Natural disaster management (5%), Climate change (5%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      31.55           Total Bank Financing:                   20.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           4.15
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 20.00
                              EC European Investment Bank                                                                  7.40
                              Total                                                                                       31.55
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to improve operational safety and oversight of international air
                           transport and associated infrastructure.
                            3. Project Description

                                                                         Page 1 of 6
                         The Bank, along with the European Investment Bank (EIB) and other donor partners, is supporting a
                         regional Pacific Aviation Investment Program (PAIP) that aims to improve aviation infrastructure,
                         management and operations in participating countries. The Program is consistent with the “safe,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         clean and affordable transport” paradigm, as it addresses critical infrastructure investments to meet
                         international air safety and security requirements, institutes a sustainable financing mechanism for
                         regulatory oversight, and is delivered through a programmatic approach with clear regional benefits.

                         An initial assessment of the urgent investment requirements at the Faleolo airport is on the order of
                         US32.2 million. To meet these needs, project financing will require a combination of resources,
                         including both IDA grant resources, as well as parallel financing from the EIB. The project will
                         invest in key international aviation infrastructure, navigational and communication equipment, as
                         well as provide technical assistance and support capacity development for regulatory oversight, and
                         operation and management of Samoa's aerodromes.

                         Component A: International Airport Infrastructure Investments (approx. US$26.07 million). Carrying
                         out of aviation infrastructure investments at the Faleolo, airport, including, among other things:
                         rehabilitation of airport runways, taxiways, and aprons; installation of new navigation aids, automatic
                         weather monitoring, safety and security equipment, and air traffic control equipment; upgrading of
                         generator capacity and installation of energy efficient equipment such as terminal lighting; provision
                         of water storage tanks; security improvements such as closed circuit television; upgrading of runway
                         lighting; provision or upgrading of fire safety equipment; provision of the VSAT secure
                         communications system; and provision of the design and supervision consulting services required for
                         carrying out such investments.

                         Component B: Strengthening Policy and Regulatory Capacity, and Training (approx. US$1.45
                         million). Carrying out of sector reform and training activities, including, among other things,
                         technical assistance and training to Line Ministries to improve aviation sector management, policy,
                         safety and security oversight, and development of a national aviation policy; and provision of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         services from PASO.

                         Component C: Strengthening airport operations and management capacity (approx. US$1.42
                         million). Carrying out of activities to strengthen airport operations and management capacity,
                         including, among other things: studies to assess the current conditions of the aviation sector and
                         airports; development of a strategic business plan; and training on aviation policy, management, and
                         operations.

                         Component D: Project Support (approx. US$2.89 million). Provision of support required for the
                         Project, including, among other things: technical, advisory, and administrative support to the TFSU
                         and the Project Support Team; and annual subscriptions for the operation of the VSAT infrastructure
                         during Project implementation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The current scope of the project is limited to the existing physical footprint of Faleolo Airport, which
                         is situated on, and surrounded by a buffer of Government-owned land. No new land or asset
                         acquisition is envisaged. The impacts are all site-specific and none of them irreversible. The majority
                         of environmental impacts relate to the transport and construction impacts of runway and apron re-
                         surfacing at Faleolo. Impacts during this phase include dust and noise emissions, heavy traffic
                         between the site and the quarry and landfill, disposal of the milled material not reused in the project,


                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                         management of storm water, and health and safety of workers and bystanders. The land disturbances
                         will all occur within the footprint of the airport; however noise, dust and vibration may be
                         experienced by those living and working on or near the airport and the transport route. Discharges
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of stormwater will occur to ground and / or via sediment ponds to existing surface drains that lead to
                         the sea.

                         Detailed design can avoid or mitigate many of the potential impacts, and otherwise there are standard
                         practices and procedures that will satisfactorily mitigate impacts during construction and airport
                         operations are addressed in the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and have been discussed
                         during consultation.

                         Aggregates for construction will be sourced from one of six basalt quarries on Upolu Island. Some
                         of the milled surfaces will be recycled into the new surface with the remainder being disposed as fill
                         in an approved landfill or reused by other contractors.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Beverly Ann McLean (EASNS)
                         Penelope Ruth Ferguson (EASIS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Project impacts primarily relate to the transport
                         BP 4.01                                              and construction impacts of runway and apron re-
                                                                              surfacing at Faleolo, and the transport of
                                                                              materials from the quarry to site. Impacts will be
                                                                              mitigated through the use of the EMP consistent
                                                                              with the PAIP Environmental and Social
                                                                              Management Framework (ESMF) and Samoa
                                                                              Codes of Environmental Practice 2007.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No               All earthworks will be in already disturbed
                         BP 4.11                                              environments. Any chance finds will be handled
                                                                              under procedures in the Environmental
                                                                              Management Plan.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        Yes              This operational policy has been triggered due to
                                                                              the presence of Indigenous Peoples (IPs) in the
                                                                              project area of influence. There will be no new
                                                                              impacts on indigenous culture, language,
                                                                              customs, institutions or customary lands. Social
                                                                              assessment was conducted, publicly consulted
                                                                              and disclosed, the results of which are embedded
                                                                              in the project design, and confirmed broad
                                                                              community support. Since the overwhelming


                                                                      Page 3 of 6
                                                                                 majority of project beneficiaries in Samoa are
                                                                                 IPs, no separate Indigenous Peoples Plan will be
                                                                                 prepared.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No               The investment activities are limited to the
                            4.12                                                 existing physical footprint of Faleolo Airport,
                                                                                 which is situated on, and surrounded by a buffer
                                                                                 of Government-owned land. No new land or asset
                                                                                 acquisition is envisaged.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              No significant environmental issues or impacts have been identified. All issues can be managed
                              within standard good practice for construction-related impacts (traffic management, limits to noisy
                              work, waste management etc.), and in the design phase (drainage, source of aggregates, percentage
                              recycled content of the new surface). No significant cultural, resettlement or gender impacts have
                              been identified. No resettlement is expected and if any resettlement issues emerge, they will be
                              addressed through a resettlement plan developed on the basis of the policies and principles
                              outlined in the Environmental and Social Management Framework developed for the overall
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Program. Gender sensitivity is assured through participation of the Ministry of Women
                              Community and Social Development in consultations and information dissemination.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Improved safety and security will be beneficial to both travelers and residents in the vicinity of the
                              airports. The investments are not expected to directly increase air operations, but may indirectly
                              change the frequency or timing of flights.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Community consultations will invite consideration of impacts, and suggestions for alternative
                              improved impact management will be incorporated in the EMP.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              In broad terms, Samoa has demonstrated its capacity to manage safeguards having previously
                              implemented the Bank-financed Samoa Infrastructure Assets Management project. For this
                              investment project, the SAA has the capacity to undertake the preparation and implementation of
                              the EMP. For in-country processes, the SAA will submit a Preliminary Environmental
                              Assessment Report to the Planning and Urban Management Agency (PUMA) in the Ministry of
                              Natural Resources and Environment (MNRE). PUMA will advise of any conditions pertaining to


                                                                         Page 4 of 6
                           Development Consent, and on Government of Samoa consultation and documentation
                           requirements. SAA will ensure that conditions are included in the EMP and that the EMP is
                           binding upon any subcontractor. The SAA is supported by the PAIP Technical and Fiduciary
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Services Unit (TFSU), with safeguards experience from other PAIP projects. A local consultant,
                           together with the TFSU, assisted with the preparation of the EMP.

                           A Social Assessment was undertaken around the project areas to identify any distinct vulnerable
                           groups amongst Indigenous Peoples, who are the vast majority of the population. Strong levels of
                           public acceptability were ascertained in community consultations in the project areas subject to
                           environmental management and benefit sharing. SAA also undertakes stakeholder consultations
                           through its Facilitation Committee.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Institutional stakeholders in safeguards compliance are the implementing agency (SAA), the
                           regulatory authority MNRE and the Ministry of Women, Community and Social Development
                           (MWCSD). Local stakeholders are the communities surrounding the Government owned buffer
                           zones around the airports. Local stakeholders were informed and consulted during the social
                           assessment, at the time of the preparation of the draft EMP, and at a meeting coordinated by the
                           MWCSD to consult airport neighbors. Stakeholders will continue to be consulted at other times
                           during implementation (for example to announce the start of works, or to advise of traffic
                           management plans during the construction phase). Neighboring communities will be made aware
                           through these media of the procedure for registering any complaints or grievances in relation to the
                           project.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   18-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Samoa                                                            31-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   18-Nov-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Samoa                                                            31-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                                                     Page 5 of 6
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Christopher J. De Serio
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Michel Kerf (SM)                             Date: 06-Dec-2013




                                                                       Page 6 of 6
