                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                         APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA1001

    t   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Nov-2014
        Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Dec-20 14

        I. BASIC INFORMATION
           1. Basic Project Data

           Country:          Albania                            Project ID:    P144688
           Project Name:     Albania Health System Improvement (P144688)
           Task Team         Lorena Kostallari
           Leader:
           Estimated       14-Nov-2014                          Estimated   27-Feb-2015
           Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
           Managing Unit: GHNDR                                 Lending        Investment Project Financing
                                                                Instrument:
           Sector(s):        Health (100%)
           Theme(s):         Health system performance (100%)
           Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
           8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
           Financing (In USD Million)
           Total Project Cost:         40.00                  Total Bank Financing:       40.00
           Financing Gap:                0.00
              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
C
              Borrower                                                                                  0.00
              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    40.00
              Total                                                                                    40.00
           Environmental B - Partial Assessment
           Category:
           Is this a         No
           Repeater
           project?

           2. Project Development Objective(s)
          The proposed PDO is to contribute to improving the efficiency of care in selected hospitals in
          Albania, improving the management of information in the health system, and increasing financial
          access to health services.
           3. Project Description
          Component 1: Improving Hospital Services (US$17.9 million equivalent)

                                                     Page 1 of 9
    21.      This component aims to improve efficiency and quality of hospital services delivery in
    Albania. The component will finance technical assistance, training, study tours, civil works, goods
    and equipment to support the design and implementation of a sustainable hospital network with the
O
    appropriate infrastructure and human capital to deliver needs-based hospital services, and to
    strengthen autonomy and accountability for hospitals and managers. Implementation will build on
    the results and concepts developed under the previous Bank-supported project (HSMP).

    Sub-component 1.1: Strengthening the Albanian Network of Hospital Services (US$3.8 million)

    22.      This sub-component will address inefficiencies in hospital services, including management
    weaknesses and overuse of services at tertiary level; underutilization of district and regional
    hospitals; poor coordination of care across outpatient and inpatient services; as well as the need for
    access to functioning outpatient services. It will also address the efficiency and quality of hospital
    services under the current system, including the lack of a functioning referral system (which
    encourages patients to generally bypass lower-level providers and to seek care directly in the
    specialized public facilities) and poor patient management in hospital facilities. It will strengthen
    outpatient services, and improve needs-based planning of hospital infrastructure and human
    resources. Finally it will establish results-based management systems for essential hospital services,
    patient management, clinical services, outcomes, and accountability.

    23.      The sub-component will finance technical assistance, capacity building and equipment for
    the following sets of activities: (a) updating the existing Hospital Master Plan; (b) piloting
    implementation of the revised Master Plan in at least three pilot regions (including the transformation
    of district hospitals into primary care/diagnostic facilities), (c) assessment and improvement of the
    current management of the QSUT, (d) elaboration of an appropriate legal and regulatory framework
    for hospital services, to provide increased autonomy and accountability; (e) training and capacity
    building for hospital management teams, MoH, HIF, and other supervising agencies on service
    planning, resource allocation, performance management, and implementation monitoring and
    contracting, (f) development of benchmarks and indicators for profiling comparative hospital
    performance (MIS/quality monitoring system), establishing baseline data and systems for
    monitoring, (g) updating, implementing, and monitoring of clinical guidelines, clinical pathways, and
    standards for referrals from primary to outpatient secondary services to inpatient and tertiary
    services, and (h) piloting social patient-based accountability mechanisms to enhance patient feedback
    and reduce informal payments - such as: establishment of hot lines and cell-phone based feedback
    mechanisms, study on informal payment, publishing ranking of hospitals based on performance, etc.

    Sub-component 1.2: Improving hospital infrastructure and the management of medical equipment
    (US$14.1 million)

    24.      This sub-component will finance the physical rehabilitation and upgrading of hospital
    infrastructure and medical equipment, based on the updated Hospital Master Plan. The Plan does not
    currently envisage closing any facilities (or adding new ones), but most likely hospital beds would be
    reduced or reallocated in accordance with service requirements, and appropriate mechanisms
    established to reallocate staff. There will be upgrading of infrastructure and equipment in three
    regions, based on a strategic plan prepared by the hospital management and regional authorities, and
    aligned with the overall Hospital Master Plan. The Pediatric hospital in Tirana (within the QSUT)
    will also be upgraded. This will be implemented in conjunction with management and payment
    reforms to improve efficiency. Moreover, based on the priorities identified in the updated Hospital


                                                  Page 2 of 9
Master Plan and hospital strategic plans, this sub-component may also finance medical equipment for
other regional hospitals to ensure that their activities can be performed in a satisfactory manner.

25.      This sub-component will also finance a number of activities related to management of the
medical equipment. These include: (i) the development of a medical equipment maintenance
strategy; and (ii) the establishment of a National Center with the mandate to manage all medical
equipment in the public sector in Albania. Considering the specific situation and the limited budget,
the adoption of a mixed model is envisaged as the most cost-effective approach to the maintenance
problem. According to this model, the first-level maintenance would be performed by in-house
technicians, while for medium and high complexity maintenance the MoH would contract a global
service provider (GSP). The government has committed to financing implementation of the medical
equipment maintenance strategy through the national budget. Funding under this sub-component will
include technical assistance, training, and physical assets.

Component 2: Expanding the Health Management Information System (US$16.8 million
equivalent)

26.      A number of complementary and interrelated subcomponents will move HMIS forward on a
number of critical fronts. The component addresses the need for improved provider-based systems,
focusing on the country's regional hospital sector which significantly impacts the orchestration of
services across the spectrum of care. It places emphasis on strengthening referrals to/from both the
primary care and tertiary care levels (QSUT). It also addresses the need to provide the hospitals with
a means of adopting the new provider payment methods, which are being organized under
Component 3.1. In addition, it addresses the need for improved automation in the country's health
insurance payer, the HIF, where an improved health insurance information system will be placed.
Finally, it provides the foundational activities to support these developments, and an institutional
home to support and sustain them in the long run.

Sub-component 2.1: HMIS/eHealth Foundational Activities and Establishing the National Health
Information Center (NHIC) (US$3.10 million)

27.      HMIS systems are increasingly interdependent and interoperable. Thus it is important to
stress overall coordination in the design and implementation of these systems, as well as to create, at
a technical level, the means for these "new generation" systems to "talk to one another" through
internet technologies. To accomplish this goal of closer integration of systems, this sub-component
includes the following sets of activities:

         Creating the Master Plan for HMIS/eHealth activities (2015-2019) and the first version of
the Albania Health Data Dictionary (HDD) and Health Data Model (HDM). The sub-component
will finance technical assistance for supporting the MoH in developing the HMIS Master Plan. The
Master Plan will provide the overall framework to develop, improve coordination between
development partners, and provide the "big picture" view of where the country plans to focus its
investments. It will also support the creation of the first HDD and HDM in the country, through
financing technical assistance and training for the MoH staff.

         Creating the first version of the Essential Registries for Albania's HMIS. The sub-
component will finance technical assistance to support the MoH in establishing the essential
registries, which are a set of important documents, shared between different applications. The
registries will include health facilities, health workers and biomedical equipment and the interrelation


                                              Page 3 of 9
    between them.

    The NHIC is the focal point for eHealth/HMIS activities in Albania - enhancing sustainability of the
o
    initiatives and providing modem user support tools.


    *       This sub-component will also finance capacity building, goods and IT equipment to support:
    (a) expanding, updating and enforcing the Health Data Dictionary (HDD) and the Health Data
    Model, (b) consolidating the current small data centers (including those for MoH, the HIF, and the
    IPH), into one Health Data Center, (c) creating a Training Center with a capacity of 50 persons, with
    appropriate equipment to support in-person training, synchronous online training as well as the
    creation of materials for asynchronous training, (d) providing user support and systems maintenance
    by establishing a Help Desk within the NHIC, and (e) supporting Biomedical Engineering and
    Maintenance.


    Sub-component 2.2: Implementing Regional Hospital Information Systems (US11.5 million)

    28.      This sub-component will finance capacity building and goods, training and IT equipment, to
    support the establishment of a modem Hospital Information System in selected regional hospitals
    (RHIS). While the country begins the process of rationalizing and repurposing its hospitals, it is the
    right moment to also install modem hospital information systems in selected hospitals. The Project
    will support at least seven of Albania's thirteen regional hospitals to introduce automated systems,
    This will include the following steps: (a) "management" functions first, including Admissions
    Discharges and Transfers (ADT), outpatient registration, bed management, medical records locator
    and an interface with HIF for claims/encounters reporting; (b) clinical functions, including clinical
    laboratory order and resulting functions, radiology order and resulting functions, and pharmacy
    prescribing functions; and (c) the creation of a clinical summary for each patient, focusing
    particularly on tracking targeted chronic disease(s). This will later lead to the establishment of a true
    electronic medical record (beyond the scope of the project). The electronic medical record would be
    established with collaboration from and coordination with the Austrian Cooperation support, which
    focuses on creating a National Electronic Health Record (NEHR).

    29.       The NHIS interfaces will be particularly important and prominent. This includes the various
    interfaces from the NHIS to the HIIS at HIF, the referral link to/from Primary Care, the referral link
    to tertiary care. Such linkages are important for promoting better continuity-of-care. Particular
    importance will be given to creating the mechanism to monitor "inappropriate" admissions and
    referrals.


    Sub-component 2.3 Implementing a new Health Insurance Information System (HIIS) for the Health
    Insurance Fund (HIF) (US$2.2 million)

    30.      This sub-component will finance IT systems and capacity building for HIF staff, ensuring
    that HIF is prepared to deal with aspects of financial management, as well as to automate the health
    insurance claim processing based on the chosen Provider Payment methods. Moreover, a new
    protection system featuring fraud and abuse detection will need to be introduced, as the HIF oversees
    ever larger segments of the healthcare delivery system in the country.



                                                  Page 4 of 9
Component 3: Improving Health Financing System (US$3.8 million equivalent)

31.     This component will address improvement of allocative efficiency and will support the shift
towards output-based and performance-based financing for hospitals and primary care services. It
will enable the expansion of health insurance coverage particularly for the poor, and the pooling of
health care resources. It will improve the policies of pharmaceuticals, which in turn will reduce high
out-of-pocket expenditures on drugs and improve quality and efficiency.

Sub-component 3.1: Payment Reform (US$2.3 million)

32.     The sub-component will finance technical assistance, capacity building, and workshops, to
support the reform of the payment system in primary and hospital care.

33.      Payment Reform in primary health care. The Project will support the HIF to move towards
risk-adjusted primary care capitation payments (from the existing historic budgets with caps), in
which "money follows the patient" and incentives are strengthened to provide key services,
particularly for the poor; improve service qua lity; and reduce unnecessary referrals. The total
amount of funds allocated to any single primary care provider or facility will be based on the average
per capita amount (or base rate) and number of enrolees, adjusted for risk profile and performance
indicators. The Project will support monitoring and evaluation of payment reforms, and further
strengthen the "pay-for-performance" approach introduced under the previous project, including
priority services such as the control of hypertension, diabetes, cervical cancer, etc. Swiss
Development Cooperation will finance complementary support to improve the quality of primary
care.

34.     Payment Reform for hospital-delivered health care. The Project will fund the development
and introduction of global budgets and a case-based payment system for hospitals, including
incentives to improve quality of care. To do this, the early years of the Project will follow a phased
approach, including support for information infrastructure, diagnostic and procedure coding systems;
hospital costing and cost accounting systems; the introduction of global hospital budgets;
development and testing of the software grouper, followed by piloting and phased implementation of
budgets based on diagnosis-related groups (DRGs). Italian Cooperation will provide complementary
support on hospital payment reforms.

Sub-component 3.2: Support to the Health Insurance Fund (HIF) for strategic purchasing, improved
coverage and pharmaceutical reform (US$1.5 million)

35.      The sub-component will finance technical assistance, training and workshops to support
organizational development of the HIF. This will enable it to be a more strategic purchaser of
services over the next few years, and to assess costs and options to expand insurance coverage. The
Project will support: (a) capacity development in the areas of management, organization, financial
and risk management, information technology, provider payment systems, and quality assurance; (b)
technical assistance to develop expenditure and revenue model projections under various scenarios
relating to expanding insurance coverage to the informal sector, and options for shifting to tax-based
financing. Support for HMIS under Sub-component 2.4 will complement the activities of this
component. This will include equipment, training and technical support to allow the HIF to mature
into a strategic purchaser.

36.     In addition, the sub-component will finance technical assistance, training and workshops, to


                                             Page 5 of 9
    support the Government in designing and piloting innovative pharmaceutical policies. This will
    include the following main activities: (a) revising the existing drug list based on clinical and cost-
    effectiveness criteria, and strengthening capacity and transparency in decision making around
    reimbursement of new drugs. This will include training on processing drug applications and capacity
O
    building in reviewing Health Technology Assessments; (b) further reducing prices for multi-source
    drugs through strengthening reference pricing, competition, and revised margins to retailers and
    wholesalers to encourage dispensing of lower cost drugs. There will also be an initiative to reduce
    costs of patented original drugs through innovative financing mechanisms such as Risk Sharing
    agreements; (c) improve generic promotion strategic plan, and enhanced monitoring of prescription
    and dispensing practices; and (d) improving treatment compliance and reducing OOP expenditure
    through revision of copayments, and targeted reductions or waiving of copayments for low-cost
    drugs essential for the management of chronic diseases.

    Component 4: Monitoring, Evaluation and Project Management (US$1.5 million equivalent)

    37.     This component will support routine Project management, including fiduciary tasks,
    Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), and audits of Project financial statements. It will finance Project
    operating costs including translation, interpretation, equipment, supervision costs (transportation and
    per diem), staffing costs of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU), M&E, studies and surveys, and
    incremental costs for the PCU in the Ministry of Health. Monitoring the implementation of the
    reforms, including potential unintended consequences, will be supported under this component.
    Study tours are possible to countries where similar reforms are at an advanced stage of
    implementation and where significant results have been achieved.
     4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
    analysis (if known)
    The Project will deal with the overall health sector in Albania, and as such will be conducted
    throughout the country. The upgrade/small-scale reconstruction works will be focused on a tertiary
    hospital in Tirana, the capital (either the Pediatric hospital and the Oncology hospital) and minor
    infrastructure works/upgrades in the regional hospitals to be selected during project implementation.
     5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
O
    Bekim Imeri (GSURR)
    Esma Kreso (GENDR)

     6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
     Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The small-scale reconstruction works envisaged
     BP 4.01                                             under the upgrades within Component 1 of the
                                                         project may lead to negative environmental
                                                         impacts such as generation of construction waste,
                                                         noise and dust, that will be mitigated through the
                                                         use of Checklist Environmental Management
                                                         Plans for Small Scale Construction. These forms
                                                         will be prepared prior to Project Appraisal, and
                                                         will be part of the documentation for the works
                                                         contracts.
     Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No




                                                 Page 6 of 9
   Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

   Pest Management OP 4.09            No

   Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
   BP 4.11
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No               The Operational Policy for Involuntary
   4.12                                                Resettlement is not triggered with the project
                                                       because the Project will finance works to
                                                       rehabilitate current operating hospital. No new
                                                       construction is planned and thus there will be no
                                                       impacts such as displacement or land acquisition.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

   Projects on International          No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
  A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The upgrading works envisaged under this project on one of the hospitals in Tirana (the Pediatric
    or Oncology) and the regional hospitals will be carried out within the existing structures and are
    aimed at improving health care services. The scope of the activities will not go beyond the existing
    footprint, and will most likely include impacts such as noise and dust generation, management of
    construction waste and site safety, as well as disruptions to the work schedule of the hospitals. All
    of these impacts can be readily mitigated through sound environmental construction practices, as
    outlined in the Small Scale Rehabilitation Works Checklist EMP that has been prepared for each
    of the project sites.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
    No long term impacts are anticipated.
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.
    No alternatives have been considered.
   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
     assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
    The PIU within the Ministry of Health has prepared the Checklist EMP for the two sites. The
    Checklist EMP will be included in the works and supervision contracts, while the PIU staff (most
    likely the M&E) will conduct supervision of EMP compliance together with the World Bank team.


                                               Page 7 of 9
      Due to the small scale of impacts and associated due diligence, there will be no need for staffing of
      the PIU with an environmental expert. Any additional requirements will be carried out by
       consultant hire, if necessary.
    5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
       on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
      The key stakeholders include other hospitals and wards within the Tirana University Hospital
       Center "Mother Theresa" where the two hospitals are located. The Checklist EMPs was disclosed
       in a public place within the Hospital Center and on the website of the Client/Hospital with a
       feedback mechanism established for any questions or comments. The Checklist EMP will be re-
       disclosed in a public place within the Hospital Center once works start. All works will be carried
       out at intervals and schedules that have been agreed with the other stakeholders within the Center
      to minimize disruption to regular work. The disclosure and consultations of the public in the
      regional hospitals will be done in a similar approach.
    B. Disclosure Requirements
    Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
      Date of receipt by the Bank                                         11-Jul-2014
      Date of submission to InfoShop                                      11-Jul-2014
      For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
      Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
    "In country" Disclosure
      Albania                                                             14-Jul-2014
     Comments:
    If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
    respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
    Audit/or EMP.
    If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
o



    C, Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
    OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
     Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [ X]     No [    ]   NA [    ]
     report?
     If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice        Yes [ X]     No [    ]   NA [    ]
     Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
     Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated    Yes [ X]     No [    ]   NA [    ]
     in the credit/loan?
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
     Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [ X]     No [    ]   NA [    ]
     World Bank's Infoshop?
     Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X]         No [    ]   NA [    ]
     place in a form and language that are understandable and
     accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
    All Safeguard Policies



                                                 Page 8 of 9
        Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes[X]   No[       NA
        responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
        measures related to safeguard policies?
        Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes[X]   No[       NA
        in the project cost?
        Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes[X]   No[       NA
        include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
        related to safeguard policies?
        Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes[X]   No[       NA
        with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
        the project legal documents?

    III. APPROVALS
       Task Team Leader:       Name: Lorena Kostallari
       Approved By
       Practice Manager/       Name: Johanne Angers (PMGR)                   Date: 08-Dec-2014
       Manager:




o




                                                   Page 9 of 9
