                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSR6073
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Egypt, Arab Republic of                      Project ID:           P100047
                            Project Name:      EG-Ain Sokhna Power Project (P100047)
                            Task Team          Mohab Awad Mokhtar Hallou
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          13-Oct-2008                                  Estimated   29-Jan-2009
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSEE                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:           Thermal Power Generation (100%)
                            Theme:            City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      1925.00                 Total Bank Financing:                                600.00
                            Financing Gap:               1.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                           570.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                              600.00
                              African Development Bank                                                                           450.00
                              Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development                                                      200.00
                              KUWAIT Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development                                                   104.00
                              Financing Gap                                                                                        1.00
                              Total                                                                                             1924.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives

                                                                                Page 1 of 11
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project is a 1,300 MW supercritical steam turbine power plant using natural gas as the
                         main fuel (and mazout as the back-up fuel). The plant will be owned, operated and managed by the
                         East Delta Electricity Production Company (EDEPC), one of EEHC’s subsidiaries responsible for
                         electricity production in the geographical territory of the proposed power plant site.

                         The proposed project includes the following: (i) two 650 MW steam turbine generators; (ii) two
                         steam generators (once-through supercritical boilers); (iii) electrical equipment including
                         transformers and switchyard; (iv) auxiliary mechanical equipment including pumps and drives, heat
                         exchangers and de-aerators, critical piping and piping valves; (v) water and wastewater treatment
                         systems and desalination plant; (vi) the implementation of the Environmental and Social
                         Management Plan (ESMP), including environmental monitoring equipment; (vii) distributed control
                         systems and instrumentation; (viii) engineering and project management services including design,
                         procurement and construction supervision as well as commissioning, testing and start-up; (ix) civil
                         works, yard tanks as well as medium and low voltage switchgear; (x) substations and transmission
                         lines to interconnect to the national power grid; and (xi) insurance.

                         Project implementation is satisfactory and progressing as scheduled with over 93% of the Project
                         implemented by the end of FY 2013. This level of completion involves procurement for all packages,
                         location of all equipment on site except for certain heaters. The three procurement packages financed
                         by the Bank were procured at a total cost of US$420 million, (estimated at appraisal at US$522
                         million). The Project implementing agencies; Egyptian Electricity Holding Company (EEHC)
                         together with its subsidiary East Delta Electricity Production Company (EDEPC) have established a
                         Project Management Unit (PMU) and a Financial Management Unit (FMU), which are operational.
                         The team receives regular progress reports for project implementation and safeguards. The Project
                         disbursed a sum of US$318 million by the end of June 2013. The power plant should start operating
                         by the third quarter of FY 2014. The PDO, procurement and safeguard ratings were satisfactory in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the last ISR archived in July 2013.

                         An additional component is introduced to the project using the project savings. The component
                         involves new transmission lines and a substation to connect the new Helwan South power plant to the
                         transmission grid and to strengthen the network of Ain Sokhna and Tebbin power plants. This
                         additional component (A1) includes the construction of the following: ( i)A 2x750 MVA, 500/220
                         kV Zahraa El-Maadi Substation; (ii) A 100 km, 500 kV double circuit transmission line connecting
                         South Helwan and Zahraa El-Maadi substations; (iii) A 150 km, 500 kV double circuit transmission
                         line connecting the Helwan South substation to the Samalaut and Assuit substations by an in-and-out
                         connection at the Samalaut substation to the already existing 500 kV Samalaut-Assuit transmission
                         line; (iv) A 30 km, 500 kV double circuit transmission line connecting the Zahraa El-Maadi
                         substation by an in-and-out connection to the 500 kV transmission line connecting the Tebbin and
                         El-Sokhna substations; (v) Two 165 MVAR, 500kV switchable line shunt reactors each to be
                         installed at the Assuit and South Helwan substations, and (vi) Connection of three existing 220 kV
                         lines (Ain Sira/ Tora (2x7 km), Cairo east / Basateen (2x5 km), Katamia/ Tebbin (15 km)) to Zahraa
                         el- Maadi Substation.

                          In addition, a technical assistance component is aimed at further enhancing the on-going energy
                         sector policy dialogue with GOE. The assistance will mainly comprise of studies and policy support
                         including rapid response support to EEHC in the implementation of the time-of-use tariff and further

                                                                     Page 2 of 11
                         tariff adjustment recommendations from the on-going Energy Pricing Strategy work. Based on the
                         successful TA implemented in the electricity, renewable energy and natural gas sectors since 2004,
                         an annual programmatic Bank budget of US$250,000 a year for the next three years was allocated to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         enable continued rapid-response assistance and support based on the trust and cooperation
                         established in the sector. In addition, substantial trust fund resources from the Energy Sector
                         Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) and the Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility
                         (PPIAF) have been mobilized.

                         The environmental and social safeguards of the Bank will apply to all the above mentioned activities
                         regardless of the source of financing. Institutional arrangements, including staff, are in place within
                         the implementing counterparts to ensure compliance with the Bank safeguards requirements.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed site of the new plant is an empty land area right next to an existing power plant on the
                         Suez Gulf, which was commissioned about 5 years ago. The site is about 52 km south of Suez city.
                         The land in question is public (belongs to EEHC), and covers an unproductive sandy area without
                         any structures, except for a temporary shed.

                         Although the location and routing of the additional transmission lines and substation required to
                         transmit the electricity generated by the Ain Sokhna power plant and Helwan south power plant to
                         the national power supply system, is not yet finally determined; except for minor sections which will
                         cross privately owned agricultural lands, the new transmission lines are expected to be mostly
                         constructed in parallel to existing lines and the area in question is generally empty state-owned land.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)
                         Maged Mahmoud Hamed (MNAOS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes
                          4.12
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No




                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The Power Plant:

                             It is expected that the construction and operation activities of the power plant may have potential
                             negative environmental impacts.

                              During the construction phase, impacts are expected in the form of increased dust, noise,
                             vibration, etc. on land, along with the impact on the Gulf of Suez from construction of the intake
                             and discharge structures on physical aquagraphy, water quality, and aquatic habitats. Furthermore,
                             traffic impact may be expected to occur during a short period at peak construction in the form of
                             increased congestion on the main access roads to the power plant. All of these impacts are
                             expected to be localized, short lived, and reversible. Mitigation measures include good practice,
                             and are included in details in the ESIA. All the mitigation, monitoring and management measures
                             proposed will be adopted by the Project Company and imposed as conditions of contract on the
                             contractor and any sub-contractors employed to build or operate any part of the power plant.

                             During the operation phase, the main impacts can be summarized in the following:

                             Air quality from stack emission. The power plant will burn natural gas as its primary fuel. As a
Public Disclosure Copy




                             result, the principle pollutant during normal operation will be nitrogen oxides (NOx). During
                             emergency operation (and for no more than 2% of operating time), the burning of light fuel oil will
                             result in emissions of particulate matter and sulfur dioxide (SO2) along with trace amounts of
                             other pollutants. Although the plant is not located near any residential areas, the design of the plant
                             will ensure that the emissions from the plant will meet both Egyptian and World Bank Guidelines.
                             Air quality dispersion modeling indicates that cumulative ground level concentration, taking into
                             account surrounding industries, are within the World Bank and Egyptian standards. The ESMP
                             recommended that an air quality monitoring system composed of 2 or 3 monitoring stations be
                             utilized during operation.

                             Aquatic impact from cooling water withdrawal and discharge:

                             Cooling water will be extracted at the rate of 36 m/sec from the Gulf of Suez, and the heated
                             plume will be then returned to the Gulf. The temperature of the returned cooling water at the point
                             of discharge conforms to the Egyptian Standard, and the discharge as modeled satisfies the World
                             Bank standard of a maximum increase of 3oC above ambient at the edge of the mixing zone (100
                             m from the point of discharge). In addition, the area affected by the highest temperature increases
                             and therefore where aquatic ecology is likely to be most affected is localized.

                             Noise impact from the plant operation:

                                                                        Page 4 of 11
                         The plant is not close to any human settlements or residential areas. In addition, the potential noise
                         emissions from the plant during operation have been modeled to provide noise contours in the area
Public Disclosure Copy




                         around the site. The predicted operational noise levels at the site boundary and at all receptors are
                         below the Egyptian and World Bank guidelines during both daytime and night-time.

                         The main potential impacts from the transmission lines include avian and aircraft hazards; induced
                         effects from electromagnetic fields; vegetation damage, habitat loss, and invasion by exotic
                         species along the right of way and access roads and around substation sites; and chemical
                         contamination from chemical maintenance techniques. Proposed environmental mitigation
                         measures include selecting the right of way to avoid important bird habitats, flight routes, and
                         human activities; installing deflectors on lines in areas with potential for bird collisions; utilizing
                         mechanical clearing techniques, grazing and/or selective chemical applications; selecting
                         herbicides with minimal undesired effects; and maintaining naturally low-growing vegetation
                         along the right of way.

                         The substations and transmission Lines in relation to Helwan and strengthening of Sokhna
                         connection:

                         The majority of environmental impacts are expected to occur during the construction phase.
                         Construction waste, noise generated from construction equipment in addition to minor traffic
                         congestions in local roads are the most significant environmental impacts anticipated. Since, the
                         route of the transmission lines as well as the location of the substations will be primarily on desert
                         unoccupied lands, the environmental impacts are expected to be localized, short lived, and
                         reversible.

                         During operation, the risk of having negative impacts on migratory birds has been carefully
                         studied through a supplementary detailed study carried out by EETC. The study indicated that the
                         planned route of the transmission lines will not interfere with any of the major routes of migratory
Public Disclosure Copy




                         birds crossing Egypt in specific seasons.

                         Mitigation measures have been provided by adequate institutional arrangements and budget for
                         effective implementation, supervision and monitoring. Mitigation, monitoring and management
                         measures proposed to be adopted by the Egyptian Electricity Transmission Company (EETC) are
                         detailed in the tables in ESIA report. These requirements will be included as conditions of contract
                         on the contractor and any sub-contractors employed to build or operate any part of the power plant.

                         The transmission lines will be implemented by the Egyptian Electricity Transmission Company
                         (EETC) and corresponding ESIA and RPFs have been prepared. These have been reviewed and
                         cleared for disclosure prior to appraisal of Helwan South Project in September, 2012 and after
                         incorporation of comments have been re-disclosed in August 2013. Permanent land acquisition
                         will be limited only for the land needed for the towers (tower base). The largest tower requires a
                         parcel of land 25mx25m in size for its base. EETC practice is not to buy the land but to enter into
                         a long-term lease for tower bases. Each tower has four concrete foundations, with each foundation
                         requiring a piece of land at most 4mx4m in size; the rest of the tower base can be used by the
                         owners. Before the construction of the transmission line, a RAP will be prepared to cover all
                         impacts (both permanent and temporary). The RAP will be translated and disclosed and
                         compensations will be paid prior to the start of construction work.



                                                                    Page 5 of 11
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             Reliable electricity generation and supply will be critical for Egypt’s longer-term development,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           as demand for electricity is expected to increase considerably in the coming years. Positive long-
                           term socio-economic impacts are expected, particularly through the provision of employment
                           opportunities and economic investments into the area. No long-term or irreversible indirect
                           impacts are anticipated from the project activities, provided that the mitigation measures proposed
                           in the ESMP are implemented.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             An analysis of alternatives was carried out during the ESIA preparation. The no action alternative
                           to the proposed power plant would result in the demand for electricity exceeding supply, with an
                           increasing deficit as demand increases in the future. As a result, the “no action? option was not
                           considered to be a viable or acceptable alternative to the proposed project. Alternative electricity
                           supply options were also considered, but it was determined that a new gas-fired plant at Al-Ain
                           Al-Sokhna site was the preferred alternative. Alternative technology and fuel were also
                           considered, and it was determined that the optimal option was gas oil-fired steam units, on the
                           basis of primarily operational flexibility and grid stability and also fuel flexibility. Alternative sites
                           were considered but the one at Ain Sokhna was preferred on a number of economic and non-
                           economic basis.

                           For the transmission line, an analysis of alternatives was carried out during the ESIA preparation.
                           The no action alternative will result in lack of power evacuation and transmission to load centers
                           and consequently the demand for electricity exceeding supply with an increasing deficit as demand
                           increases in future years. A lack of secure and reliable electricity generation and supply system has
                           significant social and economic implications since it will constrain existing and future economic
                           development, restrict socioeconomic development and restrict provision of social services. “No
                           action? alternative means loss of all project benefits.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The alternative route for the transmission line was also examined and included the examination of
                           three alternative routes. The chosen route was found to be the most feasible economically,
                           environmentally and socially. The chosen route avoids human settlements, and also avoids mining
                           areas that threat the transmission line. The desert, state owned land segment of the transmission
                           line represents approximately 88% of the total line, while only 12% passes through privately
                           owned agriculture land.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Institutionally, the project activities under the savings, namely, the substation and transmission
                           line falls under the responsibility of the EETC, a subsidiary for EEHC. The power plant was
                           implemented under the EDEPC. EETC will be in charge of the implementation of safeguards
                           measures for the substation and the transmission lines.

                           The ESMP delineates the roles and responsibilities for implementing the ESMP during
                           construction and operation. Suitably qualified and experienced contractors will be responsible for
                           the detailed design and construction of the power plant. Construction workers will be required to
                           demonstrate appropriate skills, qualifications and/or experience prior to employment.



                                                                       Page 6 of 11
                         During construction, Project Management Unit/Environmental Management Staff and the
                         Assistant Plant Manager in collaboration with the Site Manager will ensure that all contracts with
                         Contractors and sub-contractors stipulate all construction management measures (as given in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ESMP), operational design criteria and environment, health and safety standards which must be
                         implemented at the project site.

                         Implementation of these measures for the power plan are enforced by PMU/EMS and the Assistant
                         Plant Manager and supervised by the Assistant Plant Manager, supported by EDEPC Project
                         Manager in collaboration with the Site Manager, who has direct responsibility for the
                         Environment, Safety and Quality Assurance program on site during construction and operation.
                         The Assistant Plant Manager is responsible for ensuring that construction works comply with the
                         requirements of the ESMP and all environmental permits.

                         During operation of the power plant, direct responsibility for environmental compliance and the
                         implementation of the mitigation, management and monitoring measures will continue to be with
                         the Plant Environmental Staff under direct supervision of the Assistant Plant Manager. This
                         position will report directly to the Chairman/General Manager of EDEPC. The Assistant Plant
                         Manager will be based at the site and will be responsible for recruiting, training and managing his
                         staff. He will be responsible for implementing the mitigation and management measures described
                         above and for monitoring and record keeping of key environmental issues. In his role, the
                         Assistant Plant Manager will also be responsible for maintaining any pollution control equipment
                         and for developing and implementing procedures for safe handling and storage of any hazardous
                         materials used on site.

                         The Assistant Plant Manager will also have lead responsibility for maintaining a written
                         Environmental Register with respect to environmental impacts as required under Egyptian
                         guidelines. The written records will identify the characteristics of discharges and emissions, details
                         of periodic testing including results, procedures for follow-up environmental safety actions and the
                         person in charge of this follow-up. Should any prescribed standards be breached, PMU/EMS,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through the Assistant Plant Manager, will immediately inform the EEAA and disclose the
                         procedures being taken to rectify non-conformity.

                         In addition, the project company must keep a record of any significant environmental incidents
                         occurring at the plant including accidents and occupational illnesses, spills, fires and other
                         emergencies. The Assistant Plant Manager will be responsible for ensuing that these records are
                         maintained up to date and are available on site. The Assistant Plant Manager will supervise and
                         lead the Environmental Department (ED) and the Environmental Management Staff (EMS)
                         directed by the ED.

                         The cost of ESMP implementation for the power plant is US$0.62 million, which covers
                         mitigation measures during construction and operation phases, institutional aspects and training,
                         and monitoring program. Th e source of the ESMP implementation budget is EDEPC. The cost of
                         additional component A1 ESMP is US$0.773 million and is covered by EETC.

                         In terms of previous capacity, EDEPC has been financing power projects with international
                         financing institutions for several years, including the Tebbin Power Project financed by the World
                         Bank, and is thus experienced with the Bank’s safeguard polices. Implementation of safeguard
                         aspects of the Tebbin Power Project is highly satisfactory.



                                                                    Page 7 of 11
                           In addition, Egypt has strict environmental regulations on ESIAs in conjunction with large
                           infrastructure projects and each ESIA undertaken needs formal approval by the Egyptian
                           Environmental Affairs Agency (EEAA).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           With its capacity as the implementing agency for the substation and the transmission line, EETC
                           have the overall responsibility for implementation of Environment and Social Management Plan
                           and the RPF. On EETC HQ level and Social Development Officer has been assigned to be
                           responsible for ensuring compliance with the social and environmental requirements of the ESMP
                           and the RPF. In the meantime, and on the zones level, Environmental and Social Officers were
                           assigned and they will be responsible for following up the implementation on the ground,
                           communicating with local communities and addressing their concerns as well as supervising the
                           contractor performance to ensure compliance to the mitigation measures and the management
                           plan. The zones Environmental and Social Officers will report periodically to the HQ Social
                           Development Officer.

                           The newly assigned team on the HQ and zones level are having their capacities built through
                           support provided by the Bank team on day to day activities as well as planned structured training
                           on various safeguards issues.

                           EETC has designed a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) to allow for efficient and prompt
                           responsiveness to complaints and concerns of local communities and more specifically people who
                           could be affected from the project. Tiers and channels of handling complaints were identified
                           along with tools to be deployed along the process, starting with receiving the complaint until it is
                           resolved.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             In order to ensure that the views and interests of all project stakeholders are taken into account,
                           public consultation was carried out according to the Egyptian guidelines, which require
Public Disclosure Copy




                           coordination with other government agencies involved in the ESIA as well as obtaining views of
                           local people and affected groups. The adopted methodology for the public consultation conforms
                           to Egyptian guidelines and World Bank requirements,

                           The key stakeholders identified and consulted included the local authorities on city and village
                           level, NGOs, local businesses and commercials, environmental research institutions and academia.
                           Moreover, potentially affected population has been consulted along the process of the ESIA
                           preparation. The ESIA included a full list of consulted stakeholders and the results that came out
                           of the consultation activities.

                           (a)    Discussions with local stakeholders and interested parties during preparation of the
                           environmental documents for local permitting requirements;
                           (b)    Discussions with local stakeholders during the scoping meeting for the preparation of this
                           ESIA-Report;
                           (c)    On-going consultation through the Environmental and Social Officers on the zones level
                           who are regularly communicating with the local communities and affected persons.

                           As far as public disclosure is concerned, major initiatives to inform the public and interested
                           parties about the project include the following:



                                                                      Page 8 of 11
                           (a)      press advertisement describing the project and inviting interested parties to attend the
                           public meeting and review the Draft Final ESIA Report;
                           (b)      Distribution of an invitation and Arabic copy of the Non Technical Summary describing
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the context of the power plant, the technology employed, the impact on the environment, the
                           mitigation measures and the ESMP; and
                           (c)      Disclosure of the Draft Final ESIA Report and the Executive Summary, including ESMP
                           locally and via the Infoshop.

                           A variety of environmental and socio-economic issues have been covered in these consultations.
                           A full methodology for consultation and disclosure is presented in the project’s Public
                           Consultation and Disclosure Activities (PCDA), given in Annex D of the ESIA and in Chapter 9
                           of the ESIA for the transmission line.

                           A second consultation meeting with 105 participants was convened on August 6, 2008. This
                           consultation was announced in daily newspapers well in advance, along with invitations sent to all
                           relevant stakeholders. Those consulted in these sessions expect the project to have significant
                           positive long-term impacts, and in the short term considerable additional local employment will be
                           created. A more detailed description of these meetings as well as other consultation activities is
                           presented in the project’s Public Consultation and Disclosure Activities, Annexes A-D of the
                           ESIA.

                           For the transmission line component, a scoping session for was undertaken by EETC in March
                           during which a wide selection of personnel from different orientations contributed actively to its
                           activities. The key objectives of this consultation were to identify primary and secondary
                           stakeholders, ensure that they had received sufficient information about the project during earlier
                           consultation activities and to identify their immediate concerns. During the scoping session, the
                           scope of the ESIA was explained to stakeholders and their views were obtained and have been
                           integrated and considered along the ESIA process.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The ESIA preparation involved several consultative activities with affected communities. This
                           included number of focus group discussion, surveys and interviews. These activities helped in
                           sharing the project information, the anticipated impacts and the mitigation measures.
                           Documentation of these activities is also included in the ESIA. In the meantime, EETC is
                           committed to ongoing dialogue and consolations with communities along the line through the
                           assigned environmental and social officers in the zones level.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 07-Aug-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              04-Sep-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Egypt, Arab Republic of                                     07-Aug-2013
                           Comments: Egyptian Electricity Transmission Company (EETC) premises and eetc.net.eg
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 07-Aug-2013


                                                                     Page 9 of 11
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                   04-Sep-2013
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Egypt, Arab Republic of                                          07-Aug-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Comments: Egyptian Electricity Transmission Company (EETC) premises and eetc.net.eg
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Mohab Awad Mokhtar Hallou


                                                                       Page 10 of 11
                         Approved By
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)     Date: 11-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (SM)   Date: 13-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            Page 11 of 11
