                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                           ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA1041

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Oct-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Oct-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          West Bank and Gaza                Project ID:    P151032
                                                       Parent         P101289
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     Additional Financing for Water Supply & Sewage Systems Improvement
                     (P151032)
   Parent Project    GZ-Gaza Water Supply & Sewage System Improvement (P101289)
   Name:
   Task Team       Iyad Rammal
   Leader:
   Estimated       29-Sep-2014                         Estimated   30-Oct-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit: GWADR                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Water supply (50%), Sanitation (25%), Public administration- Water, sanitation
                     and flood protection (25%)
   Theme(s):         Urban services and housing for the poor (100%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:        15.00           Total Bank Financing:   0.00
   Financing Gap:              0.00
     Financing Source                                                                       Amount
     Borrower                                                                                 0.00
     Partnership for Water and Urban Development in the West
                                                                                               12.00
     Bank
     Special Financing                                                                          3.00
     Total                                                                                     15.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:




                                             Page 1 of 8
Is this a           Yes
Repeater
project?

2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The project development objective is to improve the quality and efficiency of water supply and
   wastewater service provision in Gaza. This will be achieved through (i) rehabilitation and
   expansion of existing water and wastewater systems, and (ii) enhancing the capacity of the
   Coastal Municipalities Water Utility (CMWU) to sustain water and wastewater services.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   To improve the quality and efficiency of water supply and wastewater service provision in Gaza
   and assist in restoration of basic water supply and wastewater services through: (i) rehabilitation
   and reconstruction of existing and damaged water and wastewater systems, and (ii) enhancing the
   capacity of the Coastal Municipalities Water Utility (CMWU) to sustain water and wastewater
   services.
3. Project Description
Based on the detailed damage assessment, a priority list of scaled-up activities was established which
can be financed with the available envelope. The additional financing will be used for the activities
listed below, which are similar to the activities under the original components of the WSSSIP. All
damaged works will be rehabilitated and if necessary upgraded in line with the CWMU Master Plan.
Since it is expected that more damages will become apparent as the debris is being cleared, and since
prices of materials and equipment are a function of the import restrictions imposed by the Israeli
authorizes, a high contingency rate of 20% is used for both price and physical contingencies.

Component 1: Improving Water Supply and Wastewater Facilities.

Subcomponent 1.1: Water Supply Network Rehabilitation and Reconfiguration (US $2.2M)
Reconstruction of two groundwater reservoirs of 1,500 m3 capacity each, complete with water
booster stations to serve both Khoza'a and Abassan Al Kabira areas in Khan Younis governorate in
order to replace the damaged reservoirs. Structural rehabilitation and repairs of partially damaged
ground water reservoirs in Al Musader (350 m3), Wadi Al Salqa (350 m3), and Al Moghrakah (3000
m3) located in the middle area governorate. Electromechanical rehabilitation and repair of partially
damaged Al Rahma water booster station located at the existing Rahma 5000 m3 ground water
reservoir in Khan Younis.

Subcomponent 1.2: Rehabilitation of water wells. (US $0.5M)
Drilling and reconstruction of two wells to replace the completely damaged Abu Hamam and Abu
Naser wells, each of 60 m3/hr production capacity in Deir Al Balah area. Also, 8 partially damaged
wells shall be repaired and rehabilitated including civil and electromechanical works. The works
shall cover electromechanical rehabilitation of Al Salam Brackish water desalination plant of 50 m3/
hour production capacity in Rafah which was partially damaged.



                                             Page 2 of 8
Subcomponent 1.3: Service water meter replacement and installation of district meters. (US $2.2M)
Replacement of all damaged carrier water lines including connections, valves and plumbing fixtures
and upgrading of water networks with all associated household connections .This will cover UPVC
piping and ductile pipes wherever applicable, including 4 km of 14" diameter pipes,5 km of 12"
diameter pipes, 8 km of 10" diameter ,16 km of 8" ,6",4",2" diameters. Also, the works and supplies
shall include two leakage detection vehicles to detect leakage in order to reduce it.

Subcomponent 1.4: Upgrading and maintenance of wastewater pumping stations (US $3.65M)
Carry out comprehensive cleaning and desludging of 6 anaerobic wastewater lagoons located at 3
treatment plants in North,Rafah and Khan Younis plants. This will improve the performance of the
plants by increasing the detention time for anaerobic lagoons. Also, the works shall include
electromechanical rehabilitation of mechanical surface aerators located in Khan Younis and North
WWTP and a rotary arm for bio tower in Rafah WWTP, as well as effluent water pumping stations
with all associated electrical and mechanical installations requirements.

Replacement and upgrading of various wastewater gravity pipelines of different sizes with all
associated manholes requirements which are damaged during the war periods. Electromechanical
rehabilitation and repairs of 10 wastewater pumping stations including the replacement of damaged
electrical switchboards, generators, pressure manifolds and pumps.

Procurement of two loaders, two backhoes, one excavator, two trucks and five equipped maintenance
vehicles. Comprehensive repair of 10 partially damaged service water and wastewater vehicles with
all associated spare parts.



Component 2: Utility Capacity Building and Operational Support.

Subcomponent 2.1: Construction of utility central facilities. (US $0.4M)
Rehabilitate the administration and operational buildings of the CMWU. Procurement of 30 PCs ,10
printers ,5 photocopiers, scanners and other IT equipment which are partially damaged at different
CMWU regional offices

Subcomponent 2.2: Technical Assistance for CMWU (US $0.3M)
Repair and replace damaged Information Technology equipment (computers, printers, servers).
Additional requirements of chlorine disinfection solution required to chlorinate the targeted
reservoirs again ,water supply tanks, water networks and bring them safely again to the services
mode .Also, additional chemicals for desalination plants are required to secure the operation of 9
brackish water desalination plants each of 50m3/hr production capacity and one sea water
desalination plant of 115 m3/hour .Diesel fuel quantities of at least 250 000 liters has to bemade
available to cover the deficits required for standby generators operated for more than 12 hours a day
after the complete damage of Gaza electricity generation plant .

Subcomponent 2.3: Operational Assistance for CMWU. (US $1.3M)
Purchase chlorine (extra demand to disinfect the entire water networks) and chemicals , and fuel.
Procurement of two loaders, two backhoes, one excavator, two trucks and five equipped maintenance
vehicles. Comprehensive repair of 10 partially damaged service water and wastewater vehicles with
all associated spare parts.



                                             Page 3 of 8
Enhance the CMWU environmental monitoring programs established by CMWU for both water and
wastewater services, and additional laboratory equipment and kits will be procured to enhance the
CMWU laboratory capacity. Several additional activities and mitigation measures should be carried
out to maintain both safe dumping of sludge generated from wastewater treatment plants and safe
effluent wastewater to the sea outfalls which were partially damaged during hostilities. Also, a water
quality monitoring program shall be established at customers household points where actual blending
is taking place along with the water distribution networks.

Component 3: Recurrent Costs (US #1.95)
Additional contributions to PMU and CMWU recurrent cost and monitoring and evaluation from
October 2014 till December 2017

The proposed activities include significant financing for environmental mitigation and for
contributions to the recurrent costs of the PMU and the CMWU. Additional environmental mitigation
and monitoring is necessary as groundwater recharge areas and wells have been affected by
uncontrolled sewage and possibly by hazardous substances used in the shells, bombs and ammunition
used by the IDF. Environmental monitoring as such might indicated for more rigorous rehabilitation
than estimated in the damage assessment. Additional financing to the CMWU is necessary as a
result of the significant loss of revenues from bill collection. Therefore the AF will bridge the gap in
CMWU operating costs until bill collection is back to previous or better levels, which could be
achieved project closing on December 31, 2017.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project would support the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the basic physical water supply
infrastructure in Gaza Strip. Infrastructure investments are concentrated within the middle and
southern governorates in Gaza Strip. The parent project ESIA/ESMPhas being revised to incorporate
sub-projects additional to the parent project for AF financing; these subprojects are in the same
geographic areas as those of the parent project. More specifically, operational assistance cover
operation of facilities in North Gaza and Gaza governorates. Subcomponent 4 of the first component
will finance the rehabilitation and upgrading of sewage pumping stations in all five governorates in
Gaza Strip.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
John R. Butler (GSURR)
Tracy Hart (GENDR)
Hana Salah (GSURR)

 6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              As the proposed AF is primarily restoration of
 BP 4.01                                              similar physical works funded by the parent
                                                      project, WSSSIP, there is no change to the
                                                      safeguard category, nor the triggered safeguards
                                                      policies. Hence the only relevant environmental
                                                      safeguards policy is OP 4.01 on Environmental
                                                      Assessment, and the proposed AF remains as an
                                                      environmental safeguards category B. The
                                                      safeguards instruments of the parent project


                                              Page 4 of 8
                                                  (ESIA/ESMP) can be applied to the proposed AF,
                                                  with minor updating to the ESMP to reflect the
                                                  proposed AF sites. The content of the ESIA as
                                                  well as the environmental consultations for the
                                                  initial WSSSIP is still applicable.
   Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No           No known natural habitats are affected by project
                                                  activities.
   Forests OP/BP 4.36                No           No known forests are affected by project
                                                  activities.
   Pest Management OP 4.09           No           N/A

   Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No           No known physical cultural resources are affected
   BP 4.11                                        by project activities.
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No           N/A

   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No           The project will not require any land acquisition
   4.12                                           as it will be carried out on existing facility sites
                                                  and on public land (including waqf lands) and on
                                                  municipality property and thus will not entail any
                                                  resettlement or land acquisition and will not
                                                  trigger the Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12
                                                  safeguards policy. The project will avoid all
                                                  areas where internally displaced people are
                                                  temporarily housed. The CMWU has confirmed
                                                  that there are no IDPs on the site of the works,
                                                  and also the World Bank task team did not
                                                  observe any IDPs on sites to be rehabilitated
                                                  which were visited during a recent mission.
                                                  Formal consultations were carried out in the
                                                  original project and the World Bank was
                                                  informed that the populations affected have not
                                                  changed. Information about the project and
                                                  construction schedules will be communicated to
                                                  the beneficiary population in an consultative
                                                  manner. Environmental and social
                                                  documentation will be updated and revised as
                                                  necessary and redisclosed locally in local
                                                  language (Arabic).
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No           N/A

   Projects on International        No            N/A
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No            N/A
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management


                                          Page 5 of 8
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
  and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
  As the proposed AF is primarily restoration of recently-built physical works funded by the parent
  project, WSSSIP, as well as other small-scale civil works similar in scope and geographical area,
  there is no change to the safeguard category, nor the triggered safeguards policies. Hence the only
  relevant environmental safeguards policy is OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment, and the
  proposed AF remains as an environmental safeguards category B. The safeguards instruments of
  the parent project (ESIA/ESMP) will be applied to the proposed AF, with minor updating to the
  ESMP to reflect the proposed AF sites. The content of the ESIA as well as the environmental
  consultations for the initial WSSSIP is still applicable. Hence CMWU will use the ESMP to
  address any and all expected environmental impacts, as well as mitigation and monitoring
  measures. Client supervision of environmental safeguards aspects during implementation of
  WSSSIP small civil works has been consistently rated Satisfactory, with timely and clear written
  monitoring and reporting records. The client has also complied with measuring and reporting
  relevant water quality indicators.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  The social development impacts of this project are expected to be generally positive, including
  restoring water and sewerage services, reducing physical dangers caused by damaged systems;
  providing employment for local contractors and workers, and restoring water and sanitation
  services to hospitals, schools and homes . Similarly, the, environmental impacts of this project
  are expected to be overwhemingly positive, as there has been an increase in raw sewage outflow,
  through the population, out to the sea, and potentially seeping into the aquifer. Drinking water is
  in short supply; the intervention intends to restore water supply coverage and quality to previously
  acceptable levels. Potential negative impacts of the project are limited to the project construction
  phase and may include noise, dust, obstruction of access to business and houses, etc. These
  negative impacts are manageable; their mitigation is addressed in the project Environmental and
  Social Management Plan (ESMP), whose scope and area remain the same.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  The World Bank considered providing financing to the water sector needs in Gaza through a
  stand-alone emergency project. This alternative was not favored as it required longer processing
  time, whereas the needs in Gaza are immediate and critical. Since all the activities envisaged
  under this proposed AF are in line with the original WSSSIP PDO and cover the same geographic
  locations, with the original project components and implementation mechanisms already in place,
  the same fiduciary, environmental and social safeguard mechanisms can apply, thus facilitating
  implementation in the early stages
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and
  Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) which details the environmental impacts and
  mitigation measures, respectively. The borrower retains trained staff who have accumulated
  considerable knowledge during the implementation of the current WSSSIP project and have thus
  been proven capable to implement the EMP. Client supervision of environmental safeguards
  aspects during implementation of WSSSIP small civil works has been consistently rated


                                            Page 6 of 8
  Satisfactory, with timely and clear written monitoring and reporting records. The client has also
  complied with measuring and reporting relevant water quality indicators. With regards to
  grievance resolution, complaints will be resolved by providing a written complaints to the
  borrower/client. If the issue cannot be resolved, an alternative method of completing the project
  will be identified. All complaints must be documented, including meetings and discussions of how
  the issues are resolved. The CMWU has been using a grievance process and has agreed to
  formalize this with improved documentation going forward.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Robust stakeholder consultations were conducted as part of the parent project, especially
  throughout the ESIA preparation process. Consultations with different groups and entities were
  conducted for the purposes of informing communities about the project, seekingtheir inputs to the
  design including on the consideration of alternatives. The consultation process, which is well
  documented in the ESIA, was intended to improve transparency and accountability of decision-
  making; and increase public confidence in the ESIA process. The range of stakeholders’
  consultations was widely varying and it included staff from Coastal Municipalities Water
  Authority (CMWU), the Palestinian Water Authority, mayors, wastewater experts and local
  engineers. In addition, focus group discussions and interviews were conducted with community
  members and individuals (teachers, representatives from women’s organizations, ordinary
  citizens) residing in the project area to elicit their viewpoints regarding the project.

  An Executive Summary of the ESIA/ESMP has been disclosed prior to parent project appraisal at
  the Bank’s Infoshop and in-country in Arabic and English . The nature of the in-country
  disclosure ensures that all project information is readily accessible to all stakeholders, including
  those affected by the project. The ESIA/ESMP has been slightly revised to incorporate
  information relevant to the circumstances of the AF.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Sep-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Sep-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  West Bank and Gaza                                               24-Sep-2014
  Comments: Disclosure of the updated WSSSIP-AF ESIA/ESMP and associated Executive
                Summaries in English and Arabic has been disclosed in the InfoShop, the CMWU/
                PWA website, and is available at the CMWU headquarters in Gaza City,
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment


                                             Page 7 of 8
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    report?
    If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
    Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the credit/loan?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:      Name: Iyad Rammal
   Approved By
   Practice Manager/      Name: Steven N. Schonberger (PMGR)                 Date: 30-Sep-2014
   Manager:




                                              Page 8 of 8
