INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 157
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Feb-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Ethiopia                   Project ID:  P148591
Project Name: Second Agricultural Growth Project (P148591)
Task Team       Andrew D. Goodland
Leader(s):
Estimated       09-Feb-2015                Estimated    26-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFADR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%), Irrigation and drainage
(30%), Agricultural extension and research (20%), Ag ro-industry, marketing,
and trade (20%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Water resource management (20%),
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (10%), Gender ( 10%), Nutrition
and food security (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
ci 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:     581.80            Total Bank Financing:  350.00
Financing Gap:         216.20
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         15.60
International Development Association (IDA)                               350.00
Total                                                                     365.60
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to increase agricultural productivity and commercialization of
small holder farmers targeted by the project.
Page 1 of 11


﻿3. Project Description
The primary target of the project is small holder farmers, who crop an average area less than 2.3
hectares and live in areas of Ethiopia with the highest potential for agricultural growth. The project
direct beneficiaries will be: farmers benefiting from specific trainings at Farmer Training Centers
(FTCs) with inputs, farmers in community investment groups, farmers in water user associations,
farmers benefiting from small scale irrigation and household irrigation, farmers in Farmer Research
Extension Groups, farmers being linked to the market by the project, farmers using animal health
a         services, farmer members of cooperatives supported by the project etc. In addition, the project will
reach a significant number of indirect beneficiaries, as it will improve public agricultural services
overall and access to some markets.
The project will also specifically target women farmers with tailor made innovations, activities and
technical assistance, as a gap between female and male farmers remains in Ethiopia. Female farm
managers produce 23 percent less (in terms of gross value of output) per hectare than male managers
on average. Ethiopia's female farmers face multiple challenges that hinder their productivity:
differences in both the levels of productive factors used and the returns that these factors generate
drive the country's gender gap to a substantial degree. Therefore, the proposed project will
emphasize special targeting of women farmers: both female head of household and married females.
The project design builds on the lessons from AGP and the identified investment needs for the sector
to achieve the ambitious goals established in the Government's Growth and Transformation Plan
(GTP).
The proposed components are as follows.
Component One: Agricultural Public Services. To increase the access to public agricultural services
of smallholder farmers, the project will support:
(a)    The identification of local priorities for public services through the establishment, operation
and strengthening of Agriculture Development Partners Linkage Advisory Councils (ADPLACs),
and linkages to other planning mechanisms including community consultation and local strategic
plans.
(b)    The strengthening of public service delivery, including for agricultural extension services;
livestock production and animal health services; crop production and plant health services; natural
resource management services; soil fertility management services; and agricultural mechanization.
This would include supporting small scale works and equipment (including for mobility of service
providers) for local service providers (Farmer Training Centers (FTCs); Animal Health Posts);
promotion and demonstration of identified priority technologies at FTC and model farmers, including
for agricultural mechanization; support for regional level facilities (soil laboratories, etc.); training
and human capacity support for service providers (Subject Matter Specialists, Development Agents,
Animal Health Workers, etc.).
(c)    Support the scaling up of identified "best" practice following the government's strategy,
including the identification (through a community consultation process) of local good practices,
validation and verification of local practices, and extension though FTCs and model farmers. In this
regard, the project would align and receive additional support through the proposed Netherlands-
financed CASCAPE project. Screening of technologies will include systematic assessment of
nutrition, gender-impact and contribution to climate-smart agriculture (including tillage, soil
nutrients etc.).
Component Two: Agricultural Research. To increase the supply of demand driven agricultural
Page 2 of 11


﻿technologies which directly link to the other components, the project will support:
(a)    the release of technologies to the agricultural extension system, through: i) the identification
of prioritized technologies, for which the National Agricultural Research System has completed
research station validation, and which are directly linked to the project objectives identified through
Q)        local planning processes (Component 1); support small scale irrigation (Component 3); and/or
support the commercialization of selected value chains (Component 4); and ii) field testing new
technologies through Farmer Research and Extension Groups. Screening of technologies will include
systematic assessment of nutrition, gender-impact and contribution to climate-smart agriculture
(including tillage, soil nutrients etc.).
(b)    The multiplication of improved technologies i.e. breeder and pre-basic seeds for production
(Component 1&3) and marketing (Component 4); machinery/implement prototypes (Component 1);
(c)    Capacity building for the agricultural research system to enable both national and regional
research centers to effectively respond to emerging research needs, including for increased focus on
high value crops.
Component Three: Small-scale Irrigation. To increase the access to and efficient utilization of
irrigation water of small holder farmers, the project will support:
(a)    Increased availability of irrigated water through i) the rehabilitation, upgrading and/or
improvement of existing Small-scale Irrigation Schemes; ii) establishment of new SSI systems
integrated with access roads where necessary; and iii) household/micro irrigation systems.
(b)    Improved water management services through establishing and/or strengthening Irrigation
Water Users Associations
Component Four: Agriculture marketing and value chains. To commercialize small holder farmers
through market access and efficiency of input and output markets, the project would support:
(a)    The availability of agricultural inputs and specifically for seed through support to seed
multiplication and the scale up of Direct Seed Marketing / community based seed production.
(b)    The strengthening of formal and informal farmer organizations, including formal farmer
organizations (Unions, Primary Cooperatives) and informal, commercially oriented farmer groups
(informal groups establishment would be focused on women and youth groups). The project would
support business plan preparation and implementation, including through the provision of matching
grants to qualifying groups. Service providers, including the Cooperative Agency, would receive
capacity support. Improved access to credit (both rural savings and credit cooperatives and Micro-
a         finance Institutions) would be facilitated.
(c)    The strengthening of selected livestock and crop value chains (to be confirmed, though likely
to include those currently supported under AGP (coffee, sesame, maize, wheat, honey, chickpea,
meat (shoat and cattle), milk, with the possible addition of horticulture and poultry), through a range
of activities including technical assistance to cooperatives and market buyers (including processors
and exporters), linkages between VC participants, including from importing markets (such as
participation in trade shows); competitive matching grants etc. Note that this sub-component is
likely to be financed through a parallel financing mechanism funded by USAID.
(d)    Market infrastructure development and management, including (i) construction and
modernized management of public market centers at woreda level; (ii) where clear rationale and exit
strategy for public sector investment is demonstrated, to support the construction of warehouses,
storage and grading facilities; and (iii) foot bridges which address critical market access bottlenecks
for communities.
Component Five: Program Management, Capacity Building and Monitoring and Evaluation. To
ensure project implementation, the effective monitoring and evaluation of results and a consistent
Page 3 of 11


﻿and effective approach to capacity development, the project would support:
(a)    Program management and coordination, including (i) financing the staffing of federal,
regional and woreda coordination units and Steering Committees; (ii) procurement, financial
management and safeguard functions; and (iii) goods and equipment to support project management
O
U         and implementation.
(b)    Monitoring, evaluation and learning, including (i) regular monitoring of project inputs and
outputs; (ii) participatory monitoring and feedback; (iii) baseline followed by mid-term and end of
project impact assessments; and (iv) internal learning, Knowledge sharing and communication.
(c)    Capacity Development Support Facility, which will provide technical support to all human
capacity building, throughout the project in order to (i) improve the quality of capacity development
interventions; and (ii) strengthen the institutional capacity of implementing agencies. Note that this
sub-component would be financed through a parallel financing provided by Canada DFATD.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
AGP2 will be implemented in 157 woredas with high potential for agricultural production and
commercialization located in Amhara, Oromia, Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples (SNNP),
Tigray, Benishangul Gumuz, Gambella, and Harari Regions as well as Dire Dawa Administrative
Council.
The project woredas have similar agro-ecological conditions and market access for increasing
agricultural productivity and commercialization. This, among others, includes the availability of
surface water or shallow ground water which can be exploited for irrigated agriculture. The woredas
are mostly in the highlands of Ethiopia, which are the traditional cereals production areas which
receive relatively high levels of rainfall. Though the specific sites for project implementation are not
yet known, the sub-projects will be implemented on agricultural lands.
For impact on land use and structure, the social management plan used under AGP 1 has been
updated and customized to the specificity of this project. The issues relating to OP 4.10 are defined
in detail through the Social Assessment (SA) and Consultation to reflect the policy requirements. The
SA process facilitates the identification of underserved groups that deserve special attention due to
their vulnerabilities and the project will provide a mitigation plan to preclude any social risk or
negative impacts on them.
o         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Asferachew Abate Abebe (GENDR)
Chukwudi H. Okafor (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project is a Category B., given that it would
OP/BP 4.01                               finance activities, especially those related to
groundwater development, construction of small-
scale irrigation schemes, establishment of product
storage facilities and introduction of innovative
productivity-enhancing approaches that may result in
the increased use of agrochemicals such as inorganic
fertilizers and pesticides. Since the scope and nature
of the sub-projects and the specific sites for
Page 4 of 11


﻿implementing them are not known at this time, the
specific instrument proposed for analyzing potential
environmental and social risks is in the ESMF. The
ESMF has been consulted upon and disclosed.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes           Some of the Project intervention areas may include
natural habitats. To ensure that sub-projects are
screened and impacts are avoided on natural habitats,
appropriate preventive and mitigation measures are
included in the ESMF of the Project.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           No           Project activities will not be undertaken in forests.
The proposed ESMF would have screening criteria
for screening sub-projects so that natural or
plantation forests will not be affected.
Pest Management OP 4.09      Yes          Project funds may be used to manufacture, purchase
and distribute agrochemicals (such as blended
fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides), and it is likely
that more generally support through AGP to
agriculture would encourage farmers to use more
inorganic fertilizers and pesticides. The ESMF
includes a section on Pesticide Management
Guidelines and Integrated Pesticides Management
Plans (PMPs) that would elaborate on what actions
need to be undertaken to minimize environmental
and public health impacts.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes          Implementation of AGP2 activities such as small
OP/BP 4.11                                scale irrigation schemes, water reservoir and dam
excavation and rural roads construction may affect
Physical Cultural Resources (PCRs). A set of
procedures for ensuring that PCRs are considered in
the designing process of AGP2 sub-projects are
included in the ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes          The issues relating to OP 4.10 is defined in detail
4.10                                      through Social Assessment and enhanced public
Consultation with the affected persons and
communities to reflect the policy requirements. The
key findings of the social assessment including the
process used to foster free, prior, and informed
consultations and broad community support for the
project, including the provision of grievance redress,
and benefit sharing issues; and the identified
mitigating measures are incorporated in the design of
AGP2 and summarized in the PAD as the Social
Management Plan.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         The proposed project will not undertake any sub-
BP 4.12                                   projects that will displace people. However, it would
support small-scale rural infrastructure that might
Page 5 of 11


﻿affect land holdings of individual farmers. While
individual sub-projects are not yet identified, there
will be support for activities such as small scale
infrastructure to improve productivity as well as
other rural infrastructure such as feeder roads.
Therefore, as precautionary measure, the project has
prepared, consulted upon and discloses a
resettlement policy framework (RPF) prior to
appraisal to address any issues which might arise
from economic displacement and/or restriction of
access to communal natural resources under the
Project.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   Yes          The project would not finance any new establishment
or rehabilitation of large-scale irrigation facilities and
dams above 15 meters. However, the project might
finance check dams or small dams for water storage
and will finance activities that may rely on the
performance of an existing dam. In the event that
AGP2-finances activities that may have to rely on
existing dams, the Bank will review previous
assessments of dam safety or recommendations and
safety program already in operation for the particular
dam prior to commencement of activities. Generally,
it is envisaged that no significant environmental and
social risks may arise.
Projects on International    Yes         AGP2 woredas are located in international water
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                     basins such as that of the Nile or Omo River. While
the impact of individual sub-projects such as small-
scale irrigation would be neglible and the cumulative
abstractions be minor, Riparian countries will be
notified in accordance with these policies.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No        n/a
BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
General
The Environmental Category assigned to AGP2 is Category B, predicated on the fact that
environmental risks and social impacts may be minimal, manageable and, in most cases,
reversible. The proposed operation will largely impact positively on the biophysical environments
since it will support land management (improvement of soil and water as well as watersheds). The
Project has triggered seven World Bank safeguard policies, namely: Environmental Assessment
(OP/BP 4.01), related to possible risks associated with the biophysical attributes of the
environment; Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09), predicated on the possibility of agrochemical
Page 6 of 11


﻿application and disposal; Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), because "chance finds" seem
likely; Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), predicated on the assumption that the subprojects
are likely to result in land take, loss of income and sources of livelihood; OP/BP 4.10, because
potential impacts on vulnerable and historically underserved people; Safety of Dams (OP/BP
4.37), because although construction of dams above 4.5 meters will not be funded, AGP will
finance check dams or small dams or finance activities that may rely on the performance of
existing larger dams; and Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50); because although
impacts are deemed unlikely, in view of the small amounts of water abstraction for small scale
irrigation purposes, AGP has informed riparian countries in accordance with OP/BP 7.50.
Environment
AGP2 will finance activities such as ground water development, small-scale irrigation schemes,
construction of feeder roads, establishment of product storage facilities and large-scale adoption of
innovative agricultural and livestock productivity-enhancing approaches. Likely environmental
risks may be associated with pre-construction, construction/rehabilitation and operation of storage
facilities, use and disposal of agrochemicals, inappropriate use of groundwater resources (through
over-use, agrochemical sippage, etc.) could result in aquifer depletion and contamination, affecting
water quantity and quality in neighboring communities and downstream. The Government
Implementation Agency, the Ministry of Agriculture, has formulated an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) that describes in broad terms how potential project related
environmental risks and impacts associated with all the World Bank safeguard policies would be
mitigated and addressed before and during implementation of project activities. In addition, it
describes the institutional responsibilities, capacities, financial resources and monitoring needs
essential to implement mitigation measures.
Social:
The project's anticipated social impacts have triggered OP4.12 and OP4. 10 and in line with the
Bank's safeguard policies, this project has to put in place mitigation mechanisms acceptable to the
World Bank to mitigate these impacts. For impact on land use and structure, a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF), has been prepared, consulted upon and disclosed to address any potential
impacts, which is expected to be site specific and minor.
The Bank's OP4. 10 is triggered, based on the screening conducted by the World Bank and
a          reinforced by the constitution of Ethiopia, which indicate that majority of the target population
identify themselves as having the characteristics defined under OP4. 10. Therefore, social
assessment (SA) was conducted to complement the RPF. Specially, the access to and use of
common or natural resources need to be safeguarded in a process of "free, prior and informed
consultation". Consultations have taken place between all those traditionally inhabiting an area
with those external people who made agricultural investments in the area. As was done in AGP 1,
the project will set up at the kebele level, grievance redressing mechanism and issues related to the
implementation of sub-projects that affect private and community properties will be incorporated
in participatory subproject planning guidelines and set up screening criteria in the Project
Implementation Manual. Substantial numbers of community level sacred and ritual sites of
religious and cultural importance, (sacred trees, springs, rivers, ritual sites, etc.) have been
identified by the social assessment in all target locations, thereby triggering OP4. 11 Physical
Cultural Resources. Implementation of AGP2's sub-components in the area of small irrigation
schemes, water reservoir and dam excavation and rural roads construction may likely affect
physical cultural resources (PCRs). A set of procedures for ensuring that PCRs are considered in
the designing process of AGP2 sub-projects is part of the ESMF. Mandatory measures are detailed
Page 7 of 11


﻿once a PCR safeguard is triggered during a sub project screening process.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
AGP2 resources are expected to support the establishment and strengthening of farmer
organizations, processing and marketing entities and strengthening advisory and extension
services, sustainable land management (including soil & water conservation, watershed
protection), improvement in agricultural and livestock productivity and socially and
environmentally sound subprojects such as crop and fodder production. This operation will also
finance small-scale rural infrastructure including micro-irrigation and market related infrastructure
such as foot paths, footbridges, rural drainage, rural roads, market centers, community
warehouses, etc. Woreda experts and Kebele members will receive training in environmental and
social safeguard management during implementation of AGP2 and if any potential long-term or
cumulative impacts are anticipated it is believed that these could be detected early enough through
the screening process so that they can easily be avoided or mitigated. In view of this, there is no
anticipation of any indirect and/or long-term negative impact in the areas where AGP2 will be
operating. It is anticipated that AGP2 will result in long-term positive safeguard impacts in the
project area because of the emphasis the project places on ensuring sustainable agricultural
production practices.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The only alternative is a "no project" alternative. The "no project" alternative would devoid
smallholders from improving their livelihoods by boosting agricultural production and supply
products for markets. This alternative was discarded as it was not a viable option.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In early 2009, the federal EPA (now MEF) delegated safeguard review authority to seven technical
line Ministries that included the Implementation Agency, the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA). The
MoA has good experience in preparing and implementing safeguard instruments of Bank financed
projects including AGP I. The Project has developed a grievance redress system, and culturally
appropriate benefit sharing mechanisms. Safeguard implementation in AGP1 was supported by
five safeguard specialists hired by the project. In AGP2, it is expected that more safeguard
specialists will be hired to cover the newly added 57 Woredas. The project will also designate a
qualified and experienced sociologist. During AGP I, all sub-projects were screened using the
ESMF checklists and mitigation measures were suggested to mitigate negative environmental and
social impacts. Reports were submitted to the World Bank on safeguard implementation on a
regular basis. It was noted that enforcement of the mitigation measures at the local level was a big
challenge because of limited capacity. During AGP2, sufficient budget is allocated in the ESMF to
enhance the capacity of local experts for enforcing safeguards.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the project affected communities, the Ministry of Agriculture, Bureaus of
Agriculture at regional, zonal and woreda level and the kebele administration. The private sector,
research and academia and civil society constitute another category of stakeholders who will
engage in delivering specific services and benefiting directly from the project as well. The
Executive Summary of ESMF will be translated into Amharic and other local languages and
disclosed locally in all the project woreda offices. The ESMF will also be disclosed in the Bank's
Infoshop.
Page 8 of 11


﻿B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              16-Jan-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           06-Feb-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Ethiopia                                                 03-Feb-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              16-Jan-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           06-Feb-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Ethiopia                                                 03-Feb-2015
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              04-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           06-Feb-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Ethiopia                                                 06-Feb-2015
Comments: The issues pertaining to IPP were defined in the Social Assessment and Enhanced
Consultation and summarized in the annex of the PAD as the Social Management
Plan
Pest Management Plan
a
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                              16-Jan-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           06-Feb-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Ethiopia                                                 06-Feb-2015
Comments: This is defined in the ESMF
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [  ] No [ X]  NA[]
report?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Page 9 of 11


﻿Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
Ifthe project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [ X]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                              Yes[   ] No[X]      NA[     ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a      Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [ X]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [    ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                     Yes [  ] No [X]     NA [   ]
0          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent  Yes [  ] No [X]     NA [   ]
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [    ]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?   Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA [    ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [ X ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                  Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [ X ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Page 10 of I1


﻿Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
a          measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Andrew D. Goodland
Approved By
Regional Safeguards   Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)         Date: 11-Feb-2015
Advisor:
Practice Manager/     Name: Tijan M. Sallah (PMGR)              Date: 11-Feb-2015
Manager:
Page 11 of 11


