INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA9524
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Mar-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Africa                      Project ID:   P147674
Project Name: Regional Sahel Pastoralism Support Project (P 147674)
Task Team        Christian Berger
Leader(s):
Estimated        11-Mar-2015                Estimated     26-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFADR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Animal production (60%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%)
Theme(s):        Other environment and natural resources management (40%), Rural services and
infrastructure (30%), Regional integration (20%), Rural policies and institutions
(10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     248.00             Total Bank Financing:   248.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                           Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                  248.00
Total                                                                        248.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to "improve access to essential productive assets,
services, and markets for pastoralists and agro-pastoralists in selected trans-border areas and along
transhumance axes across six Sahel countries, and strengthen country capacities to respond promptly
and effectively to pastoral crises or emergencies." In this way, the proposed project will support
Page 1 of 16


﻿improved productivity, sustainability, and resilience of pastoral livelihoods, as prioritized in the
Nouakchott Declaration on Pastoralism.
The PDO will be achieved through a combination of strategic investments, capacity building, and
U         policy dialogue. The pastoral population includes all people (active and inactive persons of all ages)
who are members of a livestock-keeping household that: (i) obtains at least 90 percent of its animal
feed requirement from grazing natural vegetation and (ii) derives at least 50 percent of its income
from livestock. The agro-pastoral population includes all people (active and inactive persons of all
ages) who are members of a livestock-keeping household that: (i) obtains 10 percent or more of its
animal feed requirement from crop residues and (ii) derives at least 50 percent of its income from
cropping activities.
The main beneficiaries of PRAPS will be pastoralists and agro-pastoralists in Burkina Faso, Chad,
Mali, Mauritania, Niger, and Senegal; specific trans-boundary geographic areas and transhumance
axes are prioritized in each of these six countries. The proposed project is expected to benefit
2,070,000 people directly (200,000 in Burkina Faso, 400,000 in Chad, 440,000 in Mali, 400,000 in
Mauritania, 400,000 in Niger, and 230,000 in Senegal) whose livelihoods rely mainly on pastoral
activities, including but not limited to livestock keeping or marketing. Target groups include women
and youth, who will benefit from the project's overall activities and from activities specifically
addressing their needs whenever possible. Secondary beneficiaries include service providers (both
public and private), as well as national and regional institutions. CILSS will be a major institutional
beneficiary of this project, alongside CRSA (Centre R6gional de Sant Animale, the ECOWAS
Regional Animal Health Center, based in Bamako) and other regional coordinating partners at the
technical level. Under the harmonized approach of the Alliance Globale pour la R6silience (Global
Alliance for Resilience, AGIR) partnership, the goals of PRAPS and other development partners are
expected to align to strengthen coordination and monitoring capacities within the Sahel.
3. Project Description
PRAPS is a US$ 248 million regional operation to scale up selected activities within six Sahelian
countries that have already proven their capacity to support pastoralist groups and enhance their
regional integration; the activities are recognized throughout the region to have the potential to
provide significant beneficial spillover effects. The proposed project will build a solid alliance to
support pastoralism by pooling the expertise and resources of various actors (bilateral and
multilateral technical and financial partners, governments, the private sector, and pastoral civil
society organizations). This support is aligned with national priorities, takes regional dynamics into
account, and complies with the subsidiarity principle. PRAPS will enhance the current frameworks
for concerted action to develop a consolidated, regionally harmonized framework that serves as a
platform for multiple actors to promote sustainable actions that support pastoralism. This approach
provides flexibility to link country-specific outputs with broader, region-wide priorities.
Key problems addressed. The Nouakchott Declaration describes the main technical pillars and scope
of operational programs to support pastoralism (enhancing production services, improving the
competitiveness of the livestock sub-sector and market access, and strengthening the security of the
assets, rights, and lifestyles of pastoral people). PRAPS will coherently address a set of fundamental,
interrelated problems that weaken the resilience of pastoral groups, impede the development of
pastoralist production systems, and increasingly ignite conflict. Aside from the scarcity and very
limited reliability of basic data on pastoralism in the Sahel, the key problems include: (i) weak
productivity of pastoral systems caused by inadequate access to services and essential inputs (such as
veterinary services, water, weather data, herd and rangeland management practices, animal nutrition,
Page 2 of 16


﻿improved breeding stock, credit, and market information and advisory services adapted to mobile
communities); (ii) insufficient national and regional cooperation, particularly for disease control,
natural resource management, trans-boundary movements of herds, and the facilitation of trade; (iii)
lack of recognition and protection of the fundamental concept of mobility; and (iv) increasing
O
Q)        vulnerability owing to increased risks (climate change, animal diseases including zoonoses,
economic hazards, conflicts, and insecurity.)
The success with which these key problem are addressed and future opportunities are pursued can be
influenced by actions taken outside the purview of the proposed project. In parallel with their
participation in PRAPS, governments can do much to further develop livestock sub-sector policies
aimed at (i) strengthening the role of regional economic integration organizations (ECOWAS/
WAEMU) as facilitators and regulators of trans-boundary movements and trade; (ii) applying revised
or new frameworks for land ownership that secure access to resources; (iii) systematically including
the concerns of pastoral populations in decentralization legislation; and (iv) bringing coastal
countries (market outlets) into discussions on pastoral policies, mobility, trade issues for animals and
their products (including imports), and sector taxation.
Gender mainstreaming. Women's roles in pastoral communities and pastoralist livelihoods varies by
country and ethnic group. Women's participation in income-generating activities may be
circumscribed by a lack of mobility and resources and by cultural and religious norms. Men usually
own the livestock and migrate with most of the cattle, while women remain at the homestead to
manage the household, food security, children, and a few livestock. Even with these constraints,
women are social, economic, and political actors in their own right. Empowering women and
recognizing their inputs in pastoralism will reduce communities' vulnerability to external shocks,
including conflict.
The project has been designed to integrate issues and particular needs pertinent to women and youth
into its activities to give them sufficient attention. All activities undertaken through PRAPS must
demonstrate that gender issues have been considered whenever possible. A gender assessment will be
conducted as part of the mid-term review, and its results will be factored into subsequent
improvements in the project's design as necessary. Progress reports, such as Implementation Status
and Results reports (ISRs), will systematically cover gender. It is expected that national project
coordination units (N-PCUs) will recruit gender facilitators with local language skills to make sure
a         that women participate actively during consultations and are duly represented in all decisions. Data
collected on beneficiaries will be disaggregated by gender. At the regional level, appropriate capacity
strengthening will take place at CILSS for a coordinated approach to gender issues within the Sahel
Initiative.
Nutrition. Animal protein is an important aspect of balanced human nutrition, particularly during the
early years of life. Livestock are important to the poor not only because of their economic
contribution but because of their contribution to human development outcomes. Animals provide
nutrients and micronutrients that would otherwise be scarce or nonexistent in local diets. In Sahelian
countries, increasing the share of foods from animal sources in the caloric intake of the poor could
have many positive nutritional benefits. Promoting livestock ownership has the potential to positively
affect human nutrition in rural areas. Evidence indicates that support for livestock development often
translates into nutritional benefits for target communities; ownership of various livestock species
increases consumption of foods from animal sources and improves children's nutritional status.
PRAPS will promote livestock development in pastoral areas, and it will support the dissemination of
information on sound nutritional practices among rural beneficiaries, particularly women and
Page 3 of 16


﻿children.
Climate-smart agriculture. Despite being a source of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and
pollutants, livestock can also mitigate-and in many instances reverse-the adverse environmental
O
Q)        impacts of conventional husbandry methods. In many arid and semi-arid areas, pastoralism is the
only renewable, non-extractive use of dryland resources, and it is essential for maintaining soil and
water quality. In the Sahel, where livestock are not present, the land becomes degraded and the loss
of biodiversity accelerates. Engagement with small-scale producers is a critical entry point to enlist
their efforts as effective agents of environmentally sound practices that provide ecological services
and help to minimize or even reverse the negative impacts of current practices. Building resilience
for pastoral and agro-pastoral communities is a core dimension of PRAPS.
Greenhouse gas emissions. Pastoralist systems typically have higher GHG emissions per unit of meat
or milk product than more intensified systems. The main reason for this difference is that animal
productivity is low in pastoralist systems as a result of poor feed rations, poor animal genetic
potential, and poor health; producers also must maintain large numbers of "unproductive" animals to
act as a buffer against losses and provide goods and services such as draft power, fiber, and savings.
In turn, pastoralist systems offer equally high mitigation opportunities, which the proposed project
will tap. Interventions that improve animal health, feeding, and marketing will reduce direct GHG
emissions per unit of meat or milk product. In addition, project activities to improve rangeland
management and productivity will positively affect soil carbon stocks, offset GHG emissions, and
provide other ecosystem services related to biodiversity and water resources.
Private sector involvement. The projects focuses primarily on the provision of public goods (e.g.,
animal health, communal rangeland development, market infrastructure, crisis management systems)
that will increase the productivity of pastoral production systems. This will help increment business
opportunities for the private sector in the rapidly growing livestock trade in West Africa. Private
companies will be contracted by the project to undertake many of its activities (construction works,
service provision...). The project design acknowledges the important role played by the private
sector in the delivery of veterinary services by supporting the installation of private animal health
providers in underserved areas, and strengthening the capacity of such providers where they exist.
The project builds on the critical role of the private sector in the booming domestic and cross-border
live animal trade in West Africa. The multi-stakeholder inter-profession associations that the project
a         will help establish and strengthen will improve the vertical and horizontal coordination of the live
animal value chains, and enhance market efficiency. The private sector - representatives of
producers, traders, market intermediaries and butchers, in particular - constitute the majority
members of management committees of the market infrastructure that the project will finance. The
creation of such committees will be a pre-condition for the construction of the agreed infrastructure,
as the committee will participate in the selection of the construction sites. Project support will also
help transform the current market information systems (whenever existing) into second generation
systems geared towards meeting the specific needs of the private sector, especially producers and
traders (including exporters); traders on the cross-border corridors will participate in data collection
on road and border crossing harassment. The project will finance small-scale private rural slaughter
facilities, milk collection units and small-scale dairy processing units operated by cooperative
enterprises and women associations (dairy units). Although, the project does not finance large-scale
meat production and processing infrastructure, and industrial dairy units, frequent interactions with
IFC during preparation were to explore investment possibilities where participating countries
expressed the need for support in these areas. In some cases, IFC is already involved in supporting
private companies in the development of viable value chains, notably in the dairy sub-sector near the
Page 4 of 16


﻿urban centers of Nouakchott and Dakar.
Subsidiarity principle. National activities are part of a regionally harmonized framework, to promote
simplification and help facilitate implementation and impact. They are clearly aligned with regional
O
priorities defined by the countries themselves and part of ECOWAS Agricultural Program
(ECOWAP). During preparation, it was also agreed that the subsidiarity principle would apply when
it makes better sense to undertake certain activities at the regional level rather than in each individual
country. For this reason, certain regional activities other than those linked directly to PRAPS
management and coordination, have been delegated to CILSS to execute on behalf of the Sahelian
countries (and to CRSA for animal health activities).This applies specifically with respect to three
types of regional activities: targeted technical assistance, information/knowledge sharing, and
training. Those regional activities will be financed jointly by the Sahelian countries as follows: each
country will make 4 percent of its IDA credit/grant proceeds for PRAPS available to CILSS. CILSS
(and CRSA for animal health activities) will be responsible for implementing technical regional
activities identified on the basis of the subsidiarity principle.
A.     Project Components
Component 1: Animal Health Improvement (US$ 50.48 million). PRAPS will support critical
national and regional efforts to build more sustainable and efficient National Veterinary Services
(NVS), as well as to conduct surveillance and control campaigns for major diseases affecting large
and small ruminants. The project will focus particularly on providing local animal health services in
remote pastoral areas. The intermediate outcome to be achieved under this component is a decrease
in the prevalence of two regionally important livestock diseases-CBPP and PPR. The short-term
outcomes are an increased share of animals vaccinated against the two diseases and the construction
and rehabilitation of veterinary units. This component will benefit livestock owners, including
women, who often own domestic animals (particularly small ruminants).
As indicated, responsibility for overall regional coordination of Component 1 will be transferred by
CILSS to CRSA through a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU). PRAPS will strengthen CRSA to
fulfill its mandate to coordinate, support, and harmonize animal health strategies and activities across
countries within the region. The World Organization for Animal Health (OIE) will assist CRSA in
this task as CRSA moves toward assuming responsibilities as the ECOWAS Specialized Agency for
Animal Health in conformity with the 2012 decision of ECOWAS Heads of State.
Sub-component 1.1: Upgrading infrastructure and strengthening national veterinary services'
capacities. To strengthen NVS and improve the local provision of animal health services in pastoral
and agro-pastoral areas, the proposed project will: (i) upgrade essential infrastructure and equipment
for NVS to carry out their duties; (ii) establish animal health professionals in strategic areas for
pastoralists; (iii) build capacity through academic and continuing training programs; and (iv) provide
targeted technical assistance.
Sub-component 1.2: Support for the surveillance and control of priority animal diseases and
veterinary medicines. To curb the prevalence of critical regional diseases (especially CBPP and
PPR), the project will support the implementation of: (i) region-wide vaccination campaigns; (ii)
surveillance programs for a wider range of diseases, including Rift Valley fever (RVF), foot and
mouth disease (FMD), and brucellosis; (iii) a veterinary drug quality surveillance program; and (iv)
awareness campaigns and training for pastoralists and agro-pastoralists to increase their involvement
in animal disease surveillance and control.
Page 5 of 16


﻿At the regional level, the proposed project will support: (i) the coordination of national animal health
activities; (ii) the provision of technical assistance tailored to particular needs, mainly
epidemiological surveillance; and (iii) the development and implementation of training programs.
O
Regional activities will improve the efficiency and harmonization of high-priority trans-boundary
programs for disease surveillance and control, facilitate safer livestock movement and trade within
the region, and enhance the sharing of animal health information across countries. Such activities
will be coordinated by CRSA.
Component 2: Natural Resource Management (NRM) Enhancement (US$ 70.87 million). This
component aims to enhance pastoral and agro-pastoral communities' sustainable management of and
secure access to natural resources. It will focus specifically on water and rangeland resources, which
often extend across national boundaries. The medium-term outcomes to be achieved in the targeted
zones are an increase in the land area on which sustainable land management practices have been
adopted, a decrease in severe conflicts over access to grazing, and a decrease in the average distance
between functional water points accessible to pastoralists and agro-pastoralists in targeted zones. To
achieve these outcomes, the area under joint management will be increased, a greater share of
conflicts will be referred to conflict resolution and mediation mechanisms, and the number of
functional water points in targeted zones will be increased. Women will be involved in rangeland
management activities, and will also benefit from better access to water because they will spend less
time procuring it.
Sub-component 2.1: Improved access to natural resource and sustainable rangeland management.
The overall aim of this sub-component is to promote sustainable natural resource use in arid and
semi-arid areas of the Sahel through the implementation of concerted management practices across
all groups of users and at different scales (local, national, and beyond). These interventions should
help to prevent conflicts and build peace among communities. They will also promote macro and
micro mobility of the livestock herd (which is a determinant of sustainable NRM in drylands),
particularly along transhumance corridors.
Activities include: (i) the development, negotiation, and adjustable implementation, using
participatory and community-driven approaches, of concerted NRM plans, mostly at the local level
and along transhumance corridors; (ii) communication to raise awareness of policies and legal
frameworks on trans-boundary transhumance, access and use rights related to natural resources, and
the importance of local natural resource management committees; (iii) promotion of conflict
prevention and dispute resolution mechanisms through information and training, as well as trans-
boundary consultation platforms involving either local communities in target areas or stakeholders
and officials involved in the national livestock sub-sector; and (iv) strengthening the capacity of
officials and pastoral communities in participating countries to monitor specific natural resource
indicators that are important to pastoralism (such as rangeland health, water facilities, bushfires, and
transhumance flows) and disseminate information and decision support tools.
Implementing NRM plans at the local level will entail, among other activities, works to mark 5,100
kilometers of pastoral tracks and develop associated rest areas, rehabilitate/improve degraded
rangeland, develop pasture reserves over 55,000 hectares, and open fire breaks. It will also entail
support to rural communities-analysis, advice, training, and forums to share experiences-to set up
and strengthen local management committees and promote sustainable management practices,
technologies, and innovations among pastoral communities. The project will also build related
capacities for local governments and support services.
Page 6 of 16


﻿Sub-component 2.2: Sustainable management of infrastructure for access to water. This sub-
component recognizes the importance of water for pastoralism and the scale of the investment
needed. Drawing from planning and consultation activities undertaken under Sub-component 2.1,
this sub-component will include: (i) designing, building, and/or rehabilitating more than 450 water
facilities particularly along transhumance corridors; (ii) setting up and building capacities of water
user associations and management committees at the community level to manage and maintain water
facilities (including experience sharing and advisory/training support services); (iii) training
maintenance staff and service suppliers; and (iv) providing guidance for developing policies and
strategies (best practices, priority directions, experience sharing, studies, and consultation).
Regional activities will be coordinated by CILSS. They will entail: (i) technical support to PRAPS
countries (related for example, to resource monitoring systems and regulatory commitments made at
the regional level); (ii) efforts to share and assess experiences (for example, with developing and
managing water facilities, or with innovative and sustainable practices for managing rangeland); and
(iii) joint training initiatives (support for master's degrees and short-term training courses).
Component 3: Market Access Facilitation (US$ 45.38 million). Pastoralists have a comparative
advantage in producing ruminant livestock, and ensuring producers' access to competitive, inclusive
markets is likely to foster broad-based poverty reduction and improve the resilience of pastoralist
households. Unfortunately, a range of constraints related to infrastructure, institutions, and logistics
impede access to markets in pastoral areas, especially for small-scale producers. This component
aims to increase pastoralists' access to competitive, inclusive markets and to increase trade in
pastoral products (especially live animals) in selected areas of each country where the project will
operate. The medium-term outcome is expected to be an increase in the number of animals sold at
reference markets (a proxy for improved market access). The short-term outcome is expected to be
an increase in the number of reference markets operating according to defined criteria. Investments
related to small-scale dairy collection centers and processing units will particularly benefit women.
Sub-component 3.1: Support to market infrastructure and information systems. This sub-component
will finance the following types of investments to develop market infrastructure and small-scale
processing activities that add value: (i) construction or rehabilitation of 105 livestock markets (in all
six countries) along selected trade corridors; (ii) rehabilitation of 300 kilometers of rural roads (in
a         Senegal); (iii) construction of 8 livestock rest areas (5 in Chad and 3 in Mauritania) equipped with
appropriate logistics and services (paddock, water supply, veterinary services); (iv) creation of small-
scale processing units to add value to livestock products; and (v) the establishment or upgrading of 6
(one per country) second-generation livestock market information systems using adapted information
and communication technology.
Sub-component 3.2: Support to producer and interprofessional organizations, and trade facilitation. If
efficient market institutions that support inclusive, competitive livestock value chains are to emerge,
producer organizations and interprofessional bodies will require support. To that end, PRAPS will
finance the following capacity-strengthening and advisory services: (i) support for the establishment,
management, and governance of producer organizations; (ii) technical assistance and small office
equipment to facilitate effective governance of livestock interprofessional organizations and their
integration in value chains; (iii) training in value-adding activities for pastoralists; (iv) training to
develop and operate a business; and (v) initiatives to facilitate trade and learning.
Regional activities implemented by CILSS under this component will include: (i) establishing a
Page 7 of 16


﻿regional livestock market information system connecting the six countries, and linking them to the
import markets of West African coastal countries; (ii) monitoring and reporting incidents of road
harassment, illegal levies, and other trans-boundary difficulties; (iii) supporting regional livestock
trade associations; (iv) providing technical support to countries (such as training and workshops to
O
upgrade tools and methods); and (v) sharing knowledge on how to facilitate regional trade.
Component 4: Pastoral Crisis Management (US$ 37.56 million). This component is intended to
improve crisis preparedness, prevention, and response at the national and regional levels. The
medium-term outcome to be achieved is a reduction in the time required during a pastoral crisis to
reach 50 percent of the targeted beneficiaries (identified in a previously developed crisis intervention
plan that specifically includes pastoralists). The short-term outcomes are an increase in the number of
specific pastoral parameters integrated in national early warning systems and a reduction in the time
required to provide funding to governments to respond to a pastoral crisis that meets the eligibility
criteria. The activities financed under this component will build greater resilience by: (i)
strengthening early warning systems; (ii) enhancing the crisis response at the national and regional
level; and (iii) supporting income diversification in vulnerable pastoral and agro-pastoral
communities. The emergency response mechanism enables participating countries to reallocate funds
to deal with any serious pastoral crisis. Support for vocational training and micro-project financing
under this sub-component-many of them will specifically target women and young people-will
help to diversify livelihoods and incomes and enable households to better withstand intermittent
crises.
Sub-component 4.1: Pastoral crisis preparedness and livelihood diversification. Activities directly
related to crisis preparedness (Window A) will include: (i) strengthening and harmonizing
information systems and early warning systems for pastoralists; (ii) developing pastoral crisis
response plans; and (iii) strengthening the capacity to implement early warning systems. Under this
sub-component, the proposed project will finance: (i) information technology and communication
equipment; (ii) training and capacity building from the central to local level in pastoral crisis
management guidelines, such as Livestock Emergency Guidelines and Standards (LEGS); and (iii)
technical assistance. Income diversification (Window B) will be achieved by identifying and
strengthening opportunities for alternative livelihoods, with special attention to improving the living
standards of the bottom 40 percent of the population in the target areas, as well as women and youth.
PRAPS will promote viable livelihoods for pastoralist households and alternatives for people to
a         move out of pastoralism by financing: (i) vocational training adapted to pastoralists so that they can
improve their employability in other economic sectors and (ii) supporting diversification through
competitive funding (grants) for micro-projects that generate local value addition and employment
opportunities.
At the regional level, PRAPS will support CILSS in realizing its core mandate to harmonize efforts
by member countries to build effective pastoral early warning systems. CILSS will also facilitate
training for participating countries in pastoral crisis preparedness, prevention, and response.
Sub-component 4.2: Contingency emergency response (US$ 0). When a natural event precipitates a
major disaster affecting the livelihoods of pastoralists and agro-pastoralists in the project areas,
governments may request the World Bank to reallocate project funds to support mitigation, response,
recovery, and reconstruction. This sub-component will draw resources from unallocated funds and/or
allow countries to request the World Bank to reallocate financing from other project components to
partially cover the costs of emergency response and recovery. Detailed operational guidelines
acceptable to the World Bank for implementing the PRAPS contingency emergency response will be
Page 8 of 16


﻿prepared at the regional level during the first year of the project's implementation. All expenditures
under this sub-component will be in accordance with paragraph 11 of World Bank OP 10.00
(Investment Project Financing) and will be appraised, reviewed, and found to be acceptable to the
World Bank before any disbursement is made. Disbursements will be made against an approved list
O
of goods, works, and services required to support crisis mitigation, response, recovery, and
reconstruction.
Component 5: Project Management and Institutional Support (US$ 43.71 million). This component
focuses on all aspects of project management, including fiduciary management, monitoring and
evaluation (M&E), knowledge generation and management, communication, and monitoring
mitigation measures related to safeguards. This component also supports critical needs for
institutional support, capacity building, and training identified in the six participating countries and at
CILSS. The institutional arrangements for implementing this project reflect the fact that it will
operate at three levels-regionally, nationally, and at the sub-national (local) level. The training and
other institutional support provided under this project will benefit women to the extent possible.
All projects that are part of the Sahel Initiative, including PRAPS, will take advantage of synergies
and complementarities to build capacity in a consistent, coherent manner for project management and
implementation. Specific areas that will receive attention include financial management,
procurement, M&E, and communication.
In line with the subsidiarity principle, this component will also organize regional fora (for launching
PRAPS and the project's mid-term review) and undertake regional studies identified with Sahelian
countries during the project's implementation. It will develop and maintain the project's regional
website as well.
Sub-component 5.1: Project coordination, fiduciary management, monitoring and evaluation, data
generation, and knowledge management. CILSS will host the PRAPS Regional Project Coordination
Unit (R-PCU), while line ministries responsible for implementing PRAPS in the six countries will
each host a National Project Coordination Unit (N-PCU). This sub-component will support staff
salaries, operating costs, and key national/regional studies to prepare or document interventions
under PRAPS. It will also support inter-ministerial work and cooperation of regional bodies required
for implementing the project. M&E will be undertaken at national and regional levels; it will include
a        regular monitoring of implementation performance and results, annual outcome assessments, annual
thematic studies, technical audits of infrastructure, and case studies. This sub-component will also
finance the generation of data on pastoral activities in the Sahel, which will be critical to guide and
calibrate investments. Knowledge management activities will include cross-country modules
supported by CILSS at sub-national, national, and regional levels, as well as dissemination at the
same three levels of lessons (based on M&E data) learned from implementing the project.
Sub-component 5.2: Institutional support, capacity building, advocacy, and communication. This
sub-component focuses on building capacity at CILSS and CRSA and within the N-PCUs. It will
provide technical and investment support to enhance the provision of services by CILSS and other
regional institutions or organizations relevant to the development of pastoralism. To this end, CILSS
will: (i) conduct an internal capacity gap analysis (including an evaluation of staffing, skills,
equipment, systems, and other parameters); (ii) produce consolidated training plans for CILSS and
other implementing agencies at the regional and national level; and (iii) identify potential synergies
and cross-fertilization possibilities among the operations within the Sahel Initiative. This sub-
component also supports greater coordination and engagement of the six participating countries in
Page 9 of 16


﻿regional decision and policy-making processes related to drylands and pastoral areas, as well as
coordination and engagement with other relevant regional public and non-public organizations.
Advocacy at the regional and national level for additional complementary support to pastoralism,
based on the Nouakchott Declaration, as well as regional and national communication activities, will
O
U         also be supported. As much as possible, training will be based on regional curriculums and carried
out across countries, with support from CILSS and other accredited regional technical bodies; some
specific training on cross-cutting themes may be done at the national level.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project will be implemented in six countries: Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania, Niger and
Senegal. Detailed locations of project activities are not yet known, although targeted administrative
zones have been identified during project preparation.
Pastoralism in the Sahel region is however taking place in agro-climatically restricted territories with
typical severe physical characteristics: generally poor soils, scarce vegetation, low rainfall, recurrent
droughts and occasional floods. The Sahel will undoubtedly be one of the world's regions most
seriously affected by climate change, with major impacts on the availability of water and forage
resources.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Abdoul Wahabi Seini (GSURR)
Dahlia Lotayef (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The Project is classified as category B project due to the
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                fact that potential environmental and social impacts may
arise, despite the important natural resources management
benefits, but these impacts are expected to be local, site-
specific and easily manageable. Those impacts are also
Q)                                             expected to be largely outweighed by improved
governance of natural resources.
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 is triggered and a
Regional Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) has been prepared given that the
exact activities and their respective sites have not yet been
identified. The Regional ESMF integrates country specific
sections; it was disclosed before appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          The project is not expected to conduct any activities in
4.04                                 critically important natural habitats, but the exact sites of
the proposed investments are not yet known, and the
impacts of severe climate conditions, insecurity, and
conflicts may cause the project's activities to extend to
areas where it had not anticipated working and require
specific management considerations. The ESMF includes
proposed mitigation measures for impacts on natural
habitats.
Page 10 of 16


﻿Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The project does not involve forests or forestry.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes          The project will mainly promote the use of integrated pest
Q)                                             management (IPM) techniques rather than pesticides, but
pasture protection or veterinary services and the fight
against vector-borne diseases may necessitate the use of
pesticides. Country-specific Pest Management Plans
(PMPs) have been developed and integrated in the
Regional ESMF.
Physical Cultural       Yes          Chance-find procedures will be recommended for
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 inclusion in work contracts, especially in areas that may
potentially have physical cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         This policy is applicable because the project investments
OP/BP 4.12                           may support interventions that could entail land taking or
limiting access to land and other resources. An RPF has
been developed for each the six countries, with
consolidation in a regional document. It was disclosed
before appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project does not involve dams.
4.37
Projects on International  No        N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No           N/A
Areas OP/BP 7.60
O
S      II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
0           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
SOCIAL: The Project activities are expected to provide substantial positive social benefits to
almost 2 million direct beneficiaries in the six countries involved, whose livelihoods rely on
pastoral and agro-pastoral activities, including but not limited to livestock keeping or marketing.
Some indirect benefits will also be realized from beneficiaries' agricultural activities. Community
involvement in the planning, design, and implementation of project activities will increase social
cohesion within communities and promote local ownership of activities and infrastructure
provided under the project. Most of the activities at the local level are likely to benefit vulnerable
groups (such as women and youth). To reduce social tension related to land issues, particular
attention will be paid to vulnerable herders and agriculturalists. Although the project is not
anticipated to have major negative social impacts, each country has prepared, validated and
disclosed a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) in accordance with World Bank Safeguard
Policy OPBP 4.12 to provide guidance for dealing with any negative social impacts associated
with land acquisition, involuntary resettlement, loss of access to resources, and other matters
arising from the implementation of project activities at the local level. The RPF provides clear
Page 11 of 16


﻿principles and detailed guidance on minimizing land acquisition and subsequent physical or
economical displacement; compensating Project-affected persons; rehabilitating livelihoods;
addressing grievances; and implementing the RPF through the preparation of Resettlement Action
Plans (RAPs) as needed. The RPFs from each participating country have been consolidated by
O
CILSS to prepare a regional RPF. The Regional RPF has been published in countries and at
infoshop prior to the appraisal.
ENVIRONMENTAL: This project has multiple environmental dimensions. It focuses on dryland
areas where adaptation to climate change is vital and where the use and management of natural
resources (particularly water and rangeland) and transcend national boundaries. Many of the
project's activities are directed toward preserving the natural capital of the countries, which is
integral to their economic development. The project will improve natural resources management
through a wide range of activities, and more particularly through component 2: "Natural Resource
Management (NRM) Enhancement", which aims at enhancing the sustainable management and
secure access by pastoral and agro-pastoral communities to natural resources (essentially water
and pasture) with trans-boundary significance. Activities under component 1: Animal Health
Improvement, will also help preserving the natural capital of these countries which is at the basis
of their economic development. Potential environmental impacts may arise, despite the important
natural resources management benefits, but these impacts are expected to be local, site-specific
and easily manageable. Those impacts are also expected to be largely outweighed by improved
governance of natural resources. Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 is triggered and a
Regional Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared given
that the sites of activities to be carried out have not yet been identified. The Regional ESMF
integrates country specific sections. The Regional ESMF has been published in countries and at
infoshop prior to the appraisal.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
o          assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
A Safeguards Focal Point has been nominated by each country during preparation to oversee the
development of the country specific safeguard documents, and will ensure compliance with the
project's environmental and social safeguards instruments during implementation.
The project is explicitly designed to include stakeholders and primary beneficiaries in decision
making as a means of promoting participation, transparency, and a sense of community ownership
and accountability. The project was initially designed through an intensive participatory process at
the local, national, and regional level. A substantial effort was made to engage beneficiaries,
stakeholders, and any groups potentially affected by the project through a series of workshops,
meetings, and consultations. NGOs and civil society (especially pastoral and other producer
associations) were involved during the identification of activities and the preparation and
validation of key studies and project documents. The consultative process initiated during
preparation will be continued during implementation to ensure that the project's activities involve
and benefit the entire community in target areas.
Page 12 of 16


﻿The Project activities involve the participation of relevant stakeholders and primary beneficiaries
affected by the Project to: (i) promote greater participation and transparency in selection, planning
and decision making at the grassroots level; and (ii) create a sense of community ownership and
O
accountability by establishing a forum for dialogue and information exchange mechanism among
the stakeholders. For interventions that could result in involuntary resettlement and/or the loss of
land, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared. The Interstate Committee for
Drought Control in the Sahel (CILSS) and the six countries' Environmental and Social experts
will monitor this policy and identify whether people are affected. In such case, a Resettlement
Action Plan will be prepared prior to the commencement of the works, based on the approved
Resettlement Policy Framework.
The project's implementation arrangements are intended to ensure coherence between all six
countries. The CILSS will have an overall operational management responsibility from a technical
view point. The Project also envisages regional training activities to be coordinated and supported
by CILSS and other competent bodies, and training Safeguard Policies will be among those
activities. Each country conducted its own consultations and validated its own national documents.
The Regional ESMF, along with the national safeguards documents were disclosed in countries
and at Infoshop prior to appraisal in compliance with the Bank's Operational Policies and
Procedures.
The monitoring of environmental & social development outcomes is a key part of the Project and
will be reviewed during implementation support. The consultative and participatory process
initiated during Project preparation will be continued in order to ensure that the benefits of the
activities go to the entire community in the targeted areas. It is envisaged that each country
organizes workshops with key stakeholders and in consultation with others countries, to continue
this consultation exercise during Project implementation. Since numerous local, national and
regional organizations will participate during Project implementation, it is envisaged that
workshops will include a wide range of interested parties, including representative of CILSS, all
governments involved, NGOs, and appropriate community representatives.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include rural dwellers in the targeted areas, comprised of pastoralists, agro-
pastoralists and sedentary people. The Project was designed using an intensive participatory
process from local, regional, national and regional level within CILSS member countries.
Substantial effort was made to facilitate the engagement of beneficiary's stakeholders and
potentially affected groups through a series of workshops, meetings and consultations. NGOs and
civil society (especially pastoral and other producers' associations) were involved both during the
identification of activities and the preparation and validation of key studies and Projects
documents. This consultation process occurred through local, national and regional meetings.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                03-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             30-Mar-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 13 of 16


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Burkina Faso                                           25-Mar-2015
Comments:
O
)          Mali                                                   30-Mar-2015
Comments:
O
Mauritania                                             30-Mar-2015
Comments:
Niger                                                  27-Mar-2015
Comments:
Senegal                                                27-Mar-2015
Comments:
Chad                                                   27-Mar-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                            02-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                         30-Mar-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Burkina Faso                                           25-Mar-2015
Comments:
Mali                                                   30-Mar-2015
Comments:
Mauritania                                             30-Mar-2015
Comments:
Niger                                                  27-Mar-2015
Comments:
Senegal                                                27-Mar-2015
Comments:
0          Chad                                                  27-Mar-2015
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?         Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                            03-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                         30-Mar-2015
Page 14 of 16


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Burkina Faso                                             25-Mar-2015
Comments:
O
)          Mali                                                     30-Mar-2015
Comments:
O
Mauritania                                               30-Mar-2015
Comments:
Niger                                                    27-Mar-2015
Comments:
Senegal                                                 27-Mar-2015
Comments:
Chad                                                     27-Mar-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
C.         Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
Ifthe project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [X] No [ ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                            Yes[   ] No[X]      NA [   ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a    Yes [  ] No [   ]   NA [ X ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Page 15 of 16


﻿Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes[X]  No[    ]  NA [
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes[X]  No[  ]  NA [
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[    ]  NA[
O
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
O
.      III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Christian Berger
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (SA)           Date: 31-Mar-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Martien Van Nieuwkoop (PMGR)         Date: 02-Apr-2015
Manager:
Page 16 of 16


