                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6598
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Bangladesh                         Project ID:    P129920
                            Project Name:     Bangladesh: Rural Electricity Transmission and Distribution Project (P129920)
                            Task Team         Zubair K.M. Sadeque
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         29-Nov-2013                        Estimated   27-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    SASDE                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        829.00                 Total Bank Financing: 600.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       229.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              600.00
                              Total                                                                                    829.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project development objectives are to reduce system losses and enhance capacity in the
                           rural distribution network of the eastern part of Bangladesh.
                            3. Project Description
                           The Project has been designed to address the investment gap in: a) the medium-voltage rural primary
                           distribution network (33kV) and main 11 kV lines; b) high-voltage (132kV) transmission network.

                                                                      Page 1 of 10
                         The proposed investments in the rural primary distribution network include construction of new
                         lines, rehabilitation/upgrading of lines, and construction of substations to complement the rapid
                         expansion of the lower-voltage network that occurred over the last decade. With the expansion in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         network operated by the rural electric cooperatives (PBSs) under the Rural Electrification Board
                         (REB) over the years, many distribution lines were extended long distances away from the
                         substations resulting in high loading, poor voltage profiles, and high technical losses. PBSs are
                         finding it difficult to serve some of the outlying areas due to the long distances from grid substations
                         and increased loading on the small sized conductors. To address these problems, a 33/11 kV network
                         development study was undertaken by an international consultant with support from local consultants
                         under the IDA-financed Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy Development (RERED) project.
                         The study analyzed the status of the medium-voltage network and identified the requirements for
                         new 33/11 kV lines and substations. The study also developed a low-cost design for 132/33 kV
                         substations to be operated by the Ppower Grid Company of Bangladesh (PGCB) to supply rural
                         grids. PGCB also conducted in-house study for the transmission system (132kV) as part of the
                         master plan updates that identified the requirements for the transmission network.

                         The primary focus of the Project is to reduce technical losses in the system in order to effectively
                         make available more energy to the consumers, thus improving quality of supply and increasing sales.
                         The investments envisaged will also increase the capacity of the distribution system to supply and
                         distribute additional power to consumers as additional generation becomes available. The Project is
                         expected to implement the 33/11 kV system designs that were identified in the 33/11 kV study
                         including rehabilitation requirements identified by REB. The Project will also include transmission
                         investments by PGCB to address critical bottlenecks in the 132 kV network supplying PBS areas.
                         This includes construction, rehabilitation and upgrading of transmission lines as well as construction
                         and upgrading of grid substations (132/33 kV). A low-cost grid substation is also expected to be
                         supported under the Project as a pilot.

                         The following components are proposed:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component A: Rural Grid Augmentation and Rehabilitation (US$658 million, IDA US$475 million):
                         The component will support the augmentation and rehabilitation needs of 37 PBSs in the eastern part
                         of Bangladesh (Dhaka, Chittagong, and Sylhet Divisions). This will include construction of new
                         lines and substations as well as upgrading lines (including re-conductoring and replacing poles). The
                         proposed investment will reduce systems losses and enhance the capacity of the 33/11kV network of
                         the Project PBSs. The proposed physical targets under the component are summarized below.

                         33 kV new line - 2,653 Kilometers
                         11 kV new line - 2,634 Kilometers
                         33 kV Line Upgradation - 863 Kilometers
                         New Substations - 110 Nos
                         River Crossing Towers- 32
                         Switching Stations - 31

                         Component B: Transmission Enhancement (US$160 million, IDA US$115 million): The 33/11 kV
                         network development study identified 13 grid (230/132/33 kV) substations that will be needed for the
                         rural distribution network in the Project areas. Out of these substations, six are included in the
                         Project to be implemented by PGCB. Four of these are conventional substations and two are gas
                         insulated substations (GIS). One of these substations will be piloted as per the low-cost design
                         suggested under the study. In addition, five substations will be rehabilitated with 10 new large size

                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         transformers. PGCB has also identified a few priority investments in the 132 kV line network to
                         remove the bottlenecks and cater to the growing load in the PBS areas, which will be supported
                         under the proposed Project. This includes both new lines and line upgrading (conductors, insulators,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and towers). The proposed physical targets under the component are summarized below.

                         132 kV new line - 170 Kilometers
                         132 KV second-stringing - 51 Kilometers
                         132 kV Re-conductoring - 458 Kilometers
                         New Substations - 6 Nos.

                         Component C: Institutional strengthening (US$10 million): Various institutional strengthening needs
                         are expected to be supported under the component as when needs arise. The expected support would
                         include, among others: a) implementation support for REB/PBS reform action plan; b) tariff study
                         for ensuring financial sustainability of the PBSs; c) energy audit, updating of REB master plan; d)
                         data management systems improvement including support to REB to improve the capturing and
                         reporting of system reliability and quality indicators (SAIDI, SAIFI etc); e) identifying the scope of
                         implementation of the Geographic Information System (GIS); f) upgrading MIS system (including
                         inventory management, computerization of accounting systems in REB); g) training on e-GP and
                         other training and capacity building activities for REB and PGCB etc. The component will include
                         provisions for implementing the Governance and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP) (Annex 6).
                         The technical assistance design is expected to allow for flexibility so that various needs can be
                         supported as and when they arise during implementation. US$6 million is allocated for institutional
                         strengthening component implemented by REB and US$4 million for PGCB.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed Project is expected to cover the PBSs in the eastern part of Bangladesh (Dhaka,
                         Chittagong, and Sylhet divisions). The exact line routes and substations locations are not identified at
                         this stage. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been adopted by REB
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and PGCB that lays out the requirements and procedure for the environmental and social impact
                         assessment once the line routes and substation locations are identified. The ESMF also describes the
                         process for alternative site selection and environmental and social baselines of the proposed
                         subproject.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDI)
                         Sabah Moyeen (SASDS)
                         Iqbal Ahmed (SASDI)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              Transmission and distribution schemes are
                          BP 4.01                                             generally considered as environmentally clean
                                                                              and non-polluting in nature. Their impacts on
                                                                              environment are normally restricted to rights of
                                                                              way (ROW). New construction/upgradation of
                                                                              substation may require rehabilitationof the old
                                                                              substations and the key related environmental
                                                                              management issue would be the collection and


                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                                                                         disposal of old transformers and capacitors. In
                                                                         view of subprojects nature, the overall project is
                                                                         classified as a Category ‘B’ and the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         policy OP/BP 4.01 has been triggered to ensure
                                                                         that the sub project design and implementation
                                                                         will be focused on reducing adverse impacts and
                                                                         enhancing positive impacts. The environmental
                                                                         and social management framework (ESMF) has
                                                                         defined the procedure for environmental and
                                                                         social screening/assessment for each subproject
                                                                         (exact routes and locations of the transmission/
                                                                         distribution lines and substations). Before
                                                                         approval of each subproject, environmental and
                                                                         social screening and assessment will be carried
                                                                         out with environmental management plan (EMP)
                                                                         and social management plan (SMP) that will
                                                                         include subproject specific mitigation and
                                                                         monitoring measures. In addition, 22 (twenty
                                                                         two) Environment Code of Practice (ECoP) have
                                                                         been prepared and included in the ESMF. EMP
                                                                         and ECoP with cost will be incorporated in the
                                                                         tender documents of work contracts. Site specific
                                                                         EMP and RAP will be prepared for any line
                                                                         routes and substation locations before the bid
                                                                         process in accordance with the ESMF.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes             It is highly unlikely that any natural habitant
                                                                         formed largely by native plant and animal species
                                                                         will be affected or modified during the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         construction phase of power transmission and
                                                                         distribution lines. However, the possible impact
                                                                         on natural habitats will be addressed through
                                                                         subproject specific EMP. In addition, the ESMF
                                                                         includes the code of practice on natural habitat as
                                                                         advance precautionary measures and the policy
                                                                         has been triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes             The transmission and distribution lines may
                                                                         cross planted forest area. The ESMF has
                                                                         provision to screening the alternative routes and
                                                                         exclude the forest area. However, this policy has
                                                                         been triggered also as advance precautionary
                                                                         measures.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             Since the routes are unknown at this stage, there
                         BP 4.11                                         is possibility that the transmission and
                                                                         distribution lines may pass through areas with
                                                                         physical cultural resources. The ESMF provides


                                                                 Page 4 of 10
                                                                           criteria for screening and assessment of physical
                                                                           cultural resources. In addition, ‘Chance find’
                                                                           procedures conforming to local legislation on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           heritage would be evaluated.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes             The transmission and distribution lines and
                                                                           substations may intervene in areas where
                                                                           indigenous people live (specific subproject
                                                                           locations will be determined during
                                                                           implementation). As such OP 4.10 has been
                                                                           triggered for the project. The ESMF includes a
                                                                           Tribal Peoples Development Framework, based
                                                                           on which site specific Tribal Peoples Plan (TPP)
                                                                           will be developed as and when required. The
                                                                           Framework describes the screening/social
                                                                           assessment to be conducted for this purpose and
                                                                           include a screening template. The TPP will be
                                                                           part of the Social Management Plan developed
                                                                           for each subproject, if the screening shows that it
                                                                           is required for that particular subproject.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             The addition of lines and establishment of new
                            4.12                                           sub-stations will require land; this may be public
                                                                           or private land depending on the routing of the
                                                                           lines and requirements of the substation location.
                                                                           Thus OP 4.12 has been triggered for the project.
                                                                           The ESMF includes a Resettlement Policy
                                                                           Framework (RPF), based on which site specific
                                                                           Resettlement Actions Plans (RAPs) or
                                                                           Abbreviated RAPs will be developed for any
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           subproject triggering private land acquisition,
                                                                           causing physical or economic displacement of
                                                                           people from public or private lands, affecting the
                                                                           livelihood of people/communities regardless of
                                                                           title. The RAP will be included in the SMP done
                                                                           for site specific subprojects where it is required.
                                                                           The ESMF includes a framework for grievance
                                                                           redress, institutional arrangements, disclosure
                                                                           process for the SMF and SMPs.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues


                                                                   Page 5 of 10
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           The Project is expected to finance the augmentation and rehabilitation of distribution network of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the Rural Electrification Board (REB) and transmission network of the Power Grid Company of
                           Bangladesh (PGCB). The project is classified as a Category B project and the Environment
                           Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) safeguard policy has been triggered to ensure that the project
                           investment are environmentally sound, sustainable and thus help to improve decision making. No
                           large-scale infrastructure investment or major expansion will be implemented under the proposed
                           Project. The environmental impacts of the project are expected to be mostly construction related
                           and limited within the project boundaries. These impacts can be mitigated through implementation
                           of appropriate environmental code of practice and environmental management plan. The
                           environmental safeguard policies Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36) and
                           Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) have also been triggered as advance precautionary
                           measures.

                           Since the line routes, exact locations of substations, size and extent of the sub-projects remains
                           unknown at the project appraisal stage, a framework approach has been adopted for the Project.
                           An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared based on
                           preliminary studies of few possible locations of proposed substations and surveys of proposed
                           routes of new /rehabilitation of transmission/distribution lines.

                           Land acquisition will be required for the purposes of the project and that tribal people will be
                           affected on the Right of Way (ROW). Therefore, both World Bank OP 4.12 Involuntary
                           Resettlement and OP 4.10 Indigenous People have been triggered for the Project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The subprojects to be financed under the Project will be finalized during the project
                           implementation phase and as such the exact locations, size and extent and the degree of impact of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the subprojects to be funded under the projects are not known. Based on the types of subprojects to
                           be financed under the Project, it is expected that the Project activities are not expected to cause any
                           long term or irreversible environmental impact. The long-term indirect impact is the development
                           of rural areas with better electricity connection. This may convert some agricultural and/or non-
                           productive land into commercial/industrial purposes.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           As mentioned earlier, the details of subprojects and their actual locations are not known at this
                           stage. The ESMF has the provisions for subproject specific alternative analysis. In general, for any
                           sub-project, the analysis of alternative should focus on: Alternative location (for substation) or
                           route (for power line); Alternative design and technology; Costs of alternatives; and No sub-
                           project scenario. The REB-PBS/PGCB authority will carry out screening at all proposed
                           alternative routes of the power line based on the screening form. Then the environment and social
                           details of these alternatives will be analyzed as per guidance provided in the ESMF. Important
                           considerations include avoiding homestead areas, as much as possible; avoiding crossing of rivers/
                           forests/natural habitats/hills/bamboo groves/cash-in trees, as much as possible. If the homestead
                           areas (or other sensitive infrastructure) are not avoidable in any of the options, the REB-PBS/
                           PGCB will consult with the owner/respective authority and collect their no objection for the
                           construction of transmission and distribution lines in written. On the other hand, use of a


                                                                      Page 6 of 10
                           government-owned land for construction of substation would significantly reduce adverse socio-
                           economic impacts. If that is not possible, efforts should be made to avoid ecologically or socially
                           critical areas for construction of substation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           REB has prior experience in implementing IDA-funded RERED project where construction and
                           rehabilitation of lines and substations were supported. To institutionalize the environment and
                           social safeguards, REB agreed to set-up a formal Environment and Social Management Unit/Cell
                           with qualified regular staff. Since the establishment of the Unit/Cell would require several
                           administrative clearances, as an interim measure, REB will set-up a Project specific Environment
                           and Social Management Unit under the Project Management Unit (PMU). PGCB has been
                           implementing the Siddhirganj-Maniknagar 230kV Transmission Line component under IDA-
                           financed Siddhirganj Peaking Power Project (SPPP). PGCB is in the process of creating an
                           Environment and Social Management Unit (ESMU) in the regular organogram and the ESMU is
                           expected to be set-up after all necessary clearances by December 31, 2013. The institutional
                           strengthening component of the Project includes provisions for short and long-term training
                           courses of their concerned officials on environmental and social management.

                          The substations under the REB part (component A) are mostly smaller gas insulated substations
                          requiring 0.5 decimals of land. However, some larger air insulated substations may be needed
                          which require approximately 2 acres of land each. REB will set up small towers and poles carrying
                          33KV/11KV lines. The substations will mostly require private lands, in areas which vary from
                          peri-urban to rural areas. Land availability, acquisition and compensation at replacement values
                          will be challenging issues for REB/PBSs. The PBSs have Land Purchase Committees (LPCs)
                          having representation of PBS Board, management, and local leaders/community representatives.
                          These committees are mandated to purchase land for development purposes on a willing-buyer
                          willing-seller basis, and as far as possible REB will try to follow this approach for making land
                          available for the substations. A benchmark price per decimal will be established to reflect
Public Disclosure Copy




                          prevailing market prices in the relevant areas. The methodology for assessing market price will be
                          included in the ESMF and will be discussed and validated by the Bank in order to ensure that
                          replacement value/current market prices are truly reflected in the benchmark values for the various
                          areas. The LPCs will negotiate with sellers using this figure as a benchmark after undertaking
                          adequate consultation processes. All transactions will be transparent and will comply fully with
                          Bank documentation, consultation, reporting and disclosure guidelines. REB will also assess the
                          availability of public lands which can be utilized for the substations.

                          For the components under PGCB part (component B), data collected by the ESMF consultants
                          show that the substations to be constructed will require approximately 2 acres of land each. The
                          areas being considered for the substation are a mix of public and private lands. Most of the towers
                          required for the project already exist, but a few more will be constructed. The ESMF study shows
                          that squatters and tribal people will be affected in the alternative routes being considered. There
                          will be temporary and permanent impacts on land, crops and livelihoods. The ESMF provides for
                          the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Tribal Peoples Planning Framework. Based on
                          these, site specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) and Tribal Peoples Plans (TPPs) will be
                          prepared once the exact line routes and substation locations are identified. REB and PGCB will be
                          responsible for preparing and implementing the Plans in accordance with the requirements of OP
                          4.12.



                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                           Through the institutional strengthening component, efforts will be made to strengthen the overall
                           institutional capacity of REB, PBS and PGCB for environmental and social management. The
                           institutional environmental and social management strategy and guidelines will also be supported
Public Disclosure Copy




                           to mainstream environment and social consideration in all REB, PBS and PGCB operations.

                           Bank missions will supervise environmental/social compliance as part of regular implementation
                           support missions.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The ESMF presented a guideline for carrying out consultation, including guidelines on nature
                           (FGD/ informal meetings) and number of consultations, location, and type of participants. Several
                           field level consultations with the key stakeholders including the PGCB and REB field level staffs,
                           and communities have been carried out during the preparation of the ESMF. As a part of
                           disclosure, summary of the ESMF report has been translated into Bangla and disseminated locally.
                           Copies of the full report (in English) and the summary (in Bengali) will be sent to concerned
                           offices of PGCB and REB and will be made available to the public. In accordance with WB access
                           to information policy, the ESMF report has also been uploaded in the website of PGCB/REB and
                           in the Bank InfoShop. The draft ESMF will be presented in a national workshop in mid-December,
                           2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   26-Nov-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Bangladesh                                                       26-Nov-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   26-Nov-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bangladesh                                                       26-Nov-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   26-Nov-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bangladesh                                                       26-Nov-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.


                                                                    Page 8 of 10
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?



                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Zubair K.M. Sadeque
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                       Date: 02-Dec-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Julia Bucknall (SM)                            Date: 03-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
