                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE

o
                a                                                          Report No.: ISDSC1O22

3   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Dec-2014
    Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Jan-2015
    I. BASIC INFORMATION
      A. Basic Project Data

       Country:            Peru                             Project ID:       P132515
       Project Name:       Subnational Transport Support Program (P132515)
       Task Team           Anca Cristina Dumitrescu
       Leader(s):
       Estimated       25-May-2015                          Estimated         12-Aug-2015
       Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
       Managing Unit: GTIDR                                 Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                            Instrument:
       Sector(s):          Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (50%), General transportation
                           sector (30%), General public administration sector (20%)
       Theme(s):           Decentralization (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Trade
                           facilitation and market access (20%)
       Financing (In USD Million)
       Total Project Cost:          600.00                Total Bank Financing:           50.00
u      Financing Gap:                0.00
          Financing Source                                                              Amount
          Borrower                                                                       500.00
a         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                           50.00
C         Inter-American Development Bank                                                 50.00
          Total                                                                          600.00
       Environmental       B - Partial Assessment
       Category:
       Is this a           No
       Repeater
       project?

      B. Project Objectives
      13.     The development objective is to facilitate access of rural populations within the Program area
      to public services, logistics corridors and employment opportunities through the improvement of
      rural road infrastructure and strengthening of the decentralized road management.
C. Project Description
15.     The proposed project will support the 5-year Government Program totaling US$600 million,
of which the World Bank (WB) loan will finance US$50 million (8.5% of the Program proceeds).
The remaining US$550 million are to be co-financed by the Inter-American Development Bank
(IDB) (US$50 million) and the GoP counterpart funds (US$500 million). The Project consists of five
components, as follows:

        Component 1- Infrastructure for Social inclusion (US$219.7 million of which the WB US
$21.2 million). This component will scale up the decentralized rural roads policies that have been
successfully developed during the previous rural roads projects, prioritizing interventions that
promote social inclusion of the poorest rural areas. Activities to be financed include: (i) rehabilitation
and improvement of rural roads prioritized through participatory planning; (ii) improvement of non-
motorized transport (NMT) tracks; (iii) reconstruction and improvement of bridges that are critical to
ensure connectivity on rehabilitated rural roads; (iv) a Pilot for slopes stabilization; and (v) initiatives
under a Local Development Window (LDW) model developed during the second Rural Roads
Project with the purpose of accelerating the emergence of productive activities in the areas where
transport conditions have been improved. For each activity, the project will finance feasibility and
technical studies, safeguards-related studies (e.g. environmental impact assessments), civil works and
supervision.

          Component 2- Integration of the Feeder Network of Selected Logistic Corridors (US$219.7
million of which the WB US$21.2 million). This component will support MTC's competitiveness
agenda financing works and technical assistance activities to improve the transitability of subnational
roads and transport services within selected logistic corridors. In particular it will finance: (i)
rehabilitation or improvement of secondary and rural roads linked to selected logistics corridors; (ii)
development of alternative technologies for rural roads rehabilitation; and (iii) an extended Local
Development Window [to check of similar with Comp. 1]. For each activity, the project will finance
feasibility and technical studies, safeguards-related studies (e.g. environmental impact assessments),
civil works and supervision.

         Component 3- Subnational Road Infrastructure Maintenance (US$120 million of which the
WB US$6.3 million). This component will finance activities to support an efficient and sustainable
decentralized maintenance of the subnational road network. In particular, the project will finance
periodic and routine maintenance activities on the secondary and rural networks (including bridges
and non-motorized transport tracks), the preparation of the related technical profiles, and supervision
services.

          Component 4- Decentralized Road Management (US$15 million, of which the WB US$1.2
million). This component will finance activities both at the subnational and central (Provias
Decentralizado) (PVD) levels to support the consolidation of the decentralized transport management
agenda. At the subnational level, the Program will finance initiatives to increase the capacity of
regional and local governments to manage road assets, address externalities and improve the
institutional and regulatory frameworks. More specifically, the project will support: (i) technical
assistance to improve decentralized road transport management, strengthening monitoring and
evaluation, institutional development and regulatory frameworks to increase the efficiency of
transport infrastructure and service provision (ii) studies on rural road safety and climate change; and
(iii) equipment for decentralized road management of PVD.
              Component 5 - Program Management (US$25.6 million of which the WB US$0.15 million).
      This component will cover Program administrative costs, as well as monitoring, evaluation, audits,
      information dissemination, program activities related trainings, and operational support. The
      Program will be managed by PVD in close coordination with other ministri es, such as the Ministry
O
      of Development and Social Inclusion (MIDIS), MTC and MEF.
      D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
O
      analysis (if known)
      16. The US$600 million Program will finance rehabilitation, periodic and current maintenance
      works on subnational (rural and non-motorized transport tracks) throughout the territory of Peru.
      Under Component 1 (Infrastructure for Social Inclusion), the roads targeted are those located in the
      poor and remote zones included under the "National Fund for Economic Inclusion in Rural
      Areas" (Fondo Nacional para la Inclusion Economica en Zonas Rurales - FONIE), mostly on the
      Central and Eastern parts of Peru, including the Andean and Upper Amazon Regions. Under
      Component II (Integration of the Feeder Network of Selected Logistics Corridors), the roads targeted
      are those feeding into the main 22 road logistics corridors identified in the country. It may be
      assessed, at this early stage of preparation, that the rural roads included in the program will be
      scattered throughout the teritory of Peru.
      E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
      17. Provias Decentralizado (PVD) - the Project Implementation Agency - has implemented two
      recent operations co-financed by the WB and IDB. Experience with the aforementioned two projects
      shows that PVD's institutional capacity for safeguard issues is existent but is limited. PVD staff
      members in charge of supervising compliance with WB social and environmental safeguard policies
      and management is reduced to one person. This staff member has the knowledge to address the
      safeguards policies required by the WB, however due to project scope it is strongly recommended
      that, before appraisal, discussions on how to strengthen PVD's team for social and environmental
      issues, be thoroughly carried out.
      F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
      Alonso Zarzar Casis (GSURR)
      Raul Tolmos (GENDR)

    II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
      Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
      Environmental Assessment         Yes           The Program does not foresee significant
      OP/BP 4.01                                      environmental impacts that could jeopardize the
                                                     natural environment of its influential project area.
                                                     Following the Operational Policy [OP 4.01] the
                                                     Program would be "Category B". This category is
                                                     justified by the fact that the rural road works to be
                                                      supported would not include any new road
                                                      construction, road paving, or major road upgrading
                                                      (to a new road standard). While the Program plans to
                                                      focus largely on road rehabilitation (restoration of
                                                     pre-existing conditions), it would most likely also
                                                      support some significant road improvements (within
                                                     the existing road standards) an Environmental and
                                        Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), and an
                                        Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                        (ESMF) will be prepared before appraisal.
o                                       Environmental Management Plans (EMP) will be
                                        prepared for all sub-projects once the specific
                                        locations of roads are known. The ESMF and EMPs
                                        will address the whole Program co-financed by the
                                        Government, WB and IDB, and it will meet the
                                        requirements of both financial institutions based on
                                        agreed common TOR, as done in previous programs.
                                        The ESIA will provide an analysis of both direct and
                                        cumulative or indirect potential negative impacts
                                        generated from infrastructure works.
    Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   This policy is triggered since rehabilitation and
                                        improvement of rural roads, reconstruction and
                                        improvement of bridges and a pilot for slopes
                                        stabilization might be located in natural habitats
                                        considered critical. Works will be scattered across
                                        the country, including in potentially fragile
                                        environmental regions. The ESMF will include
                                        measures to screen proposed works and subprojects
                                        for negative impacts on natural habitats.
    Forests OP/BP 4.36            TBD   While no new roads will be constructed, and
                                        rehabilitation and/or maintenance will be carried-out
                                        within the right of way, final decision on triggering
                                        of this policy will be taken after more information
                                        becomes available on the location of the roads
                                        proposed for improvement.
O
    Pest Management OP 4.09       TBD   The Program will not include/ support the use of
                                        pesticides, however the final decision on triggering
                                        will be taken after more details are available on the
                                        nature of potential productive sub-projects related to
                                        the Logistics Development Windows.
    Physical Cultural Resources   Yes   This policy is triggered since it is likely that physical
    OP/BP 4.11                          cultural resources may be found particularly in the
                                        Andean region where the road rehabilitation works
                                        will be implemented. During Program preparation
                                        the team will determine if project activities will
                                        impact any known physical cultural resource. The
                                        ESMF will then describe the actions that will be
                                        taken to minimize and manage likely impacts. The
                                        ESMF will include clear procedures for reviewing
                                        sub-projects for physical cultural resources issues
                                        and to manage chance finds in accordance with WB
                                        policy and the national legislation.
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      Yes   This policy is triggered due to the strong likelihood
          4.10                                                                                   that indigenous communities be benefited by the
                                                                                                 Program since its main focus is the central highlands
                                                                                                 and the upper amazon of Peru where a significant
o                                                                                                number of these communities are located. Since
                                                                                                 precise locations for Program intervention will not be
                                                                                                 known before appraisal, the borrower will prepare,
                                                                                                 with WB guidance, an Indigenous Peoples Planning
                                                                                                 Framework (IPPF) before appraisal. The client will
                                                                                                 hold consultations with the indigenous leadership at
                                                                                                 the national level to inform project design and the
                                                                                                 IPPF. The borrower will also carry out a Social
                                                                                                 Assessment and prepare IPPs whenever this is
                                                                                                 relevant once locations for project implementation
                                                                                                 are known.
          Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        This policy is triggered because it is likely that some
          BP 4.12                                                                                small areas for cultivation, also crops and houses
                                                                                                 built next to roads, may be affected by civil works to
                                                                                                 improve these rural roads. Since precise locations for
                                                                                                 project intervention will not be known before
                                                                                                 appraisal, the borrower will prepare, with WB
                                                                                                 guidance, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                                                                                 before appraisal.
          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         This policy should not be triggered as the Program
                                                                                                 will neither support the construction or rehabilitation
                                                                                                 of dams nor will it support other investments which
                                                                                                 rely on services of existing dams.
          Projects on International                                   No                         This policy should not be triggered as the Program
          Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   will not finance activities involving the use or
                                                                                                 potential pollution of international waterways.
          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      This policy should not be triggered as the Program
O
          BP 7.60                                                                                will not finance activities in disputed areas as defined
                                                                                                 in the policy.

    III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
         A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 20-May-2015
         B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
            The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
              The Plan will depend on the execution of the investment-related feasibility studies. These will
              include technical, economic, environmental and social assessments. The TOR for the studies have
              been drafted by PVD, and launched at the end of September, 2014. PVD estimates that the studies
              will be carried out within 5 months.
    IV. APPROVALS
          Task Team Leader(s):                            Name: Anca Cristina Dumitrescu

         Approved By:


    Reminder. The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
    form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
    Regional Safeguards   Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)     Date: 17-Dec-2014
    Coordinator:
    Practice Manager/     Name: Aurelio Menendez (PMGR)   Date: 07-Jan-2015
    Manager:

O




o


U
