                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                           ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                    Report No.: ISDSA8129

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Mar-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Mar-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Mauritania                       Project ID:    P144575
                                                      Parent         P118974
                                                      Project ID:
   Project Name:     MR-Skills Development Project-AF (P144575)
   Parent Project    Skills Development Support Project (P118974)
   Name:
   Task Team         Geraldo Joao Martins
   Leader:
   Estimated         14-Mar-2014                      Estimated   30-Apr-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    AFTEW                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                      Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Vocational training (100%)
   Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:        12.00                Total Bank Financing: 11.20
   Financing Gap:               0.00
     Financing Source                                                                   Amount
     Borrower                                                                              0.80
     IDA recommitted as a grant                                                           11.20
     Total                                                                                12.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)



                                            Page 1 of 8
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The Development Objectives of the proposed operation are to improve the quality and efficiency
   of training institutions and create an enabling environment for a more market-driven Technical
   and Vocational Education Training System.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
The AF will finance activities to maximize the development effectiveness of the Original Project by
scaling up activities supported under the Original Project and by funding one new activity (civil
works). The PDO will remain unchanged: to improve the quality and efficiency of training
institutions and to create an enabling environment for a more market-driven technical and vocational
education training system.

The components of the Original Project will remain unchanged. The changes being proposed include
the following: In Component 1, one new activity (civil works) will be added; (ii) PBCs will be scaled
up from eight centers to 14 centers; and the apprenticeship program will be scaled up from the
current target of 4,700 out-of-school youth to 6,500 youth. In Component 2, training support for the
sector will be scaled up through additional funds to finance implementation of the HR development
for the TVET sector.

The Results Framework (RF), including the PDO-level and intermediate results indicators of the
Project, will be amended. For those activities that are scaled up, the indicator target values will be
revised upward to take into account the incremental activities financed from the AF. One new
indicator will be introduced to reflect the new activity. The proposed project aims to support both
components of the Skills Development Support Project (P118974) as follows:


Component 1 (Strengthening and Diversifying Technical and Vocational Training).

Sub-Component 1.1: Improving the quality, effectiveness and relevance of training provided in
eligible TVET institutions (US$ 9.1 million)

The main purpose of this sub-component is to improve quality and relevance of training provided in
selected TVET institutions. Under the Original Project, the core activity of the sub-component
consists of PBCs between INAP-FTP and TVET centers. Beneficiary centers were selected on the
basis of the relevance of their programs in relation to the country’s economic needs and the center’s
capacity to implement such contract programs. Selected TVET centers are entitled to prepare their
‘projet d’établissement’ to address pedagogical, training and governance needs. They are then
entitled to receive sub-grants to implement their contract programs, equipment, and technical
assistance to help review the curriculum, aligning them with the market needs, set modern
governance standards and practice, and train trainers (inclusive of women, youth and other
vulnerable groups).

Under the AF, this activity will be scaled up. The Original Financing had planned to enroll 6 out of


                                              Page 2 of 8
18 public TVET institutions in PBCs to pilot the system, processes and procedures. The successful
launching of the program and the setting up of the system allowed the enrollment of 8 TVET
institutions in PBCs, surpassing the end of project target. Because of a new dynamic created by PBCs
and the early positive results they are showing, the program is gaining traction among other TVET
institutions. With the AF resources, a moderate expansion of the program will be pursued. It is still
risky to enroll all TVET institutions in the program without an assessment of the results and
preliminary impact of the first bunch of institutions, but a moderate scale up may be envisaged, in
view of the preliminary evidences in the field.

Under the AF, this activity will be scaled up. The Original Financing had planned to enroll 6 out of
18 public TVET institutions in PBCs to pilot the system, processes and procedures. The successful
launching of the program and the setting up of the system allowed the enrollment of 8 TVET
institutions in PBCs, surpassing the end of project target. Because of a new dynamic created by PBCs
and the early positive results they are showing, the program is gaining traction among other TVET
institutions. With the AF resources, a moderate expansion of the program will be pursued. It is still
risky to enroll all TVET institutions in the program without an assessment of the results and
preliminary impact of the first bunch of institutions, but a moderate scale up may be envisaged, in
view of the preliminary evidences in the field.

Therefore, 5 additional TVET institutions will be enrolled increasing the total number of TVET
institutions under PBCs to 13. As with the first bunch of institutions, selection criteria continues to be
based on the relevance of training provided, particularly relating to high demand sectors such as
construction, industry, services, agriculture and fishery. In addition, the Mining School, a technical
and vocational higher education institution under the auspices of the Ministry of Oil, Energy and
Mining, will also enter a PBC. Thus, the total number of new institutions under PBCs will be 6. The
Mining School is being supported as a follow up of support provided by another IDA-financed
project (Mining Sector Strengthening Project) in order to consolidate development effectiveness.

The sub-component will accommodate a new activity: the rehabilitation and moderate expansion of
four TVET centers. An assessment of the status of infrastructure of 17 TVET public institutions was
carried out in October 2013 with the financing of the Original Project. The assessment showed that
most facilities are in a critical stage of degradation because of lack of maintenance work and that this
prevents the full utilization of the installations, therefore affecting quality and efficiency. For
example, in Nouakchott, most of the TVET institutions have low student/teacher ratio (an average
1:9) because the school is unable to enroll more students either because of lack of equipment or the
non-use of practical labs. In some cases, a single additional modular facility would allow for further
enrollment. Under the Original Project, a 38% increase in enrollment was estimated as a result of
better reorganization of courses and use of the spaces. With the proposed rehabilitation and moderate
expansion (e.g. construction of one or two additional modules in the premises of the selected
schools), the enrollment in those institutions would increase by 45% at the end of the project. The
rehabilitation work would provide an enabling environment for quality improvements in the training
provided, therefore potentially attracting more students to the TVET schools. Moreover, a
performance assessment of these centers (e.g. insertion rates of graduates, gender breakdown, etc…)
would be undertaken to increase the overall project efficiency.

The rehabilitation and equipment of 4 TVET schools is part of a broader program of rehabilitation of
TVET centers launched by the Government in order to improve the learning environment of TVET.
The AF will cover 6 out of the 18 TVET centers under the auspices of the Ministry of Vocational
Training (22%), but other development partners, particularly the French Development Cooperation

                                              Page 3 of 8
(AFD) and the German Cooperation (GIZ) will also support the program. The table below presents
the breakdown of the different interventions by development partner.

All in all, 11 TVET institutions will be rehabilitated, covering about 60% of public TVET centers
under the oversight of the Ministry of Vocation Training. The October 2013 assessment that
identified the critical needs in terms of rehabilitation and expansion was followed by an architectural
study that provided the detailed costs of the proposed civil works. The architectural studies underpin
the proposed rehabilitation and expansion proposed for the AF as well planned interventions to be
supported by other development partners. The civil works under the AF is estimated to cost about US
$ 5 million and the equipment for the rehabilitated centers is estimated to cost about US$ 2.0 million.

The proposed Investment in rehabilitation and moderate expansion of the center is deemed to be
sustainable over the medium and long-term. Under the PBCs, TVET institutions have established the
goal of increasing revenue-generation to 12% of the public budget and to use at least 40% of those
revenues for maintenance works, therefore avoiding future deterioration of their facilities.

The estimated total cost of sub-component 1 under AF is US$ 9.1 million.

Sub-component 1.2: Increasing apprenticeship and short-term programs (US$ 1.4 million)

This sub-component, under the Original Project, aims at providing sub-grants for the financing of
initial apprenticeship training sub-projects by training providers (public and private training
providers, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and prospective employers considerate of
gender balance in the selection process for both trainers and trainees). This is a critically important
dimension of training targeting mostly out-of-school youth. As estimated 350,000 out-of-school
youth in Mauritania are unemployed and each year an estimated 60,000 add to this number. The
short-term training programs targets youth aged 14-25. The curriculum is also expected to address
Training/Learning opportunities for girls/women from the same age group and other vulnerable
groups such as Black Mauritanians and physically challenged individuals. They cover a broad range
of vocational areas, such as metal worker, shoemaker, tiller, baker, butcher, painter, plumber,
gardener, dressmaker, carpenter, electrician, etc. Depending on the type of skills, the duration of the
training may last 300 hours over a three month period or 600 hours over a six month period.
Proposals to conduct these short-term training programs are submitted by training providers (public
and private training providers, NGOs and prospective employers) and as for the PBCs with TVET
institutions, a contract is signed by INA-FTP with the selected providers.

The Original Project has targeted 4,780 out-of-school youth and so far 420 youth (i.e. 9% of the
target) have benefited from these courses. The AF proposes to scale up this training program by
increasing the target to 6,500 youth (or an additional 1,720 individual). The estimated cost to enroll
this additional number of youth is about US$ 1,4 million (it was calculated on the basis of the actual
unit cost of about US$ 715 per trainee plus administrative costs of INAP-FTP) for short-term training
programs.

Component 2: Improving the Institutional Environment of Technical and Vocational Education
Training

Sub-component 2.1: Enhancing the capacity of the Ministry of Technical and Vocational Training to
create a more demand-driven TVET system (US$ 0.7 million)



                                              Page 4 of 8
The Original Project supports capacity development of the sector by enhancing the institutional
capacity of the Ministry and by supporting activities aimed at developing a more demand-driven
TVET system. The activities include the setting up of appropriate regulatory framework for TVET,
the development of M&E in the sector; the elaboration of a human resources development plan and
its financing; and the carry out of labor market surveys. The development of human resources plan
should be preceded by a diagnostic of the needs of the sector in terms of qualification of human
resources. The preliminary report of the assessment shows a strong need for qualification in the
sector, including pre-service and in-service training of trainers, training of pedagogical and
administrative staff. The initial resources devoted in the Original Project (about U$ 200,000) for
training of staff over the period 2013-2016 will not be sufficient to over the expected critical needs of
the sector. The AF proposes to reinforce the amount of reinforce the resources for training by US$
0.7 million. This is just an estimate, since the specific needs will still have to be clarified and
determined once the HR Development Plan is finalized and adopted. But the idea is to agree that the
Government has an important role to play in training of human resources to the sector. One expected
results from the Project is the increase in the supply of TVET by the private sector. It is expected that
by the end of the Project, the share of private sector enrollment in TVET will increase from 15% to
25%. This increase will only be possible by increasing the pool of trainers and other staff in the
sector that would be considerate of gender and vulnerable groups’ dimensions. The
operationalization of this proposal will be made through the Annual Action Plan and Annual
Procurement Plan, which will identify training to be financed each year, the beneficiaries and the
costs. Training will be conducted in Mauritania but also in other countries depending on the areas,
the level of specialization required, and opportunities offered.

The estimated total cost of this sub-component is US$ 0.7 million over a period 2014-2017.

Sub-component 2.2: Strengthening the Capacity of the INAP-FTP to manage the TVET system

Under the Original Project, the sub-component supports: capacity development of the INAP-FTP to
support the TVET system, including M&E of contract programs; development of a normative
framework for the certification of skills; and development of short-term training programs for TVET
teachers. This sub-component remains unchanged.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project has a nation-wide approach and will provide support for the rehabilitation and expansion
of a number of TVET centers, particularly in 6 specific locations.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Alexandra C. Bezeredi (AFTSG)
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)

 6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The Original Project did not support any
 BP 4.01                                              construction activity and therefore no safeguards
                                                      instrument was required; however, the AF will
                                                      support the rehabilitation and extension of six
                                                      vocational training centers. The 6 centers to be


                                              Page 5 of 8
                                                       rehabilitated and/or expanded and their respective
                                                       sites have identified.

                                                       An Environmental and Social Management Plan
                                                       (ESMP) was prepared to comply with OP/BP
                                                       4.01 requirements. The ESMP has been disclosed
                                                       both in-country and at the Bank Info Shop prior to
                                                       appraisal.
   Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

   Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

   Pest Management OP 4.09             No

   Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes             The ESMP includes measures for managing
   BP 4.11                                             physical cultural resources, should they be in the
                                                       project area.
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No              Rehabilitation/extension of the 6 targeted centers
   4.12                                                won’t require any acquisition of land; rather,
                                                       these civil works will occur on already existing
                                                       and secured government-owned sites the policy is
                                                       therefore not triggered.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The AF is classified both socially and Environmentally as a Category B since its impacts
     associated to the activities (rehabilitation and expansion of six vocational training centers) are
     likely to be small-scale, site specific, reversible and easily manageable through minimum
     anticipatory mitigation measures. These impacts include noise, dust, air quality, liquid and solid
     wastes, occupational health and safety, and the cutting of trees. Regarding the nature and scope of
     the construction activities, two safeguard policies are triggered, namely OP/BP 4.01 on
     Environmental Assessment and OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources. In compliance with
     the policy requirements an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) was prepared by
     the Government that set forth the principles and prerogatives to be followed during project



                                               Page 6 of 8
  implementation. The ESMP has been consulted upon and disclosed both in-country and at the
  InfoShop prior to appraisal.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) was prepared by the Government, and
  will be approved and disclosed both in-country and at the Infoshop of the World Bank prior to
  appraisal. The screening procedure imbedded in the Environmental and Social Management Plan
  (ESMP) will ensure an early stage identification of environmental and social due diligence to be
  completed before the commencement of civil works.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Key stakeholders include students of vocational training centers (inclusive/considerate of gender
  and vulnerable groups), training providers (public and private), private enterprises, INAP-FTP and
  the Ministry of Vocational Training. Participatory public consultations with key stakeholders
  involving the private sector and civil society at large have been conducted during project
  formulation and preparation of the ESMP. Key actors including local populations, women, youth
  and vulnerable groups, representatives and NGOs have been involved in the definition of the scope
  of activities and will be further engaged respectively throughout implementation, supervision and
  evaluation stages of the project. A final workshop will be held in Nouakchott for further
  dissemination and disclosure of the safeguards instrument.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      12-Mar-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Mar-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Mauritania                                                       20-Mar-2014
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment



                                           Page 7 of 8
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    report?
    If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
    Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the credit/loan?
   OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
    Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    property?
    Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:      Name: Geraldo Joao Martins
   Approved By
   Sector Manager:        Name: Kaliope Azzi-Huck (SM)                       Date: 24-Mar-2014




                                              Page 8 of 8
