                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6194
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ukraine                           Project ID:    P132741
                            Project Name:      District Heating Energy Efficiency (P132741)
                            Task Team          Yadviga Viktorivna Semiko
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          12-Dec-2013                       Estimated   27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSEG                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (100%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (80%), Climate change (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       382.00                 Total Bank Financing:      332.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     332.00
                              Clean Technology Fund                                                                      50.00
                              Total                                                                                     382.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to improve the energy efficiency and quality of service of
                           selected Ukrainian DH companies, improve their financial viability and decrease their CO2
                           emissions
                            3. Project Description

                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         The proposed District Heating Energy Efficiency (DHEE) Project will be financed through IBRD
                         and Clean Technology Fund (CTF) loans; it will be implemented over 6 years. The Ministry of
                         Finance of Ukraine will be the Borrower under the Project. The Government, through the Ministry of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Finance, will on-lend to the participating district heating (DH) companies. The DH companies will
                         be responsible for the implementation of their respective investment programs financed under the
                         Project. The Ministry of Regional Development, Construction, Housing and Communal Services
                         (Minregion), which oversees Ukrainian municipal sector, will be responsible for overall Project
                         implementation as well as for capacity building of participating DH companies.

                         The Project consists of two components: (i) energy efficiency investments component; and (ii)
                         technical assistance and capacity building component.

                         Component 1: Energy Efficiency Investments (US$ 376.5 million: US$ 326.5 IBRD and US$50
                         million CTF). This component will increase efficiency of participating utilities, reduce their costs,
                         enhance reliability of their services and improve quality of heat supply. This component will cover
                         rehabilitation of boiler houses; closing of redundant boiler houses; installation of mini-CHPs;
                         replacement of network pipes with pre-insulated pipes; installation of individual heat substations
                         (IHSs) in residential buildings; installation of building-level heat meters and installation of SCADA
                         management systems to optimize heat production and supply of participating DH companies. This
                         component includes CTF co-financing that will cover installation of IHSs (together with connecting
                         pipes) and building-level heat meters.

                         This Component will target DH companies in the following municipalities: Chernigiv,
                         Dnipropetrovsk, Donetsk, Ivano-Frankivsk, Kam’yanets-Podilsky, Kharkiv, Kherson, Kirovograd,
                         Mykolaiv and Vinnyitsia. The participating DH companies and municipalities were selected
                         competitively. Selection was based on governance indicators and financial indicators. Governance
                         indicators included: availability of boiler-level gas and heat meters; prevalence of residential
                         consumption-based billing ; availability of IHSs and /or readiness to install IHSs. Financial indicators
Public Disclosure Copy




                         included: cost recovery level of heating tariffs; collection rate. All the participating DH companies
                         have 100 per cent gas meters in their boiler houses; almost all boiler houses operated by participating
                         companies have boiler-level heat meters. The average cost recovery of the participating DH
                         companies is 70 per cent (compared to 60 per cent average in Ukraine).

                         The size and details of investment programs have been finalized for the following participating DH
                         companies: Ivano-Frankivskteplokomunenergo (Ivano-Frankivsk), Miskteplovodenerhiya
                         (Kamyanets-Podilsky), Kharkivski Teplovi Merezhi (Kharkiv), Khersonteploenergo (Kherson),
                         Mykolayiboblteploenergo (Mykolaiv), and Vinnytsiamiskteploenergo (Vinnytsia). The investment
                         programs have been identified and finalized with the support of the CTF Project Preparation Grant.
                         The size of the investment programs has been discussed with the Ministry of Finance.

                         The size of the investment program for Donetskmiskteplomerezha (Donetsk) has been agreed with
                         the Ministry of Finance; the components of the investment program will be finalized soon after the
                         Board approval. The DH company is financing a feasibility study with its own funds.

                         The size of investment programs have been discussed for the following DH companies and are
                         pending approval of the Ministry of Finance: Chernihivteploelectrocentral (Chernigiv),
                         Dniproteploenerho (Dnipropetrovsk) and Kirovohradteplo (Kirovograd). The size of the investment
                         programs for these companies will be finalized before negotiations; the details of investment


                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         programs will be finalized soon after the Board approval. The investment programs will be identified
                         and finalized with the support of the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency
                         (SIDA) Urban Infrastructure Project Grant.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (US$5.5 million). This component will
                         finance technical assistance to Minregion, which will oversee the implementation of the Project.
                         Technical assistance will support: (i) supervision of Project implementation; (ii) guidance and trai
                         ning to the participating DH companies in project implementation, monitoring and evaluation; (iii)
                         capacity building and knowledge-sharing workshops to the participating companies; (iv) annual
                         quality of service surveys among the consumers of the participating DH companies; (v) annual
                         Project audits; (vi) preparation of case studies, including technical studies; and (vii) incremental
                         operating costs of Minregion related to all eligible expenses.

                         The implementation of the Project will be combined with policy dialogue on tariff reforms with the
                         main objective of improving financial viability of DH companies and advancing sector regulatory
                         practices.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will be located in Chernigiv, Dnipropetrovsk, Donetsk, Ivano-Frankivsk, Kam’yanets-
                         Podilsky, Kharkiv, Kherson, Kirovograd, Mykolaiv and Vinnyitsia. The specific Project sites have
                         been selected for Ivano-Frankivsk, Kam’yanets-Podilsky, Kharkiv, Kherson, Mykolaiv and
                         Vinnyitsia DH companies based on the results of the feasibility studies. The specific Project sites will
                         be selected for Chernigiv, Dnipropetrovsk, Donetsk and Kirovograd companies once their feasibility
                         studies are completed.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexei Slenzak (ECSEN)
                         Dmytro Glazkov (ECSEG)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Klavdiya Maksymenko (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               The Project is classified as Environmental
                          BP 4.01                                              Category B as it will support investments which
                                                                               are expected to be Category B. The types of
                                                                               activities to be implemented under the Project
                                                                               will have either minor or no adverse
                                                                               environmental impacts and provide significant
                                                                               environmental benefits. Negative environmental
                                                                               impacts are primarily associated with
                                                                               construction activities and will be mitigated
                                                                               through good construction and site-keeping
                                                                               practices. Since the investment programs of
                                                                               participating DH companies are similar, a
                                                                               Program-Level Environmental and Social
                                                                               Assessment (PLESA) was prepared by the Client
                                                                               and disclosed in every participating municipality.
                                                                               Based on the PLESA, Environmental


                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                                                                         Management Plans (EMPs) for each of the
                                                                         proposed DH companies' investment programs
                                                                         will be developed. The EMPs will be prepared as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         a part of design documentation. EMPs will be
                                                                         disclosed and publicly discussed in every project
                                                                         location.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No             No physical cultural resources will be affected
                         BP 4.11                                         by the Project.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             The proposed investments are not going to cause
                         4.12                                            any permanent physical displacement. The sub-
                                                                         projects causing any physical displacement will
                                                                         be included in the Project. However, acquisition
                                                                         of some municipally-owned land for the Project
                                                                         purposes is likely and may cause economic
                                                                         displacement. In some places unregistered trade
                                                                         pavilions and/ or street markets with unofficial
                                                                         vendors may be temporary displaced by the
                                                                         works related to networks rehabilitation. The
                                                                         Resettlement Policy Framework is described in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         one of the sections of the PLESA (attached as
                                                                         Annex 4). It has been duly disclosed in every
                                                                         Project location in local language as a separate
                                                                         document. As site-specific technical designs are
                                                                         finalized, the abbreviated Resettlement Action
                                                                         Plans (RAPs) will be prepared by DH companies
                                                                         where relevant and publicly discussed; mitigation
                                                                         measures will be implemented prior to start of the
                                                                         Project works. The Project Implementation Units
                                                                         (PIUs) of the participating DH companies were
                                                                         trained in Bank Safeguards policies and will alert
                                                                         the Central Project Management Unit (CPMU) in
                                                                         Minregion and the Bank in case of any
                                                                         displacement is caused by Project works. The
                                                                         designated safeguards specialist in the CPMU
                                                                         will closely monitor implementation of sub-
                                                                         projects.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No




                                                                 Page 4 of 7
                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The types of activities to be implemented under the Project will have either minor or no adverse
                              environmental impacts. More over, they will provide significant environmental benefits: reduction
                              in local pollution (dust and sulfur dioxide emissions); decreased emissions of greenhouse gases
                              (carbon dioxide). There will be no serious irreversible environmental consequences resulting from
                              the Project implementation. Negative environmental impacts will be local and primarily associated
                              with construction activities (e.g. dust, noise and other minor impacts of construction). Those
                              impacts will be mitigated through good construction and site-keeping practices. No potential large
                              scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts have been identified/ expected.

                              Physical works on most of the Project sites will take place at existing industrial/ district heating
                              footprint. Based on previous experience with similar investments, the rehabilitation / replacement
                              works are not expected to generate any hazardous materials that will require special disposal.

                              The acquisition of the municipally-owned land for the Project purposes is likely and may cause
                              some economic displacement. The Project works related to the rehabilitation of networks may
                              cause temporary economic displacement of light trade pavilions and/or street markets. These
                              adverse effects will be mitigated by provision of alternative land and places for trade, assistance in
                              moving or compensation for lost income.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The Project is classified as Environmental Category B. Since the investment programs of
                              participating DH companies are similar, a Program-Level Environmental and Social Assessment
                              (PLESA) was prepared by the Client and disclosed in every participating municipality. PLESA
                              covers the whole investment program financed by the Project in participating DH companies.
                              PLESA contains description of potential environmental and social impacts as well as mitigation
                              measures to address those. PLESA also contains monitoring plan to oversee the implementation of
                              the proposed mitigation measures. The site-specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs )
                              will be prepared by each DH company as a part of works design documentation. The abbreviated
                              Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared in cases where any economic displacement is
                              caused by the Project. The Central Project Management Unit (CPMU) in Minregion will be in


                                                                         Page 5 of 7
                           charge of the overall Project implementation. Minregion has prior experience of successful
                           implementation of Bank-financed municipal projects (e.g., Urban Infrastructure Project). The
                           CPMU has a designated safeguards specialist who will supervise implementation of the site-
Public Disclosure Copy




                           specific EMPs and abbreviated RAPs.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key project stakeholders are: participating DH companies, local authorities and local
                           communities in municipalities where participating DH companies are located. Draft PLESA has
                           been disclosed and is being discussed in all Project municipalities (public consultations in two
                           municipalities have been completed; in remaining four they have been scheduled; the public
                           consultations are expected to be completed by the end of December, 2013). Project
                           Implementation Units (PIUs) of participating DH companies and the CPMU are responsible for
                           organizing public consultations in every city. Special training session was conducted for the PIUs
                           and the CPMU on October 31, 2013, to ensure they have sufficient understanding and capacity to
                           organize the consultations process. Site-specific EMPs will be prepared for each project site and
                           disclosed before works start. Where relevant abbreviated RAPs will be prepared, publicly
                           consulted on and implemented before the Project works start.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        21-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     25-Nov-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ukraine                                                            26-Nov-2013
                           Comments: PLESA was disclosed in English and Ukrainian on Minregion's website as well as in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         municipalities where participating DH companies are located.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        21-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     25-Nov-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ukraine                                                            26-Nov-2013
                           Comments: Resettlement Policy Framework was disclosed in English and Ukrainian on
                                         Minregion's website as well as in municipalities where participating DH companies
                                         are located.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment



                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Yadviga Viktorivna Semiko
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                               Date: 10-Dec-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (SM)                             Date: 11-Dec-2013




                                                                        Page 7 of 7
