                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA1051
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                              Project ID:    P144726
                            Project Name:      National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project-II (P144726)
                            Task Team          Saurabh Suresh Dani
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          29-Sep-2014                        Estimated   18-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSURR                              Lending     Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Flood protection (50%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (40%),
                                              Telecommunications (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Natural disaster management (50%), Climate change (20%), Rural services and
                                              infrastructure (20%), Vulnerability assessment and monit oring (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     320.00           Total Bank Financing:                 290.00
                            Financing Gap:          -44.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          74.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                290.00
                              Total                                                                                      364.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to reduce vulnerability to cyclone and other hydro-
                           meteorological hazards of coastal communities in project States, and increase the capacity of the
                           State entities to effectively plan for, respond to, and recover from disasters.



                                                                       Page 1 of 17
                         3. Project Description
                         Background. About 5,700 kilometers of India’s coastline is exposed to severe cyclones and
                         approximately 40 percent of its total population lives within 100 kilometers of the coastline
Public Disclosure Copy




                         increasing potential natural disaster losses. The NCRMP is a flagship program, the first Bank funded
                         project in India exclusively focusing on ex-ante disaster risk mitigation. It is being implemented by
                         the NDMA with support from the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), GoI, focusing on cyclone prone
                         coastal States and UTs. The project is part of a broader national multi-hazard mitigation program
                         taken up by the NDMA that includes understanding hazards like seismic risk, floods, landslides and
                         establishment of a National Disaster Management communication network.

                         NCRMP I. The National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project I (P092217, Credit 4772-IN) has been the
                         first phase of an Adaptable Program Loan (APL) designed to assist the Government of India and the
                         vulnerable coastal states in mitigating cyclone related risks by focusing on ex-ante risk mitigation
                         interventions as part of a strategy to integrate disaster risk mitigation into the longer-term national
                         development process.

                         The NCRMP I is a US$455 million ongoing Project (US$359 million IDA credit and US$96 million
                         counterpart funds) being implemented through the National Disaster Management Authority
                         (NDMA) in coordination with the states of Andhra Pradesh and Odisha and the National Institute of
                         Disaster Management (NIDM), New Delhi. The Project includes a US$319 million project (US$255
                         million IDA credit and US$64 counterpart funds) approved by the Board of Executive Directors on
                         June 22, 2010 and became effective on March 30, 2011. It includes Additional Financing of US$136
                         million (US$104 million IDA credit and US$32 million counterpart funds) approved in 2013 after
                         Cyclone Phailin. The first phase of this APL focuses on the states of Odisha and Andhra Pradesh for
                         early warning and cyclone risk mitigation infrastructure components while technical assistance for
                         strengthening disaster risk management capacity has been made/is available for all coastal states.

                         NCRMP II. The Project is the second in a series of Projects, which started with an ongoing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Adaptable Program Loan. The second phase of this APL (this project) proposes to support activities,
                         similar to those under NCRMP I, in the states of Gujarat, Kerala, Karnataka, Maharashtra and
                         Karnataka. The lending instrument is Investment Project Financing and the implementation period is
                         five years.
                         Project Components. The project has the following five components: A) Early Warning
                         Dissemination Systems and Capacity building for Coastal Communities; B) Cyclone Risk Mitigation
                         Infrastructure; C) Technical Assistance for Disaster Risk Management Capacity; D) Understanding
                         Multi-Hazard Risk Management; and E) Project Management and Implementation Support.
                         Components A and C will be implemented by NDMA with support by the states. Component B will
                         be implemented by the five participating states: Gujarat, Maharashtra, West Bengal, Kerala, and
                         Karnataka. Component D will be implemented by Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA). The Technical
                         assistance for DRM capacity and understanding Multi-hazard Risk Management will be available to
                         all the 13 coastal states and UTs that is centrally managed by NDMA/NIDM/MHA. A short
                         description of the components is given below:

                         Component A: Early Warning Dissemination Systems (EWDS) - US$15 million
                         The objective of this component is to reduce the vulnerability of coastal communities by addressing
                         the existing gap in dissemination of warning to the communities. Currently NDMA is leading the
                         development of EWDS for the states of Andhra Pradesh and Odisha, as part of NCRMP I, which
                         includes the necessary equipment and training. This component will support the expansion of EWDS


                                                                      Page 2 of 17
                         to Gujarat, Maharashtra, West Bengal, Kerala, and Karnataka. It will assist in:
                         a) installation and operating EWDS allowing the state and/or district/sub district level control center
                         to send communications directly to the villages using Global System for Mobile Communications
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (GSM)/Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) based technology, including strengthening
                         emergency operation centers to channelize the warning through different communication channels.
                         The component also includes providing satellite phones/alternative technology to key officials to fail
                         proof the EWDS and also expand a new radio based wireless communication technology in selected
                         blocks in each state; and
                         b) Strengthen the capacity of officials and village representative in operating, maintain and using
                         these EWDS equipment and communities in disaster preparedness and response by preparing disaster
                         management plans and organizing mock drills and similar exercises.

                         Component B: Cyclone Risk Mitigation Infrastructure – US$278 million
                         The objective of this component is to increase the preparedness and reduce the vulnerability of
                         coastal communities through strategic infrastructure investments, i.e., improving their capacity/
                         access to emergency shelter, evacuation routes and protecting critical infrastructure against cyclones
                         and hydro meteorological hazards to reduce potential damages and ensure continuation of services.
                         To determine the number, characteristics and location of risk mitigation infrastructure in each of the
                         project states, identification mechanisms included vulnerability assessment of the areas, current
                         status/availability of structures, land availability, access to the sites, public consultations and status/
                         type of other on-going programs in the coastal areas. The portfolio of risk mitigation infrastructure
                         under this component includes a broad range of investment such as multi-purpose emergency
                         shelters, up-grading of roads, underground electric cabling, construction of bridges and upgrading of
                         saline embankments and bunds.

                         Sub-component B.1: Cyclone Risk Mitigation Infrastructure in Gujarat – US$77 million. To finance:
                         i) multi-purpose cyclone shelters (MPCS), and ii) access roads and bridges. Construction of 175
                         MPCS across 12 districts, including 29 shelters in surge prone areas. Improvement of roads of an
                         aggregate length of about 188 kilometers from existing single lane standard to double lane standard.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component B.2: Cyclone Risk Mitigation Infrastructure in Maharashtra – US$87.5 million. To
                         finance: i) MPCS, ii) underground cabling, iii) saline embankments and bunds, and iv) emergency
                         operations centers infrastructure. Construction of 20 MPCSs, conversion of HT (high tension) & LT
                         (low tension) overhead lines into HT&LT underground cables in the coastal town of Alibag in
                         Raigad District, construction of one new and rehabilitation of 7 saline embankment, and construction
                         and equipment of district level emergency operation centers.

                         Sub-component B.3: Cyclone Risk Mitigation Infrastructure in West Bengal – US$91.2 million. To
                         finance construction of 155 multi-purpose cyclone and flood shelters along coastal districts.

                         Sub-component B.4: Cyclone Risk Mitigation Infrastructure in Kerala – US$22.3 million. To
                         finance: i) construction of 49 MPCS across 9 districts, ii) rehabilitation of 13km of access roads, and
                         iii) construction of 19 footbridges and canals.

                         Sub-component B.5: Cyclone Risk Mitigation Infrastructure in Karnataka – US$14.0 million. To
                         finance: i) construction and rehabilitation of 30 MPCS, ii) rehabilitation of embankments and canals;
                         and iii) construction and rehabilitation of bridges. Investments in Karnataka are based on a
                         preliminary proposal, which will be appraised and finalized during implementation of this project.



                                                                        Page 3 of 17
                         Component C: Technical Assistance for Disaster Risk Assessment and Recovery - US$10 million
                         The objective of this component is to improve the quality of available information on multi-hazard
                         risks for decision making, and the assessment of strategies for risk financing.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component C.1:Multi-hazard risk modeling and assessment – US$8 million. In Phase I, NDMA
                         is undertaking a hazard and risk assessment of coastal India. The understanding of risk and
                         vulnerabilities from Phase I will be carried forward through improved probabilistic risk modeling of
                         multi-hazards and cascading impacts of disasters along coastal India.

                         Sub-component C.2: Strengthening Emergency Recovery Capacity – US$2 million. This sub-
                         component will finance the implementation of the key findings from the Capacity Building study (at
                         national, state and local level) undertaken by NIDM in NCRMP I focused on risk and damage
                         assessment. The findings will feed into developing training modules that will focus on strengthening
                         capacity of the State’s disaster responders.

                         Component D: Understanding and Strengthening Multi-Hazard Risk Management - US$19.5 million
                         The objective of this component is to understand and strengthen National Multi-hazard risk
                         management at a national level. The components would entail the following:

                         Sub-component D.1: Enhancing the Capacity for Disaster Risk Management and response in non-
                         coastal states – US$ 14.5 million. This will entail the following: a) Multi-hazard risk assessment–
                         This will finance a systematic assessment of the current and future disasters and climate risks,
                         focusing on urban areas in non-coastal states. A web-based GIS platform will be established to store
                         and manage the data gathered. Modeling will also be undertaken on a pilot basis for high risk flood
                         areas and potentially landslide risk areas to factor in cascading multi-hazard disaster impacts; b) Pilot
                         physical structural assessment– entailing a pilot initiative to train engineers on the assessment of the
                         physical vulnerability of identified public buildings and critical infrastructure to seismic and other
                         hazardous events. This will entail the development of identifying vulnerable critical infrastructure, a
                         comprehensive multi-hazard check-list and accepted assessment guidelines; and c) Strengthening
Public Disclosure Copy




                         capacity for disaster response – This would entail the strengthening the capacity of emergency
                         responders (local governments, first responders and other agencies involved in disaster response) in
                         selected urban areas that are considered highly vulnerable to the impacts of earthquakes or
                         landslides. It will include: (i) operating, maintaining and regular use of the EWDS equipment by
                         officials and village representatives; and (ii) of communities in disaster preparedness and response
                         through disaster management plans, arranging mock drills etc. It will also facilitate upgrading search
                         and rescue equipment’s coupled with proper training in the use and deployment of these tools.

                         Sub-component D.2: Comprehensive multi-hazard risk financing strategy – US$2 million. This sub-
                         component would assist a feasibility study that would review options to improve the management
                         and financial protection against multi-hazards. It will assist in estimating annual expected losses
                         caused by adverse natural events, and the probable maximum loss which will enable the development
                         of a comprehensive Multi-Hazard Risk Financing strategy at the National level.

                         Sub-component D.3: Design of a National Seismic Risk Mitigation Program – US$2 million. This
                         sub-component would assist the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) and the National Disaster
                         Management Authority (NDMA) in the design of a comprehensive National Seismic Risk Mitigation
                         Program. This will encompass activities that will strengthen risk assessment capabilities, raising
                         public awareness, strengthening the design and enforcement of building codes and land-use
                         regulations, retrofitting critical infrastructure, and risk financing. Such a program would enable

                                                                       Page 4 of 17
                         government agencies to be better prepared, respond to, and recover from earthquakes.

                         Component E: Project Management and Implementation Support - US$23 million
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will finance the incremental operating costs of the Project Management Unit (PMU)
                         and the State Project Implementation Units (SPIUs). In addition, the component will include
                         consultancies required for the preparation and supervision of specific activities, trainings, exposure
                         visits and knowledge exchange programs. The component allocation is as follows: NDMA US$5.3m,
                         Gujarat US$4.6m, Maharashtra US$5.3m, West Bengal US$5.5m, Kerala US$1.3m and Karnataka
                         US$1m.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         India is one of the most populated countries in the world with over one billion people and is
                         vulnerable to a wide range of natural hazards particularly cyclones, floods, earthquakes, drought and
                         landslides. The Global Climate Change and Vulnerability Index 2011, ranked India second in
                         ‘extreme risk’ countries in the world vulnerable to natural and climate change hazards. It has a
                         coastline of 7,516 km, of which approximately 5,700 km is exposed to cyclones of various degrees of
                         intensity, and an estimated 40 percent of its total population living within 100 km of the coastline
                         that can be potentially affected. As storm surges and climate change induced sea level rise become
                         more pronounced, hazard events are set to grow in frequency and intensity. Economic losses due to
                         disaster are also on the rise both from an increase in the number of disaster events and from an
                         increase in the average loss associated with each disaster event, coupled with a greater concentration
                         of exposed assets.

                         India’s high level of poverty, rapid urban infrastructure growth, high population density, and limited
                         community awareness, further increases the vulnerability of its people to the impacts of natural
                         hazards and climate change. New residents, urban poor living in peri-urban areas, and informal
                         settlements concentrated in high risk zones are particularly vulnerable to natural hazards due to lack
                         of adequate infrastructure, insufficient enforcement of building codes, a near absence of financial and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         insurance mechanisms that help transfer risk, and limited access to basic emergency services. It is
                         estimated that around 200 million city dwellers in India will be exposed to storms and earthquakes by
                         2050 (World Bank and United Nations 2010).

                         In the past decade, the Government of India (GoI) has shifted from a reactive emergency response to
                         being proactive in implementing disaster preparedness and risk reduction initiatives. This change has
                         led to an increased focus towards future oriented risk mitigation programs and strategies aimed at
                         ultimately benefitting millions of people vulnerable to natural disaster risks at the national, state and
                         district, including the village level.

                         The NCRMP is structured in phases, based on the risk levels of the states and their implementation
                         readiness. In the first project (Phase I), under implementation since 2010, states of Odisha and
                         Andhra Pradesh have been covered and in the second project or Phase II, the states of Gujarat,
                         Maharashtra, Kerala, West Bengal and Karnataka are being included. A brief description of the
                         participating states that are being supported under NCRMP II is provided here:
                         Gujarat. The State has the largest share (23%) of the total Indian coastline. Its coast has a high
                         diversity of terrain, shelf depths and hydrology, with some extremely flat and low lying sections. The
                         highest tidal ranges in the Indian coast are witnessed in the Gulf of Khambat (up to 8m). These
                         characteristics can amplify storm surges and impact wide stretches unlike many other coastal regions
                         of India. Two cyclone seasons are experienced in Gujarat: March to July (advancing southwestern


                                                                       Page 5 of 17
                         monsoon) and September to November (retreating monsoon).

                         The state has a large number of key ports and coastal settlements along its 1,600 km coastline. It
Public Disclosure Copy




                         serves as gateway for importing petroleum, gas and other bulk goods to North India. About 90,000
                         houses, spread over 1,300 settlements, are vulnerable to severe damages. A simulation of storm surge
                         along the Gujarat coast substantiated by field work and observations indicate that an estimated 291
                         settlements are prone to storm surges of various intensities along the coast.

                         Maharashtra. Located along the west coast, the state is the second largest in terms of population and
                         the third largest in terms of area, and is spread over 307,713 square km. The state has the country's
                         second largest urban population, and is about 43% urbanized. Mumbai, Maharashtra’s capital city is
                         the principal financial center and a major commercial hub of the country.

                         Maharashtra is prone to a host of hazards. It is at moderate risk to cyclones and storms. During the
                         period from 1890 to 1995, 210 cyclonic depressions were recorded in the Arabian Sea. Out of these,
                         19 (including 6 major ones) affected the Maharashtra-Goa coast. The Konkan region lies in the
                         moderate to low damage cyclone risk zone with wind speeds rarely exceed 155km/h. Heavy
                         urbanization has also increased vulnerability to hazards, in particular urban flooding.

                         West Bengal. The coastal stretch of West Bengal is highly vulnerable to cyclones and the frequency
                         of storms crossing this belt is high. The most destructive element associated with an intense cyclone
                         is storm surge which leads to inundations and coastline washout/erosion. High storm surge in coastal
                         West Bengal is due to its peculiar bathymetry and the nature of the coastal belt. The northern part of
                         the Bay of Bengal is very shallow. The coast is also landlocked on three sides. As a result, when a
                         very severe cyclonic storm or cyclone approaches the coast, the storm surge generated by the wind
                         pressure submerges the coastal belt. Another peculiar characteristic of this coast are the high number
                         of rivers and rivulets criss-crossing islands that have an elevation of 4 to 5m above sea level. This
                         makes these islands and the populations inhabiting them highly vulnerable.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The state has a population of more than 90 million and it is amongst the highest density states in the
                         country. Coastal communities in the state are largely poor and often live in houses made of mud
                         walls and thatched roofs, making them highly vulnerable to cyclones, high speed winds, precipitation
                         and inundation. West Bengal has suffered from cyclones, floods, droughts and earthquakes. On May
                         25, 2009, a severe cyclone, “Aila” lashed the West Bengal coast causing destruction not only in the
                         coastal blocks but also far inland.

                         Kerala. The state has a geographical area of 38,863 square km. It lies between the Arabian Sea on the
                         west and the Western Ghats on the east. Kerala’s coast runs 580km in length, while the state itself
                         varies between 35km to 120km in width. Kerala receives an average annual rainfall of 3,100mm
                         mostly through seasonal monsoons and averages 120-140 rainy days per year. The excessive rainfall
                         that the state receives every season, including from tropical cyclones, makes it prone to severe
                         landslides, flooding and coastal erosion.

                         The density of coastal urban population is 4,228 persons per square km, nearly twice the average
                         urban density in the state. Continuous occurrence of high intensity rainfall for a few days is the
                         primary factor contributing to extreme floods in the State. Between the year 1891 to 2007, 31
                         cyclonic storms/severe cyclonic storms have affected the Kerala coast. Cyclones are usually
                         accompanied by tidal waves which, on occasion, enter land up to a distance of 10 km, along with
                         heavy rains and winds with speeds exceeding 50 km/h.

                                                                      Page 6 of 17
                         Karnataka. The state has a total area of 191,791 square km, and it is the seventh largest state in India
                         by area, and eight by population. The total coast length is 320km, along which there is one major
Public Disclosure Copy




                         port, the New Mangalore Port, and more than 10 medium and small ones. The three coastal districts
                         (Uttar Kannada, Udupi, and Dakshina Kannada) have a total population of about 5 million. Of these,
                         the people at highest risk (the ones within 5km from the coastline) are about 2.8 million, of which
                         close to 40 percent are below the poverty line. The state falls under moderate and low risk zones for
                         cyclones but it has experienced floods related to low pressure systems and cyclonic circulation over
                         the Bay of Bengal and Arabian Sea. The last major hydro-meteorological event, in 2009, affected
                         more than 4,000 houses causing major damage.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Venkata Rao Bayana (GSURR)
                         Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              While the project interventions are likely to have
                         BP 4.01                                               an over-all positive impact in mitigating risks
                                                                               from disasters, specific interventions envisaged
                                                                               under the project such as creation of cyclone risk
                                                                               mitigation infrastructure under Component B
                                                                               (that includes improvement of roads and bridges;
                                                                               strengthening/upgrading of coastal embankments;
                                                                               underground electric cabling and construction of
                                                                               cyclone shelters) may have some potential
                                                                               adverse environmental and social impacts.

                                                                               Planning and construction of this infrastructure
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               would require avoidance/mitigation measures to
                                                                               ensure that adverse environmental impacts are
                                                                               minimized and properly managed. Impacts
                                                                               resulting from poor sub-project location and/or
                                                                               design; drainage; impact on local flora and fauna;
                                                                               work site safety management, including
                                                                               occupational health and safety of construction
                                                                               workers; construction materials management,
                                                                               including source handling and transportation and;
                                                                               issues associated with improper disposal of debris
                                                                               and construction wastes would require attention.
                                                                               More so, like the parent project, the most
                                                                               important environmental concern pertains to
                                                                               avoiding the highly sensitive ecological areas
                                                                               and/or environmental features in the vulnerable
                                                                               coastal environs, which is possible by using the
                                                                               screening mechanisms (including use of GIS)
                                                                               diligently.

                                                                               OP 4.01 has been triggered to facilitate creation/


                                                                       Page 7 of 17
                                                                         strengthening of mechanisms whereby sub-
                                                                         projects can be planned, designed and maintained
                                                                         in an environmentally sound manner through
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         integration of appropriate approaches into the
                                                                         over-all decision making process of the project –
                                                                         as was done for NCRMP I.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           While the proposed project interventions are not
                                                                         likely to cause significant conversion or damage
                                                                         to natural habitats, OP 4.04 has been triggered as
                                                                         some of the sub-projects are likely to be located
                                                                         within/very close a critical natural habitat (owing
                                                                         to the fact that the coast line is dotted with several
                                                                         ecologically sensitive areas, including those
                                                                         defined as ‘critical’ under the policy).
                                                                         Management measures, particularly diligence in
                                                                         appropriate site selection would also be required
                                                                         for avoiding/minimizing disturbances,
                                                                         particularly during the planning and design stage.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            OP 4.36 has not been triggered for this project as
                                                                         no interventions are envisaged in forest areas and
                                                                         therefore no conversion/degradation of this
                                                                         natural resource is expected to occur. The
                                                                         screening mechanism that has been formulated
                                                                         for the project enables in early identification of
                                                                         such issues. Based on the screening result, site
                                                                         assessment and the availability of alternative sub-
                                                                         project site/s, further decision about inclusion/
                                                                         exclusion of such a sub-project will be made.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            OP 4.09 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                         biological/environmental control methods or
                                                                         reliance on synthetic chemical pesticides is not
                                                                         envisaged.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The implementation of the project/program is not
                         BP 4.11                                         likely to affect religious structures of local
                                                                         significance or other physical cultural resources.
                                                                         Impacts, if any would be addressed through
                                                                         appropriate design interventions. Since some civil
                                                                         works are involved, ‘chance finds’ at work sites is
                                                                         a likely impact that has to be managed through
                                                                         appropriate provisions in the relevant (safeguards
                                                                         as well as bidding) documents.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            OP 4.10 has not been triggered as there are no
                                                                         tribal habitations with unique socio-cultural
                                                                         identity vis-à-vis the mainstream population in
                                                                         the proposed project locations. This is based on
                                                                         the assessment (both field level and documentary)



                                                                 Page 8 of 17
                                                                               conducted for the preparation of the Environment
                                                                               and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for
                                                                               this project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes             OP/BP 4.12 has been triggered to effectively
                            4.12                                               manage involuntary resettlement in case of
                                                                               acquisition of any private land/s. While primarily
                                                                               the proposed works would be undertaken on
                                                                               available/government land, participatory
                                                                               approaches of voluntary donation, direct purchase
                                                                               or exchange by the sponsoring institutions will be
                                                                               followed for obtaining land, if required for some
                                                                               sub-projects.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No              OP 4.37 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                               there is no construction of new dams or activities
                                                                               that are concerned with safe functioning of
                                                                               existing dams.
                            Projects on International          No              OP 7.50 will not be triggered for this project as
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               there are no interventions planned/proposed over
                                                                               or around an international waterway that could
                                                                               cause a potential conflict. There are also no
                                                                               activities that may affect the use or pollute such a
                                                                               waterway.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                OP 7.60 is not being triggered as the project is not
                            7.60                                               proposed in any disputed area.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              While the project is expected to benefit the coastal communities in the participating states by
                              reducing their vulnerability to cyclone and other hydro-meteorological hazards through creation of
                              cyclone risk mitigation infrastructure and early warning systems, the proposed investments may
                              have some adverse environmental and social impacts.

                             Environmental Issues/Impacts. The proposed investments under Component 2 of the project to
                             create risk mitigation infrastructure include construction of multi-purpose emergency cyclone
                             shelters, improvement/upgrading of roads to provide connectivity to cyclone shelters, underground
                             electric cabling works, construction of bridges and strengthening of saline embankments/bunds.
                             These activities are central to the approach and design for environment management and
                             safeguards aspects of the project since they have a potential to create significant or irreversible
                             impacts on natural and physical environment in a coastal area, if not managed appropriately.
                             Activities under other components would focus on multi-hazard risk modeling and assessment,
                             capacity building for Disaster Risk Management; implementation support and other such softer
                             aspects. Any significant or irreversible adverse impact on environment is not envisaged from the
                             implementation of such proposed interventions.



                                                                       Page 9 of 17
                          Since works would be largely carried out in the coastal realms of states that are marked by various
                          degrees of vulnerability and are marked with sensitive environmental features, there are some risks
                          or issues that need to be managed through appropriate planning and upfront care during the site
Public Disclosure Copy




                          selection process, particularly in case of sub-projects located close to the shoreline or high tide line
                          influence area or in low lying area/s.

                          Potential adverse impacts on account of activities/works proposed under Component 2 of the
                          project may include: (i) direct/indirect impacts resulting due to poor site selection for sub-projects
                          (example: salt water intrusion due to inappropriate planning and design of embankments); (ii)
                          impact on the drainage pattern of the area, including impact on coastal flora and/or fauna due to
                          changes in tidal water flow or drainage congestion resulting from obstruction to natural flow of
                          water due to the improper storage of materials or dumping of construction wastes; (iii) felling of
                          trees and clearance of vegetation for sub-project construction; (iv) impacts on water resources used
                          by the people; (v) occupational health and safety concerns that may arise during the construction
                          stage; (vi) impacts due to construction material (sand, water, earth, aggregate) sourcing and
                          transportation and; (vii) concerns arising out of improper management of debris and other
                          construction wastes.

                          In view of the potential impacts on the environment, Bank’s OP 4.01 on Environmental
                          Assessment, OP 4.04 on Natural Habitats and OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources have been
                          triggered, and the project is designated as Category A. On the whole, with proper planning and
                          implementation of management measures, the project interventions are not likely to cause large
                          scale, significant or irreversible damage to natural and/or physical environment.
                          Social Issues/Impacts. Based on past experience from NCRMP I, land acquisition or population
                          displacement is not envisaged under the project. Primarily, land owned by the government will be
                          used for construction and rehabilitation of shelters, roads and embankments. In cases where
                          institutional land is not available, participatory approaches of voluntary donation or direct
                          purchase or exchange by the sponsoring institutions will be followed for obtaining land. Although
                          it is highly unlikely that private lands and/or public land from private users will be required;
Public Disclosure Copy




                          considering any remote circumstances that may arise in a few sub-projects, World Bank’s
                          Operational Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) has been triggered to effectively
                          manage such cases of involuntary resettlement. A social screening exercise at the sub-project level
                          will determine the specific requirement, if any on land uptake in addition to any other key social
                          issue.

                          Further, the field level and documentary assessment conducted for the preparation of the
                          Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) reveals that there are no tribal
                          habitations with unique socio-cultural identity vis-à-vis the mainstream population in the project
                          locations in the five participating states. The assessment reveals that: (a) the proposed sub-
                          projects under the operation will be located in coastal zone/non-scheduled areas (non-tribal/non-
                          indigenous people areas); (b) the population in the coastal zone mainly belongs to fishing
                          communities, which are non-tribal/non indigenous in character and practice; (c) the major
                          economic occupations of these populations are fishing, salt making and agriculture and that these
                          occupations are more than subsistence economic pursuits.

                           In view of the points mentioned above, Bank’s OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement has been
                           triggered and based on the assessment, OP 4.10 has not been triggered for this project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities


                                                                     Page 10 of 17
                           in the project area:
                           Most significantly, the reduction in the vulnerability of coastal communities, in the five
                           participating coastal states of Kerala, Gujarat, Maharashtra, West Bengal and Karnataka, to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           adverse impacts of cyclones and climate related hazards will be a desirable long term impact from
                           the project. This long-term generally positive impact of the project will help in bringing
                           development in the targeted areas, particularly in the local context.

                           Considerations of environment and social dimensions in operation and maintenance cycle of assets
                           would help in ensuring the soundness and sustainability of the program from an environmental
                           perspective. For example, project benefits for multipurpose disaster shelters include ensuring safe
                           sheltering of the project beneficiaries at the event of any disasters including cyclone, and
                           providing new or upgraded spaces for schools, health centers, or other public uses (as decided by
                           the community). Separate floor for sheltering livestock is expected to save number of cattle and
                           other livestock in the event of a disaster. Some ancillary provisions in the cyclone shelters
                           stemmed out from environmental considerations. The design of each shelter includes separate
                           sanitary facilities for men and women, access ramps and sanitary facilities for physically
                           challenged, separate space for generator, first aid facilities and a kitchen. These provisions also
                           include an attempt towards clean energy benefits from use of solar panel/s.

                           Further, the experience gained during the project implementation would help the implementing
                           agencies, both at the central and state level, to address environmental and social issues more
                           systematically in their regular disaster risk reduction operations as well. The project’s treatment of
                           environmental and social issues specifically with regard to the approach used for screening sub-
                           projects (which is based on a robust and scientific methodology) has a potential to set an important
                           precedent for non-project activities/areas now and in the future. At the same time, long-term/
                           indirect adverse environmental and social impacts may result if road infrastructure and saline
                           embankments are designed and implemented without due considerations to local environmental
                           and social features, including drainage and safety aspects.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The environment and social screening tool developed as part of the Environment and Social
                           Management Framework (ESMF) for the parent NCRMP project has been used effectively for
                           early identification of key environmental and social issues associated with sub-projects, which are
                           not only many in number but also spread across a wide geographical coastal realm of two states,
                           namely Odisha and Andhra Pradesh. This exercise, carried out in parallel with the technical
                           assessment, has also helped in precisely identifying the location for a sub-project. For location/s
                           falling within the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) line, an alternative site was identified in Odisha.
                           For sub-projects with significant social issues, land acquisition and displacement issues and the
                           ones falling within the CRZ with no alternative sites, were either dropped or considered for Phase
                           II, depending on the nature and scale of issues. The already established methodology for
                           environment screening exercise, supported by use of scientific tools such as GIS and remote
                           sensing techniques, has helped in avoiding/minimizing adverse environmental impacts on sensitive
                           habitats and in finding alternatives, wherever possible.

                           For NCRMP II, all sub-projects will be subjected to an environmental and social screening in line
                           the process and procedures set forth in the ESMF and in line with the well-established system
                           adopted for the parent project (NCRMP I). The screening process will filter out sub-projects with
                           substantive/ major environmental or social issues. It will distinguish/identify sub-projects


                                                                     Page 11 of 17
                           requiring a detailed impact assessment and/or regulatory clearances and requirement for land
                           uptake, if any.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           A detailed or limited environmental impact assessment study (as the case may be depending on
                           findings from the screening exercise) will be undertaken for investments pertaining to saline
                           embankment/bund strengthening works and underground electric cabling (or in exceptional cases
                           for roads with major re-alignments). These sub-projects will undergo an analysis of alternatives,
                           especially in terms of their proposed location and/or design as required under standard EA
                           practice. For sub-projects requiring regulatory clearances (including the Coastal Regulation Zone
                           (CRZ) clearance), alternative site/s will be explored, and for those with no viable alternatives,
                           permissions will be sought in line with regulatory requirements.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environmental and Social Management and Safeguards Instrument: In order to ensure effective
                           environmental and social management in a scenario where multiple sub-projects are proposed
                           along different locations in the coastal areas of five participating states and their specific locations
                           are not known at the time of over-all project design, an approach for preparation, application and
                           implementation of an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been adopted
                           for the project. It includes: (a) Environment and Social Screening approach and methodology and;
                           (b) Environment and Social Assessment for certain type of sub-projects (such as saline
                           embankment/bund works and underground electric cabling works).

                           The ESMF was originally prepared for NCRMP I, wherein it was applied and implemented in the
                           two participating states of Odisha and Andhra Pradesh. The framework has now been revised/
                           updated and is being used for NCRMP II. The revised document reflects the changes in regulatory
                           requirements/ procedures that have come into effect post-2009 and takes into account the
                           experiences/lessons learnt from the implementation of the first project. The revision/updating has
                           also considered the baseline or existing environmental and social characteristics of the four states
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (Gujarat, Maharashtra, Kerala and West Bengal) proposed to be covered under NCRMP II. The
                           use of this framework will be extended to Karnataka, where project preparation works have
                           recently been initiated. Once some baseline information is available, appropriate additions/
                           modifications will be made in the ESMF.

                           Management of Environmental and Social Issues/Risks: The ESMF will serve as a comprehensive
                           and a systematic guide covering policies, procedures and provisions, which are being/will be
                           integrated with the over-all project cycle to ensure that the environmental concerns/issues are
                           systematically identified and integrated into the project/sub-project cycle. It guides the integration
                           of environment, health and safety aspects within the decision making and implementation process
                           of various sub-projects. It will also support compliance with applicable laws and regulations of
                           GoI and State Governments apart from meeting the requirements of the relevant Bank policies.
                           This includes the consideration of the relevant Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines of the
                           World Bank Group.

                           The over-all environment management approach for the project under the ESMF includes the
                           following key steps:
                           (i)     Environment screening, which helps in early identification of key environmental issues at
                           the sub-project level. The screening process forms the first step in the environment management
                           process for the project and has been/is being carried out in parallel with the project identification/


                                                                      Page 12 of 17
                         engineering feasibility studies for the sub-projects under consideration for inclusion in the project.
                         Proposed investments have been/are being screened and sub-projects with no significant adverse
                         environmental impact are being identified for implementation under Phase I. The environment
Public Disclosure Copy




                         screening process for the project has used a robust methodology supported by use of scientific
                         tools such as GIS and remote sensing techniques, which has helped in avoiding environmentally
                         sensitive sites. The results are being collated state-wise in the form of Screening Reports. The
                         process and documentation structure for environment screening exercise was developed under
                         NCRMP I (currently under implementation in Odisha and Andhra Pradesh) and was found to be
                         quite effective in identifying issues early-on even in a scenario where a large number of sub-
                         projects (400+ in each state) were being considered in a single state.
                         (ii)     For sub-projects with a potential for significant adverse environment impacts (as identified
                         from the screening results), an Environment Assessment (EA) and sub-project specific
                         Environment Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared in accordance to Bank’s OP 4.01. The EA
                         will include an assessment of baseline conditions, analysis of alternative options, assessment of
                         potential impacts, identification of mitigation measures and preparation of sub-project specific
                         environmental management plans. However, it is expected that sub-projects with the potential for
                         significant adverse environment impacts will be few in number. These are primarily expected to be
                         limited to strengthening of saline embankments/bunds and underground electric cabling works.
                         (iii)    Based on screening results, if a sub-project does not require an EA, the generic/standard
                         activity-specific EMP, developed as part of the ESMF, will apply. These generic/standard activity-
                         specific EMPs provide over-all guidance on avoidance, minimization and mitigation measures to
                         be adopted during the planning/selection, design, implementation and operation stages of a sub-
                         project.
                         (iv)     Integration of Environmental Requirements in Bidding Documents. The considerations/
                         requirements will be mainstreamed as part of the over-all decision making and execution process.
                         For environment, health and safety requirements to be followed by the Contractor during
                         construction, the requirements in form of conditions/specifications will be integrated into the
                         Bidding Documents and Bills of Quantities (as required/relevant) will be provided for.
                         Institutional Arrangements: The project proposes to use the institutional arrangements (both at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         central and state levels) and a safeguards framework similar to that followed for NCRMP I. This
                         approach would help in strengthening aspects/elements that have worked in the first project and
                         facilitate in refining/focusing on issues that require some improvement.

                         The National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), on behalf of Ministry of Home Affairs
                         (MHA), is managing the project and has the over-all responsibility for implementation. As in
                         NCRMP-I, the NDMA will provide technical and monitoring support, including that for proper
                         application of the ESMF requirements in various stages of the project cycle. NDMA’s existing
                         PMU is headed by a Project Director and supported by technical experts and management staff.
                         The current PMU set-up has one specialist each to handle environment and social aspects. NDMA
                         is currently providing guidance to the participating states under NCRMP II and four states (except
                         Karnataka) have developed the required investment proposals. Model DPRs have been prepared
                         and first-year investments have been identified in the said four states.

                         At state level, the existing nodal agency for disaster management (e.g., State Disaster Management
                         Authorities or Revenue/Relief Departments) will be responsible for managing the project. Within
                         this department/agency, a State Project Implementation Units (SPIU) will be created to play the
                         coordination/project management role. Implementation of the ESMF, including sub-project
                         specific preparation of safeguard documents and implementation/monitoring of the RAPs and
                         EMPs is the responsibility of the State PIUs. The Project Implementation Unit in each state will

                                                                   Page 13 of 17
                          have Nodal Environmental and Social Experts to continuously apply and review the ESMF
                          implementation in the project. These experts will be responsible for ensuring proper preparation
                          and implementation of safeguard documents/instruments as well. All the Detailed Project Reports
Public Disclosure Copy




                          prepared by the line/implementing agencies will be vetted/certified by these Nodal Environment
                          and Social Experts.

                          The project also has a provision for Third Party Audit covering technical, environmental and
                          social aspects to support NDMA/SDMAs/Line Departments in attaining technical quality and
                          safeguard compliance objectives. These arrangements and staff positions at the central and state
                          level are similar to the institutional structures from the parent project (NCRMP I).

                          The NDMA and the state agencies have also designed a Grievance Response Mechanism (GRM)
                          to answer to queries, receive suggestions and address complaints and grievances about any
                          irregularities in application of the guidelines adopted in this framework for inclusive project
                          design, and assessment and mitigation of social and environmental impacts. In case of grievances,
                          the matter will be brought to the notice of local tehsildar/Sub Divisional Magistrate (SDM). He/
                          she shall hear the case in presence of all concerned and will try to reach an amicable solution. In
                          case of non-satisfactory solution, the matter will be brought to the notice of the District Collector
                          and he is the final authority to decide the case. As and if required, certain cases will be referred to
                          State Steering Committee which would examine and address the grievances. The Social
                          Management Specialist from the SPIU/SDMA will be responsible for maintaining a record of the
                          proceedings and the final decision/s.

                          Borrower Capacity: The NDMA, which will be the central co-ordinating agency for this project, is
                          familiar with the Bank’s safeguard requirements, through its involvement in NCRMP-I. On the
                          environment and social management aspects, the Authority has gained basic familiarity with
                          regard to the Bank’s safeguard requirements through the on-going project. Insights into typical
                          issues/problems have been developed at most levels, reporting and other monitoring mechanisms
                          have been developed/standardized.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The state governments, particularly those of Gujarat, Maharashtra and Kerala are generally aware
                           of environmental issues and management requirements of the Bank on account of their
                           involvement in other Bank projects. However, West Bengal may require a closer monitoring and
                           over-sight and for this required training and support is being provided both by NDMA and the
                           Bank. More so, some sensitization/awareness among implementers in the field (consultants,
                           contractors and line agency staff) will also be required so that project specific requirements set
                           forth in the ESMF are understood clearly by all concerned. The Bank will continue its oversight on
                           aspects pertaining to institutional arrangements and staff capacity, as with a large number of
                           implementing entities that are involved in the operation, some staff turnover during the course of
                           project implementation is expected.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Stakeholders: The primary beneficiaries will be the coastal communities in the five participating
                           states (Gujarat, Kerala, Maharashtra, West Bengal and Karnataka), benefitting from targeted risk
                           mitigation interventions such as cyclone risk mitigation infrastructure and early warning systems.
                           The secondary stakeholders include officials from National Disaster Management Authority,
                           concerned State Disaster Management Authorities, Revenue and Disaster Management
                           Department/s, local governments/village Panchayats; local NGOs; and selected government


                                                                     Page 14 of 17
                           departments such as Public Works, Irrigation/ Kharland Board and other administrative officials/
                           staff in the five said states associated with the planning, design and implementation of NCRMP II.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Consultations: Stakeholder consultation, information dissemination and social mobilization have
                           remained integral part of NCRMP’s planning and implementation. In accordance with the
                           applicable Bank policies, public consultations have been/are being carried out in areas where
                           specific investments are proposed for funding under NCRMP II in the five participating states. The
                           public consultation process has been designed in a way that: (i) affected people are included in the
                           decision making process; (iii) public awareness and information sharing on project alternatives/
                           benefits are promoted; and (iii) views on designs and solutions from the communities are solicited.
                           During the preparation of the ESMF for both NCRMP I and II and during planning of sub-
                           projects, extensive consultation have been/are being carried out with communities, intended
                           beneficiaries, implementing departments, experts (as needed), local NGOs and other stakeholders.
                           The outcomes of these consultations have been considered in the ESMF preparation process and
                           are also documented in the screening reports. Beneficiary consultations and participatory planning
                           have continued through the implementation period in NCRMP I. The same approach and
                           mechanisms will continue for sub-projects/interventions proposed under this project.

                           The key stakeholders in the project are those are vulnerable to cyclone, storm surges, and floods in
                           the coastal areas. The ESMF was prepared in consultation with the local communities, NGOs and
                           government officials/agencies. The sub-project specific EA/s (environmental assessment) and SA/
                           s (social assessment) and Resettlement Action Plan/s (RAP/s), where required, will be prepared in
                           consultation with affected communities and the draft/s will be disclosed to solicit feedback.
                           D
                           isclosure: The draft ESMF document (March 12, 2014 version) has been made public through the
                           Project Authority’s website and has also been disclosed at Bank’s PIC/Infoshop. The state-wise
                           draft Environment Screening Reports (for Phase I investments), including proceedings from the
                           public consultation process are currently being consolidated and will be disclosed on the NDMA
                           and the state websites in line with the requirements of Bank’s Operational Policies and as has been
Public Disclosure Copy




                           done for the parent project. The final version of the ESMF (October 1, 2014) has also been
                           disclosed, both in the Project Authority’s website and at Bank’s PIC/Infoshop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        20-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     28-Apr-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                              16-Apr-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        20-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     28-Apr-2014




                                                                     Page 15 of 17
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            16-Apr-2014
                           Comments: The ESMF is the tool which is going to be used to implement safeguards.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?


                                                                    Page 16 of 17
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Saurabh Suresh Dani
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                     Date: 06-Oct-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst (PMGR)             Date: 07-Oct-2014
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    Page 17 of 17
