                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC3409

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Myanmar                         Project ID:      P145534
                            Project Name:      MM: Telecommunications Sector Reform (P145534)
                            Task Team          Tenzin Dolma Norbhu
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          08-Nov-2013                     Estimated        06-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     TWICT                           Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Telecommunications (70%), Public administration- Information and
                                               communications (20%), General information and communications sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Regulation and competition policy (70%), e-Government (20%), Infrastructure
                                               services for private sector development (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     31.50                    Total Bank Financing:        31.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                31.50
                              Total                                                                      31.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           17.      The development objectives of the project are to: (a) improve the enabling environment for
                           the telecommunications sector and extend coverage in selected pilot locations; and (b) establish
                           priority eGovernment technological foundations and institutional capacity for Government to embark
                           on its public sector reform program
                           C. Project Description
                         A. Project Components

                         18.   Component 1. Creating an enabling environment for connectivity ($ 8.0 million): This
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component will focus on:

                         (a)      Reinforcing the implementation of a policy and regulatory environment for a pro-
                         competitive sector to improve sectoral efficiency and respond to key regulatory priorities. This
                         subcomponent will focus on addressing policy and regulatory bottlenecks to maximize the benefits of
                         the sector reform agenda. Technical advisory assistance will be provided to MCIT on policy matters
                         and to the regulator on various regulatory matters. Two long-term advisors will be assigned to work
                         hand in hand with MCIT and PTD. A policy advisor will support MCIT and a regulatory specialist
                         will be assigned to the PTD to provide overall regulatory advice, help PTD address gaps, and provide
                         day to day mentoring to staff. ($1.5 million)

                         (b)      Institutional capacity strengthening for the Ministry and the regulator. Significant
                         institutional strengthening support is needed to ensure that Myanmar can successfully transition from
                         a monopoly to a competitive market structure. Capacity development support for MCIT and PTD
                         staff will be provided through workshops and training events, peering arrangements with regulators
                         in the region; and study visits. The support will focus, among others, on issues such technology
                         trends and policy implications, competition, open access and price regulation, licensing, spectrum
                         management and monitoring, quality of service monitoring and technical regulations. Resources will
                         also be provided for the establishment of a shared local area network infrastructure for MCIT and
                         PTD, library and access to international ITU technical and radio resources ($1.5 million)

                         (c)     Spectrum management and monitoring system. The regulator will be responsible for
                         spectrum management and monitoring. Given that most new network deployments will rely on
                         wireless technology, there is a need to support the strengthening of the regulator’s spectrum
                         management function. The regulator will be provided investment support to procure and implement
Public Disclosure Copy




                         a spectrum management and monitoring system (SMMS) so that it has the tools to effectively
                         manage the radio spectrum. Consultants will assist the regulator in the development of technical
                         specifications for the SMMS, preparation of bidding documents, bid evaluation and contract
                         administration of the system.($5 million)

                         19.     Component 2. Restructuring of Myanmar Post and Telecommunications ($2.0 million) The
                         main objective of this component is to separate the policy and operational roles of the Government
                         and will entail the technical assistance for the corporatization of MPT, and preparation for its
                         eventual privatization.

                         20.     Component 3: Extending connectivity to rural areas ($ 20 million): This component will
                         support the development of the Government’s universal access strategy in order to accelerate the
                         provision of telecommunications and Internet services in remote areas of Myanmar. This will
                         primarily be achieved through a competitive award of capital subsidies through an output-based aid
                         tender process to licensed operators that would be responsible for installing, operating, and
                         maintaining the telecommunications systems on a commercial basis. Bank support for this
                         component will have two important impacts: (a) establish and institute a competitive and transparent
                         process to involve the private sector in providing infrastructure access and services in rural and
                         economically unviable areas of Myanmar; and (b) redefine public sector role from that of financing
                         information and communications infrastructure development to one of facilitating private service
                           provision of services. This component will be implemented over two phases, where in the first
                           phase, a detailed scoping of the Universal Access program will be conducted and in the second
                           phase, the program will be implemented. This component will focus on:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (a) Technical assistance to develop a universal access strategy for Myanmar ($0.3 million);

                           (b) Capital subsidy support to provide telecommunication and internet services to rural areas of
                           Myanmar that are commercially unviable for operators to service without a one-time subsidy ($19.3
                           million); and

                           (c) Technical assistance for consultant services to design the bidding documents for the output-based
                           aid schemes described above and manage the implementation of these programs ($0.4 million).

                           21.      Project Implementation Support ($1.5 million) will be used to hire a Financial Management
                           Specialist, Procurement Specialist, safeguards specialist and other required support staff including
                           translators, communications specialist and an M&E officer. Funds will also be used to procure
                           required office equipment. Operational costs of the project will also be met from this allocation. The
                           Government’s in-kind contribution to the project will include office space and a full time Project
                           Director.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Components 1, 2 and technical assistance subcomponent of Component 3 of the project will be
                           implemented in Nay Pyi Taw and Yangon, whereas the investment subcomponent of Component 3
                           will be implemented in remote, rural inhabited locations in Myanmar. The exact locations and details
                           of Component 3 will be confirmed during project implementation when the Universal Service
                           Strategy is developed and pilots designed. All Project sites where telecommunication masts and
                           towers will be installed will be selected in such a manner that they do not adversely affect natural
                           habitats, forests, and physical cultural resources.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Borrower has limited institutional capacity for safeguard policies. At a national level there is
                           limited legal requirements and limited institutional capacity for ensuring effective safeguard
                           preparation and implementation in infrastructure projects in Myanmar. The Ministry of
                           Communications and Information Technology (MCIT) is in the process of licensing two new
                           operators (Telenor of Norway and Ooredoo of Qatar) through an international competitive process.
                           The information memorandum for this bidding opportunity specifically requires that all
                           telecommunications operators and their subcontractors have to abide by international environmental
                           standards at network roll out as well as in everyday operations.

                           For the Project, activities to build safeguard capacity building at MCIT will be supported.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Andrea Fitri Woodhouse (EASTS)
                           Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (EASER)
                           Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                         Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          TThe project is proposed as category “B? as the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                     rural access component of the project will
                                                                     include limited small scale civil works related to
                                                                     the construction of telecommunications masts
                                                                     and towers. Potential but temporary negative
                                                                     impacts on local environment and communities
                                                                     will mainly occur during the construction
                                                                     phases of this Project. The nature of the
                                                                     proposed construction works although at
                                                                     different sites (not identified yet) will include
                                                                     similar activities, with an extent of impacts
                                                                     during construction that can be readily screened,
                                                                     assessed and mitigated . The selection of sites
                                                                     will be screened for environment and social
                                                                     impacts using an Environmental and Social
                                                                     Management Framework (ESMF) before
                                                                     decision on the actual location is made and
                                                                     commencement of works. To mitigate the
                                                                     potential negative impacts during construction
                                                                     and maintenance, Environmental Codes of
                                                                     Practices (ECOPs) will be prepared as part of
                                                                     the ESMF to outline requirements for mitigation
                                                                     measures and monitoring aspects to be carried
                                                                     out during construction and maintenance. This
                                                                     ESMF will be in line with the WB safeguard
                                                                     policies and will be incorporated in the bidding
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     documents of the contractors/selected operators
                                                                     particularly the ECOP part of the ESMF. The
                                                                     ESMF will be disclosed in the Bank’s Infoshop
                                                                     and in the country in local language and
                                                                     discussed with civil society organizations before
                                                                     appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    TBD          The ESMF includes provisions for screening of
                                                                     sites for masts and towers for impacts on natural
                                                                     habitats. Sites with critical natural habitats that
                                                                     could be adversely affected by the installation of
                                                                     masts and towers will be avoided, whereas
                                                                     installation of masts and towers maybe allowed
                                                                     in natural habitats provided that the benefits
                                                                     outweigh the negative impacts of the
                                                                     installations and that mitigating measures
                                                                     developed and implemented to address the
                                                                     impacts
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No           Given the scale of mast and tower installations,
                                                                     the project is not expected to significantly affect
                                                                 forests, forest health and forest-dependent
                                                                 communities. Nevertheless, the ESMF will
                                                                 include provisions for screening environment
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 and social impacts of mast and tower
                                                                 installations and measures in case the
                                                                 installations will have impacts on forests
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not procure any pesticides or
                                                                 pesticide equipment, nor will an increased use
                                                                 of pesticides result from the project.
                                                                 Maintenance of the masts and towers will not
                                                                 involve use of pesticides as this will be done by
                                                                 manual labor
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    It is unlikely that the masts and towers will be
                         BP 4.11                                 located in areas with and/or will negatively
                                                                 affect PCR. Nevertheless, the ESMF will
                                                                 include provisions for screening of PCRs during
                                                                 site selection and installation of masts and
                                                                 towers. In addition, the ESMF will also include
                                                                 provisions for Chance Find during installation
                                                                 of masts and towers
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   The triggering of OP 4.10 will depend on the
                                                                 selection of remote rural communities to be
                                                                 identified during project implementation. With
                                                                 more than 50% of Myanmar inhabiting ethnic
                                                                 minorities covered by OP 4.10 it is likely that
                                                                 the policy is triggered. If this isthe case an
                                                                 Ethnic Minorities Planning Framework (EMPF,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 similar to an IPPF) will be prepared as part of
                                                                 the ESMF to provide concrete screening
                                                                 procedures to ensure that the project will not
                                                                 negatively impact ethnic minorities and provide
                                                                 project benefits as appropriate
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    TBD   Involuntary land acquisition will not occur
                         4.12                                    under the project. Operators will make long
                                                                 term lease contracts with interested land owners
                                                                 on commercial terms. In each location, the
                                                                 operators will seek land owners who are willing
                                                                 to lease their land on a commercial basis;
                                                                 operators or government entities will not
                                                                 facilitate involuntary land acquisition or leasing
                                                                 arrangements. Recognizing that land markets is
                                                                 poorly developed and there are few or no
                                                                 experiences with land leasing arrangements for
                                                                 telecommunications towers and masts in
                                                                 Myanmar, principles for such arrangements will
                                                                 be developed along with procedures to verify
                                                                                                                                 that all land leases are carried out with
                                                                                                                                 appropriate arrangements and on a voluntary
                                                                                                                                 basis, without coercion or under duress. These
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 principles and procedures will be included in the
                                                                                                                                 ESMF, which will also provide steps to be taken
                                                                                                                                 to verify that there is no legacy issue in any land
                                                                                                                                 transactions regarding the leasing of land to be
                                                                                                                                 carried out in association with the project.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The Project will not involve in construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of any dams nor any of the project
                                                                                                                                 activity is dependent of any existing dam or
                                                                                                                                 dam under construction.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            There are no known project components
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            involving International Waterways as defined
                                                                                                                                 under this Policy of the World Bank.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not located in any known
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas as defined under this WB Policy.
                                                                                                                                 All activities will be confined to Myanmar
                                                                                                                                 Political boundary.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 29-Nov-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      A tentative schedule for the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for
                                      project preparation is provided below:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      1. Draft ESMF prepared by November 17, 2013
                                      2. ESMF Disclosed on website by November 22, 2013 and discussed during through a Public
                                      consultation by November 29, 2013
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Tenzin Dolma Norbhu

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Josefo Tuyor (RSA)                                                                                                   Date: 12-Nov-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Randeep Sudan (SM)                                                                                                   Date: 14-Nov-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
