                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC1478

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Bolivia                          Project ID:      P127837
                            Project Name:       Access and Renewable Energy Project (P127837)
                            Task Team           Lucia Spinelli
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           02-Dec-2013                      Estimated        27-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      LCSEG                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General energy sector (60%), Other Renewable Energy (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         51.00                Total Bank Financing:    50.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             1.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   50.00
                              Total                                                                         51.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           A.       Proposed Development Objective(s). The project development objective is to expand and
                           improve access to electricity in the rural areas of Bolivia under a viable and sustainable model of
                           electricity access expansion that is consistent with the new national decentralized framework.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project comprises the following four components, scheduled to be completed within a
                           5-year period (January 2014 – January 2019):
                         Component 1: Electricity services for rural areas (US$42.6 million). This component would support
                         investments in infrastructure to provide electricity services to people living in rural areas and rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         villages throughout Bolivia. It includes the following sub-components:

                         a.       Sub-component 1.1 – Grid extension (US$30 million). Investments to be financed under the
                         sub-component would consist in the construction of low voltage distribution lines to facilitate new
                         connections to existing grids in villages in rural areas with limited social and environmental impact.
                         Grid systems will be financed 100 percent by the central government or 80 percent by the central
                         government and 20 percent by the municipality sponsoring the project, depending of the areas. Once
                         built, subprojects will be managed, operated and maintained by the distribution utilities working in
                         the area, as stipulated by the regulator.

                         b.      Sub-component 1.2 – Installations of Individual Residential Solar Photovoltaic Systems (US
                         $5.4 million) in remote rural areas. Under this sub-component near 6,800 solar photovoltaic systems
                         would be installed in households in rural areas of Bolivia. The household solar PV system would
                         include a PV module mounted on a pole or on the roof, controller, battery, and several fluorescent
                         lamps. Each solar PV system would provide electricity for basic lighting, a radio, a battery charger,
                         and a TV. Off-Grid Systems for residential users (SPV) will be financed 80 percent by the central
                         government and 20 percent by the municipality sponsoring the project. Once systems are installed,
                         operation and maintenance will be a municipal responsibility. In order to fulfill it, Municipalities will
                         outsource the services to trained O&M entities

                         c.      Sub-component 1.3 – Installations of Solar Photovoltaic Systems in Public Institutions (US
                         $72 million) to support provision of electricity to around 1,700 un-served schools in rural areas and
                         other public institutions (health centers, community centers, etc.) . The solar systems for schools will
                         include the PV panel and mounting structure, controller, battery, metal cabinet, inverter, AC breaker,
                         a TV and media player as well as didactic material about renewable energies for teachers and
                         students. These systems will be financed 100 percent by the central government. Once built,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         operation and maintenance is a municipal responsibility.

                         Component 2: Technical Assistance (US$2.4 million). This component would support capacity
                         building activities that help leverage the investments in grid extension and off-grid systems and help
                         assure a better and more sustainable impact of the energy services. Workshops for SPV users,
                         workshops for municipal staff and local service providers on technical aspects related with O&M, the
                         development of adequate outreach material, user’s manual, consultations, and baseline studies for
                         impact evaluation are some of the activities to be financed under this component. The preparation of
                         inter-institutional agreements (see institutional arrangements section), activities related with an
                         overall support to access to modern household energy services (for instance cook stoves) and some
                         studies to help strengthening the MHE will also be part of this component.

                         Component 3: Project Management and Operation (US$5.0 million). Under this component, the
                         VMEEA through the PIU (PEVD) would carry out the following project management activities: (i)
                         technical assessment to evaluate and supervise investment sub-projects and manage the technical
                         assistance component; (ii) project management and administration (including procurement, project
                         audits, a financial management, safeguards and environmental management supervision, outreach
                         activities, etc.); and (iii) monitoring and evaluation.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will be implemented in various departments in the country.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           •        Solar photovoltaic systems would be installed to households, schools, health care and
                           community centers in rural areas of Bolivia that do not have access to electricity. Eligibility criteria
                           for solar PV system would include: (i) provincial governments (gobernaciones) or municipalities
                           with high poverty and indigenous people rates; (ii) population density equal or above 5 users per
                           kilometer; (iii) communities with no rural electrification plans in the next 5 years; and (iv) where the
                           provision of electricity service to smaller and more dispersed population through grid extension or
                           small hydro is increasingly costly.

                           •      Eligibility criteria for network densification would include: (i) provincial governments
                           (Gobernaciones) or municipalities with high poverty rates; (ii) average connection density by
                           kilometer of constructed network equal or above 5 users; and (iii) potential consumers located
                           beyond 100 meters from the existing low-voltage transmission lines, as stipulated by the Electricity
                           Law.

                           The project would especially target the poorest communities of Bolivia located in the municipalities
                           of the Potosí and Chuquisaca Departments. In Chuquisaca, 95% of the inhabitants of the
                           municipalities are Quechua speakers. Statistics from 2005 also show that 64% of the population in
                           Chuquisaca is indigenous, while this number reaches 82% in Potosí.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Electricity Program for Living with Dignity (PEVD), within the Vice-Ministry of Electricity and
                           Alternative Energy’s Alternative Energy General Directorate, will be the project executing agency. It
                           is expected that the PEVD’s project implementing unit (PIU) will include environmental and social
                           specialists. Terms of Reference for these specialists will be prepared by the Borrower with Bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                           support. These specialists will be responsible for ensuring compliance with Bank Operational
                           Policies related to environmental and social safeguards, and with Government of Bolivia rules and
                           regulations. Given that the location of a majority of sub-projects will not be identified prior to
                           appraisal, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared. Prior
                           experience with the Decentralized Infrastructure for Rural Transformation project (ITDR project)
                           exposed the Borrower to Bank’s social and environmental safeguard policies but also evidenced high
                           demand for Project implementation support. The project budget provided funds for capacity building
                           on timely and effective application of social and environmental management and safeguards.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Noreen Beg (LCSEN)
                           Juan Carlos Enriquez Uria (LCSEN)
                           Adam John Behrendt (LCSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Although the project will have a positive impact
                           BP 4.01                                               on the environment overall, by improving the
                                                                                 supply of energy in rural areas of Bolivia,
                         thereby reducing the use of fossil fuels for
                         domestic consumption, and the use of firewood,
                         OP/BP 4.01 is triggered because the physical
Public Disclosure Copy




                         interventions resulting from the implementation
                         of investments under Component 1 (Electricity
                         Services for Rural Areas) could have low to
                         moderate negative impacts on the environment.
                         The Project is classified as Category B- a
                         project with environmental impacts that are
                         easily identified and mitigated-requiring a
                         partial environmental assessment.

                         The installation of solar panels will require a
                         plan for disposal of batteries, and the
                         construction of low voltage electricity
                         distribution lines. Expected potential negative
                         environmental impacts will be primarily during
                         the construction phase of civil works.
                         Cumulative environmental impacts are not
                         expected to be significant, as the project is
                         nationwide but relatively limited in scope (most
                         activities would be developed in two provinces
                         – Chuquisaca and Potosí – but a few activities
                         would remain open to other regions). The
                         impacts and relevant mitigation measures will
                         be described in the project’s Environmental and
                         Social Management Framework (ESMF).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project is expected to result in positive
                         social outcomes, through its support to improve
                         the quality of life for rural populations in
                         Bolivia as the provision of electricity will
                         contribute to poverty alleviation by improving
                         the education, health and public security and by
                         providing opportunities for economic
                         development.

                         The Borrower will carry out public
                         consultations on the draft ESMF with local and
                         regional government representatives,
                         representatives of stakeholders in local
                         communities, and local NGOs. The ESMF will
                         document the results of the consultations and
                         will take into account and address stakeholder
                         concerns.

                         Once the ESMF is prepared, it will be added to
                                                             the Project Implementation Manual as an annex.
                                                             As this is a demand driven operation, the
                                                             Manual will focus on monitoring and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             implementation of Environmental Management
                                                             Plans (EMPs). The Manual will also incorporate
                                                             eligibility criteria for subprojects (both positive
                                                             and negative, this is, that determine the
                                                             possibility to move forward or not with the
                                                             development of specific subprojects) and further
                                                             details and guidelines for the preparation of
                                                             specific EMPs, as specific sites might not be
                                                             known at the time of appraisal.
                                                             The EMPs will cover both direct and indirect
                                                             impact of project implementation.

                                                             It is expected the ESMF will be finalized by
                                                             November, 2013 (prior to appraisal). EMPs will
                                                             be prepared once sites are known (taking into
                                                             account other findings such as from social
                                                             consultations) and prior to the start of any
                                                             works.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   This policy is triggered because sub-projects
                                                             (both the low voltage distribution lines and the
                                                             solar installations) may be located in or close to
                                                             natural habitats. While the project will not
                                                             support or lead to the conversion of natural
                                                             habitats, and the ESMF willexplicitly forbid any
                                                             project activities inducing significant
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             conversion or degradation of critical natural
                                                             habitats, this policy is triggered to ensure that
                                                             minor construction works have EMPs that will
                                                             protect biodiversity and water resources. The
                                                             most significant impacts will result from the
                                                             construction of low-voltage distribution lines
                                                             and construction of related infrastructure, and
                                                             appropriate mitigation measures will be
                                                             followed to limit the impact on local fauna, avi-
                                                             fauna and to protect indigenous plant and tree
                                                             species.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    Although there will be a need for replacement of
                                                             trees that will be removed along the Right of
                                                             Way, this safeguard policy is not triggered
                                                             because the construction of low voltage
                                                             distribution lines will not lead to the significant
                                                             degradation and conversion of critical forest
                                                             areas and forest ecosystems., nor will they affect
                                                                 the management or utilization of forest
                                                                 resources.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    This safeguard policy is not triggered because
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 the project will not support activities that
                                                                 require the use or procurement of pesticides.
                                                                 Any land clearing for placement of distribution
                                                                 poles will be undertaken manually.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   This safeguard policy is triggered because civil
                         BP 4.11                                 works (construction of low voltage distribution
                                                                 lines and installation of poles for domestic PV
                                                                 systems) may affect resources of physical,
                                                                 cultural, and/or historical importance. A chance
                                                                 finds procedure will be inserted into
                                                                 construction contracts and included in the
                                                                 ESMF, and the local and national Cultural
                                                                 Patrimony, Archaeology Departments, and/or
                                                                 Museums authorities will be notified when
                                                                 chance finds are made.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   This safeguard policy is triggered given that the
                                                                 operation would be an Indigenous Peoples
                                                                 Project, as the overwhelming majority of direct
                                                                 project beneficiaries are indigenous. Varied
                                                                 strategies and approaches to consultation may
                                                                 be required depending on project area and
                                                                 region (including consultations in native
                                                                 languages), and will be reflected in the PAD.
                                                                 The client will carry-out a social assessment and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 consultations in indigenous peoples’ areas
                                                                 during preparation and prior to appraisal, which
                                                                 will provide inputs to the Project Appraisal
                                                                 Document and Implementation Manual.

                                                                 A first preliminary assessment will analyze the
                                                                 national situation, describing general poverty-
                                                                 related issues as well as data that will showcase
                                                                 the relevance of selecting the Potosí and
                                                                 Chuquisaca departments as priority target areas
                                                                 of the Project. This first draft will help prepare
                                                                 topics, questions and guidelines for the field
                                                                 work, including consultations.

                                                                 Free, prior and informed consultations will be
                                                                 carried-out during September-October 2013
                                                                 with relevant Indigenous stakeholders
                                                                 (beneficiaries, NGO’s, National and
                                                                 Subnational Government entities, among
                                                                 others). The Bank team will support the
                                                                counterpart in carrying out the consultations,
                                                                including providing examples and general
                                                                guidelines on how these could be conducted.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                Once the consultations have been developed,
                                                                their results will inform the social assessment,
                                                                which would be finalized by the end of October
                                                                (in order to incorporate its concepts and findings
                                                                in the Project Appraisal Document). The final
                                                                assessment will include the cultural dimensions
                                                                related to project activities, such as traditions
                                                                and gender and age perspectives. The social
                                                                assessment will also evaluate the accessibility
                                                                and cultural adequacy of the overall project
                                                                governance and communications, of the design
                                                                and definition of eligibility criteria and issues
                                                                related to the training and management of PV
                                                                system maintenance, operations and related
                                                                tariffs/costs. It will also extract and include
                                                                lessons learned from previous operations.

                                                                Its findings will be incorporated into the
                                                                Implementation Manual, including criteria to
                                                                determine eligible subprojects and acceptance of
                                                                these by beneficiaries.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   Subprojects financed by the Project are likely to
                         4.12                                   require minor land easement and/or acquisition,
                                                                including potential investment that might entail
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                resettlement as defined by OP 4.12 (loss of
                                                                assets, physical displacement, or livelihood
                                                                losses, particularly along the way leave of the
                                                                distribution lines). The Borrower will prepare a
                                                                Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to ensure
                                                                that analysis of alternatives and appropriate
                                                                compensation and support to potentially
                                                                affected persons are incorporated into the
                                                                subproject design. The RPF should be finalized
                                                                by the end of October, 2013.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No    This safeguard policy is not triggered because
                                                                the project will not support the construction or
                                                                rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
                                                                investments which rely on existing dams.
                         Projects on International        No    This safeguard policy is not triggered because
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   the project will not support activities which
                                                                affect international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This safeguard policy is not triggered because
                                 7.60                                                                                            the project will not support activities in disputed
                                                                                                                                 areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 06-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The project will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), as well
                                      as a Resettlement Policy Framework and social assessment in indigenous areas which will provide
                                      inputs to the Project Document. Subproject Resettlement Plans will be prepared (if needed) once
                                      exact subproject sites are known, which should be prior to start of any works. These framework
                                      documents will be prepared prior to appraisal, and will include documented evidence of informed
                                      and transparent consultations with stakeholders. These documents will build on the lessons learned
                                      from the implementation of the social and environmental instruments prepared for the Bolivia
                                      Decentralized Infrastructure for Rural Transformation Project (ITDR). The ESMF will contain
                                      screening criteria for sub-projects, and templates of EIAs/EMPs that must be prepared for sub-
                                      projects. The EMPs will address both direct and indirect project impacts, and the appropriate
                                      mitigation measures.

                                      As previously mentioned it is expected the different instruments and activities would be finalized
                                      by the following dates:

                                      Consultations: September-October 2013
                                      ESMF: November, 2013
                                      Project Implementation Manual: November, 2013
                                      RPF: October, 2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Lucia Spinelli

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                                                Date: 24-Jan-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies (SM)                                                                                         Date: 04-Feb-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
