INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA1045
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Dec-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Vietnam                   Project ID:  P151946
Parent       P090723
Project ID:
Project Name: Additional Financing to Livestock Competitiveness and Food Safety Project
(P151946)
Parent Project Vietnam Livestock Competitiveness and Food Safety (P090723)
Name:
Task Team       Son Thanh Vo
Leader:
Estimated       15-Dec-2014               Estimated    28-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFADR                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Animal production (60%), Health (30%), Agricultural extension and research
(10%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (38%), Rural policies and institutions (36%),
Other rural development (26%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     55.00            Total Bank Financing:   45.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                        10.00
International Development Association (IDA)                               45.00
Total                                                                     55.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
Page 1 of 13


﻿2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The project development objectives (PDOs) are to increase the production efficiency of
household-based livestock producers, to reduce the environmental impact of livestock production,
processing and marketing, and to improve food safety in livestock product supply chains (mainly
meat) in selected provinces.
B. Current Project Development Objectives - Parent
C. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
1.     Component A: Upgrading Household-based Livestock production and Market Integration. In
addition to scaling up its support to GAHP households, wet markets and small slaughterhouses in the
same Provinces than phase 1, the following interventions are proposed to help the project being even
more transformative:
a)     Focusing on groups and cooperatives: whilst the first phase of the project has already started
advocacy for groups' formation, the concept and its added-value are still only partly understood by
both producers and extension services. The project will prioritize the development of these groups
and cooperatives during the AF as: (i) an entry point for the GAHP accreditation (for sustainability
matter, as the current system is not viable both from the HHs' perspective (too expensive) and the
accreditor's (too many HHs to inspect) perspectives), and (ii) a way for better access to inputs, TA,
markets and a source of income for the cooperative (selling of animal feed, services providers (e.g.
through miller and mixer, etc.). This would mean working on curriculum development, training of
HHs and extension staff and providing incentive (matching grant / access to credit). The project
could strengthen the current GAHP groups through promoting more collective actions within and
among the groups to make them more capable and informed actors in productions, linking with
markets as buyers and sellers at the same time. Block grants will be used to finance business
proposals developed by the GAHP groups, with support from TA and/or local facilitators. Capable
groups, through using effectively the block grants and available TA, will be able to move up the
ladder to join the tier of collaborative groups then cooperatives in a stepwise approach.
b)     Helping stakeholders all along the value-chains to establish and consolidate "productive
alliances" or "partnerships" (contractual relationship), as win-win mechanisms to ensure inputs and
markets availability and competitiveness of prices. This would concern maize and animal feeding
producers, inputs suppliers, pigs/poultry producers, middlemen/traders, slaughterhouses and markets.
Pertinent lessons from the closed Bank-funded Agriculture Competitiveness Project (ACP) will be
drawn, in particular to ensure that incremental steps to collective actions are taken, including
developing core organizational, management skills and effective governance arrangements first and
ensuring that only best organized groups and cooperatives will be involved in building productive
alliances with other suppliers' groups or agri-business companies.
c)     Strengthening wet markets' management by involving direct beneficiaries, namely the
retailers, in the markets' boards. This would allow addressing better retailers' priorities, negotiating
more sustainable utilization fees and developing transparent markets' management procedures. In
Page 2 of 13


﻿addition to pork and poultry meat markets, the AF will support the rehabilitation and improved
management of the buffaloes U Market in Nghe An Province. This market gathers about 3,000
buffaloes from the entire country, Lao PDR and Myanmar every six days to be sold for meat or
breeding and disseminated in all provinces. The current situation poses a real threat to animal health
and the control of animal diseases is almost impossible given the non-existing infrastructure. The
support to this important market will clearly contribute to the PDO and is an economically viable
investment that will bring important local revenues to the commune and province.
2.     Finally, it is also important to deal effectively with dead animal and slaughter waste. This is
to introduce and make available effective solutions for all hazards along the operation from farm to
consumers for safe meat value chains. LIFSAP and the concerned services of MARD (Department of
Livestock Production (DLP) and Department of Animal Health (DAH)) have put in place practical
solutions for most critical issues (use of antibiotic or hormones by farmers, disease prevention in
farms, animal waste treatment, meat inspection, transport hygiene, etc.). However the aspect of how
to handle potentially pathogenic waste (e.g. from dead or culled animals, or from condemned animal
by-products) during the slaughter process is not managed in a satisfactory manner.
3.     Component B: Strengthening Central-level Livestock and Veterinary Services. Again, the
project has already achieved a lot through this component, through successful capacity building and
training program (meat inspectors, decentralized staff from DARD, DLP and DAH, etc.),
strengthening of the Centre for Testing Livestock Breeds and feeds, development or improvement of
key guidelines related to animal diseases surveillance, food safety and good hygiene practices,
surveillance protocols and sampling methods, etc., and monitoring of animal diseases prevalence and
pathogens/residues in products and effluents.
4.     However, to demonstrate its sustainability and transformative nature, this AF should focus
on: (i) fully institutionalize the above-mentioned successes, and (ii) put more emphasize on Policy
dialogue and reforms. For the latter, the project would benefit in advocating and supporting MARD
in strengthening its collaboration with other line Ministries (Environment, Trade, Technology and
Science) but also the civil society: national associations of producers, unions of cooperatives,
Veterinary Association, etc. Bringing international expertise on some topics would also benefit a lot
the project, the MARD and livestock stakeholders.
5.     Areas where this Policy Dialogue could have strong impact on project's achievement
include: (i) groups and cooperatives (legal framework, rights and duties, curriculum), (ii) national
environmental standards and their applicability to rural livestock-producing areas, (iii) national
standards on animal feeding and breeding, including their enforcement through strengthening the
related laboratory network for testing, (iv) enforcement of the legal framework against illegal
slaughtering, including communication and public awareness, capacity building and cooperation
between agencies, (v) institutionalizing Food Safety standards through in particular reviewing the
veterinary education curriculum to include Food Safety, and (vi) veterinary services and animal
health.
6.     On the latter, Vietnam already received the evaluation of the Veterinary Services and the
sub-sequent Gap Analysis, as part of the OIE recognized tool Performance of Veterinary Services
(PVS) Pathway. Results of these analytical works are available to partners and should be used to
identify weakness that should be tackled to achieve the PDO. In particular, Vietnam is currently
reviewing its Animal Health Legal Framework to make it compliant with international standards. The
OIE has already conducted a mission to start helping the country in this initiative. Similarly, there is
Page 3 of 13


﻿no independent "Veterinary Statutory Body" (VSB) in the country and the relations between the
public Veterinary Authority and private veterinarians are limited. The Veterinary Association of
Vietnam should play a role to reinforce this area. Such an innovative project would facilitate efforts
to establish the VSB and to pilot initiatives aiming at delegating some tasks of public good nature to
private veterinarians through the so-called "sanitary mandate". International expertise from the OIE
during the extension phase could help the project undertaking this soundly.
7.     With the close of the Viet Nam Avian and Human Influenza (VAHIP) in June 2014, to
anticipate any future outbreaks this project will include a new sub-component for an emergency
response to any trans-boundary or zoonotic diseases affecting pigs and poultry, therefore threatening
the project's ability to achieve its development objective. It is anticipated that this sub-component
will have a zero allocation. Following a disease outbreak's suspicion or confirmed event that may
cause a major threat to public health or drop in livestock competitiveness, the Government of
Vietnam may request the WB to re-allocate project funds to support early and rapid mitigation,
response, control and recovery from this outbreak. This component would draw resources from the
unallocated expenditure category and/or allow the GoV to request the WB to re-categorize and
reallocate financing from other components to partially cover emergency response and recovery
costs. This component could also be used to channel additional funds, should they become available
as a result of an eligible emergency. Detailed operational guidelines acceptable to the WB for the
implementation of the Contingency Emergency Response sub-component under LIFSAP will be
prepared as a disbursement condition. All expenditures under this sub-component, should it be
triggered, will be in accordance with paragraph 11 of OP 10.00 of the Investment Project Financing
and will be appraised, reviewed and found to be acceptable to the WB before any disbursement is
made.
8.     Component C: Project Management. Being such an innovative project in the Vietnamese
context, international expertise to bring advice and technologies from elsewhere remains crucial. The
possibility of extending the working collaboration with ILRI will be investigated to ensure the
project's success and maintain the current high standard of results monitoring and impacts
assessment.
9.     In addition, the communication strategy would need to be reviewed, updated and maintained
to adapt itself to implementation progress, as well as to targeted beneficiaries (GoV, donors and
partners, value-chains' stakeholders and consumers in particular).
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The proposed project will be implemented in 12 cities and provinces in four geographical production
clusters: Thanh Hoa and Nghe An (Central North); Hanoi, Hai Phong, Thai Binh, Hung Yen, and Hai
Duong (North); and Cao Bang (Northern Border); and Ho Chi Minh City, Long An, Dong Nai and
Lam Dong (South). Ethnic minority people are present in all provinces, especially in Cao Bang
(94.2%), Lam Dong (24.l1%), Thanh Hoa (17.6%), Nghe An (14.5%) and Dong Nai (75%).
The project's overall socio-environmental impacts are expected to be positive as the objectives and
activities are to promote reduction of environmental impact of livestock production, processing and
marketing, and to improve food safety in livestock product supply chains. The project invests in
some small-scale infrastructures such as the upgrading of wet markets, small slaughterhouses and
pilot LPZ. During project implementation, the project would explore different options of technical
designs and construction practices for infrastructure upgrades to avoid land acquisition and minimize
Page 4 of 13


﻿social and environmental impacts. There will be relatively minor impacts such as dust, noise, waste
and wastewater generation during construction phase. These impacts are small, localized, temporary
and manageable through the environmental safeguard instruments of Environmental Management
Plan (EMP) or Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOP) to be implemented during the construction
phase.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Thu Thi Le Nguyen (GENDR)
Nghi Quy Nguyen (GSURR)
Khang Van Pham (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          The overall socio-environmental impacts are
BP 4.01                                     expected to be positive as the objective and
activities aim to promote the reduction of adverse
environmental impacts from livestock production,
processing and selling. As the project invests in
small-scale infrastructure such as upgrading
access road, power lines, water supply or drainage
system, livestock waste treatment facility,
renovating wet (meat) market, slaughterhouse,
there will be relative small impacts such as dust,
noise, waste and wastewater generated during
construction phase. These impacts are small,
temporary, localized and manageable through
EMP or ECOP in accordance with OP4.01 or
through EPC in accordance with the national
regulation. All subprojects under the parent
project were prepared with EMP or ECOP or
EPC. Implementation of subprojects was
followed the EMP/ ECOP/ EPC. Civil contracts
included environmental covenants. Monitoring is
implemented by PPMU and local authorities and
communities.
Waste management and environmental sanitation
conditions at wet (meat) markets supported under
the parent project have been much improved. It
was clear that biogas scheme and composting at
GAHP households contribute to management of
animal solid waste and wastewater.
Since there are no physical investments identified
during project appraisal, and as the AF aims to
extend the GAHPs to additional groups in an
expanded geographical areas, and to
institutionalize existing best practices within the
Page 5 of 13


﻿livestock sector, the Environmental Management
Framework (with EMP/ECOPs) was updated
from the EMF of the parent project to include
new regulations of the Government relevant to the
project to guide the screening and mitigation of
potential impacts from project activities.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04     No           This policy is not triggered. The environmental
screening confirmed that the parent project did
not trigger this policy. Activities to be financed
by the AF will be implemented in lands that are
already being used for agriculture or public
facilities. The project will not finance any
activities that threaten forests or natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36              No           This policy is not triggered. Activities to be
financed by the AF will be implemented on lands
that are already being used for agriculture or
public facilities. The project will not finance any
activities that threaten forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09         Yes          The project does not finance procurement of any
pesticides. Application of the small amount of
chemicals, e.g. Chloramine T to disinfection of
breeding facilities at GAHP households is in
accordance with GoV regulation. In addition,
practice of regular clean-up of breeding facilities
and application of biological product, e.g. E.M
(Effective Microorganisms) to composting at
GAHP households much reduce offensive smell
and pests, e.g. flies and mosquitoes, and thus to
reduce reliance upon chemicals.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No          This policy is not triggered. The environmental
BP 4.11                                      screening confirmed that the parent project did
not trigger this policy. Activities to be financed
by the projects will be implemented in lands that
are already being used for agriculture or public
facilities. There are no physical cultural properties
on these lands.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10   Yes          This policy remains triggered in this additional
financing project. The Ethnic Minority Planning
Framework (EMPF) prepared under original
project is still applicable. Where relevant, the
EMPF will serve as guidance to develop EMDPs
for all project activities of which location and
impact are identified in project implementation.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  Yes          This policy remains triggered in this additional
4.12                                         financing project. No major resettlement is
anticipated, and only limited land acquisition
Page 6 of 13


﻿would result from project investments in small-
scale infrastructure (e.g., access roads, electricity,
water and sewage systems) in the LPZs. In the
original project, for, slaughterhouse construction,
the owner generally purchases required land at
market price. The upgrading of wet (meat) market
mainly occurs in the existing boundaries of
proposed market. MARD will update the
resettlement policy framework (RPF). Where
relevant, this framework will serve as guidance to
develop RPs for all project activities of which
location and impact are identified in project
implementation.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No           This policy is not triggered. The AF does not
involve activities relating to dam.
Projects on International      No           This policy is not triggered. The AF does not
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        involve activities relating to international
waterways
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No         This policy is not triggered. The project is not
7.60                                        located in any disputed areas.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental safeguards:
The project is classified as an "Environment Category B" under OP/BP 4.01. The project's overall
environmental and social impacts are assessed to be positive. The project aims to increase the
production efficiency of household-based livestock producers, to reduce the environmental impact
of livestock production, processing and marketing, and to improve food safety in livestock product
supply. Negative impacts are assessed to be small, temporary, site-specific, and manageable and
can be avoided or minimized through proper design and application of mitigation measures.
The infrastructure investment activities supported under the Additional Financing (AF) remain the
same. There is no change in PDO and project components. The AF remains triggering two
environmental safeguard policies, including OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and OP 4.09
(Pest Management). There is no any specific environmental management plan or ECOP/ EPC
prepared during the AF preparation since no new LPZ or wet (meat) markets and slaughterhouses
were identified prior to appraisal. MARD updated the EMF reflecting recent changes in the
national regulation relevant to the projects. MARD consulted and disclosed the updated EMF
locally. It was disclosed in the Bank's InfoShop prior to appraisal.
Under the parent project, the training on GAHP and mitigation measures supported by the project
for livestock solid waste and wastewater generation from the LPZ, households and
slaughterhouses, wastes from wet markets resulted in increased positive environmental impacts.
Page 7 of 13


﻿Pest management: The AF will not finance procurement of any pesticides. However, the AF may
involve applicability of small amount of chemicals to disinfection of breeding facilities. Thus,
proper use of these chemicals is guided in the updated EMF to avoid causing negative impacts on
the environment and human health.
Livestock Production Zone: The revised FS Report on LPZ in Dong Nai province supported under
the parent project is acceptable to the Bank. The project will carry out consultation activities
during the implementation stage, making sure that all surrounding communities will be consulted
and informed of the project evolution. EMP for the LPZ was prepared, consulted with stakeholders
and disclosed at the project communes.
Wet Market & Slaughter House: No outstanding environmental safeguard issue. No outstanding
social safeguard issues identified as all lands required for these activities are either in the existing
boundaries (wet market) or purchased at market price (slaughter house) agreed between concerned
parties.
Social
Involuntary Resettlement. The project is expected to have marginal adverse impacts with respect
to land acquisition and resettlement. Involuntary resettlement could potentially occur as a result of:
(i) land acquisition for small-scale infrastructures; and (ii) transfers of land between farmers, on a
less than voluntary basis, to form or consolidate a designated LPZ. It was anticipated that limited
level of land acquisition will be entailed as the result of the investment in small scale
infrastructures (eg. road, electricity, and water and sewage schemes) in the LPZs and for the meat-
market upgrading. Each of the small infrastructures is anticipated to ha ve low-intensive impact.
Indigenous People. Ethnic minority people are present in all provinces, especially in Cao Bang
(94.2%), Lam Dong (24.10%), Thanh Hoa (17.6%), Nghe An (14.5%) and Dong Nai (75%). While
the proposed LIFSAP is anticipated to have positive impacts on the incomes of ethnic minorities
through strengthened household-based producer food chain and livestock production, attention is
needed to ensure that ethnic minorities are informed and consulted on the project activities and
that they participate and benefit from the project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
A potential long term indirect impact to be considered in the project is the safety of humans and
the environment when dealing with animals or chemicals during daily livestock production
practice (in contact with animal, manure handling or using chemicals for fly or pest control).
Mitigation measures to address potential issues during design, construction and operation phases
have been included in EMF to minimize these impacts.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
In addition to the matching grant program to support household farms to build bio-digesters for
livestock waste and wastewater treatment facilities, the Project would also consider secondary
treatment options through lagoons or fishponds. Recycling of manure would also be carried out
under the proposed project.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Page 8 of 13


﻿assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) prepared an update EMF, EMDF
and RPF during AF preparation.
Environmental safeguard
Environmental Management Framework (EMF). As details of sub-projects are not identified
during project appraisal, the EMF of the parent project was updated to guide the AF in screening,
assessing and mitigating environmental and social impacts of project activities. An EMF forms
part of the feasibility study in accordance with the country's environmental regulations and the
World Bank OP/BP 4.01. The EMF requires that activities financed under the AF will not create
adverse impacts on the local environment and local communities, and the residual and/or
unavoidable impacts will be adequately mitigated. The framework provides guidelines for: (a)
safeguard screening, including a negative list of sub-projects that would be excluded from the
menu of eligible sub-projects; (b) impacts assessment and preparation and implementation of
mitigation measures, including EMP for complex sub-projects or ECOP for simple, small scale
subprojects. The sub-project EMP or ECOP will be included in the bidding and contract
documents and will be monitored by supervision engineers; (b) safeguard documentation
preparation and clearance; and (c) safeguard implementation, supervision, monitoring, and
reporting.
Checklists and samples of environmental management plans have been developed for other small
infrastructure to be financed by the AF. These checklists and plans shall form parts of the EPC
which is required for small-scale infrastructure. The updated EMF also included specific measures
for mitigating potential environmental impacts related to non-structural works under the AF. The
mitigation measures such as provision of protective equipment or training on safety rules etc. will
be applied as needed.
The parent project has included in its design a matching grant program to design and build
livestock waste and wastewater treatment facilities for farms in LPZs and slaughterhouses. The AF
will continue with this program. There were 479 environmental protection commitments (EPCs)
prepared for the parent project during implementation in line with the EMF, of which 355 EPCs
were prepared for wet markets and 124 EPCs were prepared for slaughterhouse. All EPCs were
disclosed in project communes. Monitoring plans were conducted by PPMUs in collaboration with
DONREs (Department of Natural Resources and Environment) ensuring agreed measures were
followed. An EMP for a selected pilot LPZ in Dong Nai was prepared, consulted and disclosed at
project commune.
Training on GAHP to households has improved farmers' awareness and resulted in their
application of safety measures in livestock production and proper waste treatment and
management. Waste management system and hygienic conditions in upgraded wet markets are
much improved. Trader's awareness of hygiene and food safety was improved and much raised.
Planting green trees has been implemented in some upgraded wet markets where land is available.
Wastewater treatment systems supported by the parent project in slaughterhouses are operating
well and the quality of wastewater after treated meets required national standard under supervision
by provincial DONREs. Biogas scheme and composting supported under the parent projects have
contributed to improved management of animal waste at households.
Page 9 of 13


﻿LPZs and slaughterhouses are classified into two categories based scope as specified in MONRE's
Decree 29/2011/ND-CP dated April 18, 2011 in order to identify environmental impacts and
instrument requirements. The EMF provides detailed guidelines on both screening and
classification and on the preparation of environmental assessment documents. LPZ with the scale
of 500 cows/buffaloes or more; 1,000 other livestock or more is required to prepare an EIA report.
The EIA report is subject to approval by the World Bank. Environmental Protection Commitment
(EPC) is required for smaller LPZs.
The AF will not finance a slaughterhouse with the scale of 500 livestock per day or more that
would require an EIA. Therefore, EPC is required. The AF will not support any new pilot LPZ.
On pest management, as the AF may involve applicability of small amount of chemicals to
disinfection of breeding facilities, the updated EMF has included the guidelines on sustainable use
of these chemicals in accordance with (i) law on plant protection and quarantine No.41/2013/
QH13; (ii) circular 21/2013/TT-BNNPTNT issues by Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development; (iii) circular 25/201 1/TT-BYT issued by Ministry of Health; and (iv) circular
15/2009/TT-BNNPTNT issued by Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development.
For the parent project, application of chemicals to disinfection of breeding facilities is in
accordance with GoV regulations. In addition, regular clean-up of breeding facilities and
application of biological product of E.M (Effective Microorganisms) to composting much reduce
offensive smell and pests, e.g. flies and mosquitoes, and thus to reduce reliance upon chemicals at
GAHP households. Such practices will continue with the AF.
Social safeguard
Ethnic Minority Planning Framework (EMPF). The EMPF that was developed in the original
project will be updated and applied to AF phase. The updated EMPF will be applied and where
ethnic minorities are present, subprojects social assessments will be undertaken and EMDPs
prepared. This instrument will be conformed to the OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples, ensuring that
the development of subprojects fully respects the dignity, human rights, economies, and culture of
affected ethnic minority peoples. The implementing agencies must be able to demonstrate that it
has obtained broad community support for the subproject through a process of free, prior, and
informed consultations with the affected ethnic minority communities. In this regard, the EMPF
sets out guidelines to: (a) ensure that the ethnic minority peoples receive social and economic
benefits that are culturally appropriate; (b) avoid potentially adverse effects on the ethnic minority
communities; and (c) when such adverse impacts cannot be avoided, minimize, mitigate, or
compensate for such effects. The framework covers guidance on (i) preliminary screening; (ii)
social assessment; (iii) preparation of EMDP; (iv) implementing arrangement; (v) Estimated
budget; and (vi) Monitoring and Evaluation. In original project, PCU and PPMUs have done a
good performance in implementing OP 4.10 Indigenous People. Supporting activities to ethnic
minorities communities have been developed and/or mainstreamed in project activities in Cao
Bang, Lam Dong and Dong Nai. The objective is to ensure an equitable access to project benefits
among ethnic minority groups compared to others. Specific activities may include additional
training on GAHP; support for upgrading farms and equipment, consultation with ethnic minority
people.
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The RPF that was developed in the original project will be
updated and applied to AF phase. This updated RPF, in accordance to OP 4.12 Involuntary
Page 10 of 13


﻿Resettlement, lays down the principles and objectives, eligibility criteria of displaced persons,
modes of compensation and rehabilitation, participation features and grievance procedures that
will guide the compensation and potential resettlement of these persons. It further describes the
planning and documentation requirements for such activities under the project. Under original
project, as the project's activities involves no land acquisition, so there is no Resettlement Plan
prepared in implementation. First, the upgrading of 331 wet markets occurred in its existing
boundaries. PCU and PPMUs have developed transitional plan to minimize impact/disturbance
over existing sellers in the market. Regarding the pilot LPZ in Dong Nai where the project may
finance some small rural infrastructure (electricity, rural road...), affected people have decided to
donate their land given the impact is minor and the potential benefit of these small infrastructures.
Second, in the list of 51 slaughterhouses supported by the project, none of them requires additional
land acquisition. In some case, the owner has to buy the new land for their new slaughterhouse.
The transaction was made based on the agreement between land owner and slaughterhouse owner.
The transaction cost was generally reflected the market level.
Borrower capacity. Form the environmental and social perspective, the current arrangement at
PCU of MARD is adequate with dedicated consultant covering all environmental and social issues
under this project (including environmental and social safeguard). Assigned staff of PCU and
PPMUs have relatively good understanding about the WB environmental and social safeguard
policies through the experience gained in original credit, as well as other Bank funded projects.
The implementing agencies were able to establish a well-defined social safeguard M&E system
that will continuously be the main pattern for tracking, documenting, and reporting performance of
environmental and social safeguard in AF project. A full guideline on M&E was included in the
included in the Project Operation Manual.
At provincial level, technical staff at DONRE/DARD has been assigned to take part in
environmental capacity building, monitoring and management activities. Adequate budget has
been allocated for the implementation of the environmental activities, mitigation measures and
monitoring.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
In addition to PCU of MARD, PPMUs in project provinces, local authorities, local communities,
and concerned households are responsible to comply with the project's frameworks. Public
consultationson and disclosure of these instruments were carried during project preparation,
especially during October 2014. Consultation with people and households affected by the project,
local authorities, and mass organizations will be been conducted at the subproject level. Prior to
project appraisal, all safeguard documents have been disclosed in Vietnamese at the Vietnam
Development Information Center, project provinces, and at the Bank's InfoShop (in English) in
Washington, DC.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                01-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                             28-Nov-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 11 of 13


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Vietnam                                                   28-Nov-2014
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                               0 1-Aug-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                            28-Nov-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Vietnam                                                   28-Nov-2014
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                               0 1-Aug-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                            28-Nov-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Vietnam                                                   28-Nov-2014
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?            Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                               0 1-Aug-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                            28-Nov-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Vietnam                                                   28-Nov-2014
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes[X] No[   ]   NA [   ]
Is a separate PMP required?                             Yes[   ] No[X]       NA [   ]
Page 12 of 13


﻿If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a       Yes [   ]  No [  ]   NA [ X]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [X]   No [  ]   NA [    ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X]  No [  ]   NA [    ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or  Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [   ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X]    No [  ]   NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X]  No [  ]   NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:     Name: Son Thanh Vo
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Nathan M. Belete (PMGR)               Date: 17-Dec-2014
Manager:
Page 13 of 13


