                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC2739

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Tajikistan                       Project ID:      P132652
                            Project Name:      TAJIKISTAN AGRICULTURE COMMERCIALIZATION PROJECT
                                               (P132652)
                            Task Team          Sandra Broka
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       14-Feb-2014                         Estimated        30-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: ECSAR                                Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Agricultural extension and research (50%), Crops (30%), Irrigation and drainage
                                               (10%), Animal production (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Other rural development (75%), Rural services and infrastructure (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     22.00                     Total Bank Financing:         22.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                    22.00
                              Total                                                                        22.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to increase the commercialization of farms and agribusinesses
                           in selected areas of Tajikistan. This will be achieved by improving the performance of selected value
                           chains and providing financial and capacity building services to the project beneficiaries.

                           The direct beneficiaries of the project would include (i) commercially-oriented producer
                         associationsand farmers, agro-processors, agri-business enterprises and agro-input dealers engaged in
                         the value chains supported by the project; (ii) participating financial institutions; and (iii) public and
                         academic institutions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Project Description
                         Component I: TA Support to Commercialization (US$ 4.35 million, all IDA)

                         1. This component will support the following activities:

                         a.        Training to value chain participants. For farmers, the project will support three main types
                         of training : (i) extension services and technological advice, on as needed basis, to farmers on
                         specific subjects of agricultural production and processing; (ii) training activities to all value chain
                         participants, on the benefits of participation in a value chain, and duties and responsibilities of the
                         various participants; and (iii) to very small farmers, to increase their commercialization potential, on
                         the benefits, duties and responsibilities of establishment and participation in productive partnerships.
                         This training is expected to strengthen the partnerships by building economies of scale to market
                         their products and to purchase farm inputs on more favorable terms, through group buying and
                         selling. The training will also cover strategies for increasing marketed surplus, the identification and
                         evaluation of sales opportunities, business management, transport, storage, grading and quality
                         control. The training will be gender-sensitive.

                         For agro-processors and agri-business enterprises the potential (demand-based) training activities
                         will include: strategies for improving links with producers and producer organizations; strengthening
                         aggregation activities; business management, marketing and quality control; improvements to
                         product quality along the value chain; sources and use of market information; market studies and test
                         marketing, roundtables, attendance at trade fairs and mentoring services to help participants
                         understand market requirements. Agro-input dealers will receive training on business practices,
                         where and how to source farm inputs, how to facilitate and benefit from discounted (group) sales to
                         producer associations, and awareness and application of quality and safety regulations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         All training activities will be implemented by local and/or international consulting and training
                         companies to be hired under the project, which have demonstrated experience in the relevant training
                         domain. Cooperation will also be sought with other projects involved in building the capacity for
                         extension, including projects seeking to build a viable private sector extension service.

                         b.      Provision of support to agro-processors, agri-business enterprises, agro-input dealers and
                         commercially oriented farmers and producer associations to develop business plans and investment
                         proposals for productive linkages, and guidance on how to finance the necessary investment.

                         c.       Capacity building in the country’s consulting sector, through transfer of global knowledge
                         and good practices, on how to support agribusiness sector development and value chain/productive
                         linkage development activities, to ensure that such capacity remains in the country after the project
                         closes. The project will work with (an) committed consulting company (-ies), improving their
                         capacity to work with interested value chain participants and build optimized value chains and
                         productive linkages.

                         Component II: Access to Finance for Commercial Farms and Agribusinesses ($US20.0 million,
                         including US$13.9 million IDA)
                         2.       Potential investments include: improved on-farm technology, storage, processing, new
                         products, marketing, quality enhancement and food safety. Activities under this component will be
                         consistent with OP10.00 Investment Project Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         a.        Credit Line for medium-term loans and leases (US$15 million, including US$10 million
                         IDA). To address the current market failure to provide medium-term credit for investment, a credit
                         line will be provided to government to support medium-term lending and leasing for investment
                         activities by agro-processors and other agri-businesses involved both in the selected value chains, but
                         also to other credit-worthy agri-businesses. This credit line will be for loans or leases of up to 7
                         years, with the exposure per beneficiary of up to US$400,000, for investment in modern
                         technological plant and equipment. Ministry of Finance will channel the funds through qualified
                         commercial banks and non-bank financial institutions (Participating Financial Institutions – PFIs)
                         selected jointly by the Government, World Bank and IFC. These PFIs will carry out full appraisal of
                         loans, set interest rates and repayment terms to final beneficiaries based on prevailing market
                         conditions and the type of investment financed, and bear the full risk of loan repayment. Participating
                         PFIs will be required to contribute at least 25% of the total lending or leasing requirement from their
                         own resources. Detailed operational guidelines for the credit line, setting forth the types of
                         investments financed, as well as financial and operational requirements to borrowers and PFIs will be
                         developed before the implementation will start. Borrowers will be expected to contribute around 20%
                         of the total project cost from their own resources. To ensure that the benefits of this credit line are
                         widely distributed, the maximum support for any single value chain, all borrowers included, will be
                         $US1 million.

                         b.        Matching Grant Support for Investment Proposals (US$4.6 million, including US$3.5
                         million IDA). Matching grants will be provided in the following two types of support: (i) to
                         complement the commercial credit line described above, not exceeding 30% of the total financing
                         received through the PFIs. These matching grants will be appraised by the PFIs, as part of the total
                         financing package towards partial coverage of the sub-project costs (a portion of this, in the amount
                         of 20% of the project costs will be covered by the borrower). To ensure repayment discipline, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         matching grant will be the last 30% of the financing, i.e., the borrowers will have to repay the first
                         70% of the financing received on time and in full, in order to benefit from the matching grant. (ii) to
                         provide the start-up capital of the productive partnerships created under Component 1, which target
                         the smaller and poorer farmers, the partnerships will be eligible to receive a matching grant for
                         investment purposes (procurement of small-scale equipment, building of storages, etc.) in the amount
                         not exceeding US$20,000 per partnership. The partnerships will have to meet a set of criteria,
                         including, but not limited to: (i) the extent to which the grant proposal will, improve market access
                         and add value; (ii) the expected impact on market demand for farmer produce; (iii) potential
                         replicability by other small rural businesses; (iv) the technical financial and environmental viability
                         of the proposed grant project; and (v) likely sustainability. The program will be subject to a rigorous,
                         transparent selection process. Beneficiaries will be monitored to ensure that implementation takes
                         place as agreed, and once in operation, each investment will be evaluated to assess its costs and
                         benefits. Applicants will be required to contribute at least 30 percent of the total cost of the
                         investment (in addition to any matching grant and/or loan support), and will be required to engage in
                         activities to develop and strengthen linkages along the value chain. The matching grants to
                         productive partnerships will be implemented by the Project Implementation Group (PIG), on the
                         basis of the agreed criteria and in close collaboration with the World Bank team. Detailed operational
                         guidelines for the matching grant program will be developed during the further preparation work.

                         c.       Capacity building for PFIs (US$400,000, all IDA). Given the novelty of the medium-term
                         investment lending and value chain financing concepts, the Project will implement a capacity
                         building program for the financial institutions involved in the Project. The PFIs will receive training
                         in two subjects: (i) Appraisal of agricultural investment loans and leases, (ii) Financial Products for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         financing of value chains. Management and minimizations of the risks associated with these new
                         products will be part of the training program; and (iii) Conducting subprojects EA. The PFI training
                         activities will be done in a close collaboration with IFC.

                         Component III: Institutional Capacity Building and Project Management (US$3.75 million, all IDA)

                         3.        This component will strengthen the capacity of public institutions responsible for relevant
                         services and policies; and the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture to manage this and other donor
                         projects.

                         a. Market Information for farmers and agribusinesses (US$700,000, all IDA). FAO is currently
                         developing, in collaboration with the National Statistics Agency (Goscomstat), a market information
                         database containing price data collected weeklyin all major markets. At project end in mid-2014,
                         they will have built the data set and created a publicly accessible interne t site for potential users. The
                         project will extend this work by initiating collection of three other price indices which are vital for
                         the agribusiness sector yet not being collected in the country: farm-gate prices, wholesale market
                         prices and wholesalers’ prices. The project will also make this information more accessible to
                         farmers and agri-business enterprises. Guidance on how best to use this information will also be
                         incorporated into the training programs to be implemented under component I. above. The project
                         will also finance a wholesale market feasibility study, which will, among other things, look at cross-
                         border markets.

                         b.       Upgrading of the technological skills in the agro-processing sector (US$800,000, all IDA).
                         The project will work with the Technological University of Tajikistan to improve its capacity to
                         ensure better prepared food technology graduates which enter the country’s food processing sector.
                         The project will provide technical assistance on the curriculum, teaching equipment upgrades, as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         well as strengthen the linkages between the university and the private processing sector.

                         c. Support to the policy and regulatory reform for input use and marketing (US$250,000, all IDA).
                         This sub-component will strengthen the public sector capacity for regulation and quality control of
                         farm input use and marketing. The current regulatory environment for fertilizer and agricultural
                         chemicals will be reviewed and draft amendments will be prepared to align with international best
                         practice, public sector staff will be trained to apply and monitor these regulations, quality control and
                         safety standards will be strengthened, and administrative procedures will be developed to license and
                         monitor private sector importers, distributors and retailers of these inputs. The impact of current tax
                         policy on farm input use, farm input markets and farm output will also be reviewed and
                         recommendations will be developed for tax policy reform.

                         d.       Project Management (US$2 million, all IDA). Given the project’s emphasis on increasing
                         agricultural commercialization and productivity, the Ministry of Agriculture will serve as the
                         project’s implementing agency. A Project Implementation Group (PIG) within the Ministry of
                         Agriculture, comprising existing ministry staff and consultants will be responsible for project
                         management and coordination. This arrangement will strengthen the Ministry’s capacity to move
                         away from implementing projects through stand-alone PMUs, to a more integrated implementation
                         structure. Training and supervision during the course of project design and implementation will
                           further strengthen this capacity. The component will also finance Monitoring and Evaluation
                           activities, including the baseline study, mid-term and final impact surveys.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)
                           The project locations will be chosen during further preparation work, based on the value chains to be
                           supported and the location and activities of aggregators and producers in the value chains. The
                           location and activities of agri-business projects by the Bank and other donors will also influence
                           project location, in order to avoid duplication and develop synergies with other projects. The project
                           will be located in rural areascwhere agricultural potential is high and agriculture is critical for rural
                           livelihoods.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) will be in charge of the project implementation. The project
                           implementation unit (PIU) will contain staff of the MOA, as well as consultants hired from outside.
                           While some members of the formerly existing Project Implementation Units, including
                           environmental specialists, may be employed by the new PIU, its capacity cannot be assessed at this
                           stage and will be done during the project design stage.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Arcadii Capcelea (ECSEN)
                           Lola Ibragimova (ECSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              This policy is triggered as the project will
                           BP 4.01                                                support a series of activities which will generate
                                                                                  some environmental and social impacts. While
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  the project will provide many environmental
                                                                                  and social benefits such as increased food
                                                                                  security and farmers income, proposed activities
                                                                                  under component 2 that would provide access to
                                                                                  finance for commercial farms and
                                                                                  agribusinesses as well as matching grants
                                                                                  supporting different types of subprojects
                                                                                  (improved on-farm technology, storage,
                                                                                  processing, new products, marketing, quality
                                                                                  enhancement and food safety), may also cause
                                                                                  some negative impacts related to: (a) increased
                                                                                  pollution of ground and surface waters due to
                                                                                  processing of agricultural products; (b) solid
                                                                                  wastes during processing of agricultural
                                                                                  products; (c) noise and air pollution; (d) health
                                                                                  and safety hazards at the agro-processing
                                                                                  factories; etc. To address these adverse impacts
                                                                                  the Borrower will prepare an Environmental
                                                                                  Management Framework (EMF) which will
                                                                                  specify the EA requirements for subprojects and
                                                             matching grants to be supported under the
                                                             second component. This document will cover
                                                             the following: (a) rules and procedures for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             environmental screening; (b) guidance for
                                                             preparing subprojects EIA and/or simple EMPs
                                                             as well as of EMP Checklist; (c) possible
                                                             mitigation measures for different types of
                                                             subprojects and matching grants; and (d)
                                                             requirements for monitoring and supervision of
                                                             implementing of EIA/EMPs requirements. The
                                                             proposed training and extension to be provided
                                                             under the component I and III of the project will
                                                             include various aspects of ensuring
                                                             environmental sustainability of different types
                                                             of agricultural investments. In this regard the
                                                             EMF would provide advices on what
                                                             environmental issues should be integrated in the
                                                             curricular for proposed agricultural training and
                                                             extension activities. While the training and
                                                             information dissemination activities will be
                                                             focused mostly on post harvesting investments,
                                                             they would also cover also key environmental
                                                             safeguards issues during agricultural production
                                                             such as mineral fertilizers and pesticides
                                                             management through Integrated Pest
                                                             Management approach, soil and water resources
                                                             conservation. Under the capacity building
                                                             activities to be provided for participating
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             financial institutions a special training will be
                                                             devoted to rules and procedures of subprojects
                                                             EA. Per WB requirements the EMF will be
                                                             disclosed and consulted in the country before
                                                             appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No    This policy will be not triggered as the project
                                                             would support investments only in the
                                                             settlements or on existing agricultural lands.
                                                             The EMF will provide guidance and criteria for
                                                             subprojects screening on this OP and all those
                                                             which might trigger the policy will be excluded
                                                             from the project financing.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    This policy will be not triggered as all project
                                                             activities will be implemented in the existing
                                                             settlements and there will be no support for
                                                             wood harvesting subprojects.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes   This OP 4.09 is triggered as the project may
                                                             finance purchasing of pesticides and and/or
                                                             proposed project activities that could lead to
                                                                                                                                 their increased usage. No separate Pest
                                                                                                                                 Management Plan is needed, but the
                                                                                                                                 Environmental Management Framework will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 include a section describing both measures
                                                                                                                                 which will be used to ensure compliance with
                                                                                                                                 national laws and WB requirements relating to
                                                                                                                                 pesticide purchase and use, and also measures to
                                                                                                                                 promote Integrated Pest Management (IPM)
                                                                                                                                 approaches and safe pesticide handling and
                                                                                                                                 disposal practices to reduce human and
                                                                                                                                 environmental exposure. Additionally the EMF
                                                                                                                                 will include a list of eligible pesticides in the
                                                                                                                                 country and guidance on their use. Any
                                                                                                                                 proposed financing for purchase of pesticides
                                                                                                                                 will require NoB from WB.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            N/A
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            N/A

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           Involuntary Resettlement Policy OP4.12 is
                                 4.12                                                                                            triggered. Project activities will not require
                                                                                                                                 resettlement. The typical range of activities is
                                                                                                                                 focused on technology transfer, improved
                                                                                                                                 pasture management practices, market
                                                                                                                                 orientation trainings and which do not require
                                                                                                                                 expansion of agricultural land plots already
                                                                                                                                 leased or owned by the farmers. However, sub-
                                                                                                                                 grant and sub-loan financing is allowed for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 small construction works, such as small agro
                                                                                                                                 products storage facilities. Although these
                                                                                                                                 would only are anticipated to be constructed on
                                                                                                                                 land owned or purchased by the loan or grant
                                                                                                                                 beneficiaries or on public land allocated by the
                                                                                                                                 local authorities, there is a risk that there could
                                                                                                                                 be informal land users who could be displaced.
                                                                                                                                 An RPF for the project will be prepared which
                                                                                                                                 will focus mainly on the mitigation of this risk.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            N/A

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 16-May-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             The EMF document will be prepared and disclosed, and the public consultation held before
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Appraisal. Its disclosure will be done via Internet and by submitting the draft documents to key
                             stakeholders for review and comments. After that (in about 10-14 days) the EMF document will
                             be consulted at a special workshop with participation of all stakeholders and representatives from
                             broad public and NGOs. All relevant consultation documents including invitations, announcement,
                             list of attendees, minutes and summaries of comments received will be attached to the EMPs and
                             ESMF for Infoshop disclosure.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Sandra Broka

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                               Date: 03-Dec-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)                         Date: 03-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
