                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA8845
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:    P133456
                            Project Name:      Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guangan Demonstration Area Infrastructure
                                               Development Project (P133456)
                            Task Team          Joanna Mclean Masic
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       22-Sep-2014                           Estimated   24-Feb-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GSURR                                  Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Urban Transport (59%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector
                                              (38%), Vocational training (3%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (65%), Infrastructure services for
                                              private sector development (35%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     242.54           Total Bank Financing:                 100.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 142.54
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    100.00
                              Total                                                                                    242.54
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support Linshui County Town and
                           Qianfeng District Town to improve infrastructure and investment support services.



                                                                       Page 1 of 13
                          3. Project Description
                         Component 1: Technical Assistance (US$ 600,000). This component will provide technical
                         assistance to Linshui and Qianfeng to better plan and manage built urban assets, while taking into
Public Disclosure Copy




                         account the wider impacts of urban growth on the environment. It will support Linshui to better
                         understand industries with potential for growth in Chongqing EMR and design target investment
                         support services. The component includes technical assistance to: (a) prepare urban capital
                         investment and asset management plans for Linshui County ETDZ and Qianfeng District Town; (b)
                         conduct cumulative environmental assessments for Linshui County Town and Qianfeng District
                         Town; and (c) carry out industrial value chain analysis, private sector demand surveys, and
                         marketing and investment promotion services in Linshui County ETDZ.

                         Component 2: Linshui County Town (US$ 64.39 million). This component will: (a) create a green
                         transport (biking and busing) corridor between low-income areas in the town center and industrial
                         areas in the Lihshui county ETDZ, and linking to the Guang’an-Chongqing highway; (b) construct
                         storm water drainage, sewage interceptors, sewage pipelines and treated effluent pipelines for
                         existing and new residents and industries; (c) increase wastewater treatment capacity by building a
                         wastewater treatment plant (WWTP); and (d) develop and implement industry-linked skills training
                         for low-income and poverty individuals.

                         Component 3: Qianfeng District Town (US$ 42.62 million). This component will: (a) develop an
                         alternate passenger and cargo route between the railway station and industrial area, bypassing the
                         town center; (b) construct sewage interceptors connecting to a non-Bank financed wastewater
                         treatment plant; and (b) revitalize urban public space and create a slow, green transport corridor
                         along the Luxi River, connecting low-income areas of the town center with industrial areas.

                         Component 4: Project Management and Capacity Building (US$1.77 million). This component will
                         support design, review, advisory and construction supervision needs for participating institutions to
                         implement the project. The component includes: (a) consulting services for project management and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         construction site supervision; and (b) management capacity building and training.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Guang’an City is located in southeast Sichuan, bordering Chongqing Municipality in the east and
                         south. It belongs to the sub-tropical humid monsoon zone with ample precipitation. Annual average
                         temperature is 16-18 degrees Celsius. Main landforms include low hills and river valleys. Qujiang
                         River, a secondary tributary of Yangtze River, crosses Guang’an City in its middle along a north-east
                         to south-west direction. The central city of Guang’an (Guang’an District) is located on the west of
                         the Qujiang River. Qianfeng County is located between the Qujiang River and Huaying Mountain,
                         while Linshui County is located between Huaying Mountain and Tongluo Mountain.

                         Qianfeng County Town is about 17 km away from central Guang’an City. It is planned as a
                         secondary urban center of Guang’an City. A 47km long Luxi River crosses Qianfeng County Town
                         from northeast to southwest and eventually joins the Quajing River. Except the existing built-up
                         areas, land use in the county town is predominantly farmland. Currently the county town has a built-
                         up area of about 6.15km²; industrial and residential areas account for around 50 percent each.
                         Qianfeng's industrial park is in the south of the town. According to the Qianfeng New Town
                         Regulatory Planning which was being prepared at the time of project appraisal (September 2014), the
                         planned Qianfeng New Town will cover an area of 16.49km² by 2030. Monitoring results available


                                                                     Page 2 of 13
                         show the ambient environmental quality in Qianfeng County Town overall complies with applicable
                         standards, except noise levels at night time, due to its closeness to an existing railway line.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Linshui County town is about 38km away from central Guang’an City. There are several rivers in the
                         project area. The project will support construction of wastewater interceptors along the Shiba River,
                         while another Bajiao River will be the receiving water body for treated effluent from the project
                         supported No.3 wastewater treatment plant. The Shiba River crosses the middle of Linshui County
                         Town from west to east. Lingbaoshan Stone Carving and Bridge Relics site, a municipal level
                         Culture Relics Protection Unit, is located at the middle reaches of the Shiba river. Linshui County
                         Town currently has a built-up area of 18.12 km², including urban and residential area (11.12km²) and
                         industrial area (7km²). Linshui County Town’s industrial area is located to the south of its urban core
                         and currently has about 60 enterprises. According to the urban master plan of Linshui County Town,
                         by 2030 the town will cover an area of 28.3km². Monitoring results available shows ambient
                         environmental quality in Qianfeng County Town overall complied with applicable standards.

                         The population of Qianfeng District and Linshui County Town and surrounding areas is still
                         predominantly rural. Over the next 10 – 15 years, urbanization in these areas is expected to result
                         from rural to urban migration. Urban-industrial expansion is required to ensure the necessary jobs,
                         housing and urban services can be created in these towns to absorb and provide good living
                         conditions for rural migrant workers. However, along with the urban-industrial expansion process,
                         land use change and industrial development will have a potential impact on local and regional
                         environmental quality and resources. Also, since most of the rural residents in urban-expansion areas
                         would lose land permanently, it will be a challenge for them to generate and secure their family
                         income unless appropriate measures are taken. To address the potential risks, a comprehensive
                         assessment of direct, indirect and cumulative impacts is required as well as well-designed mitigation
                         and public communication plans to ensure environmental and social considerations are integrated
                         into planning processes and development decisions.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Jun Zeng (GSURR)
                         Ning Yang (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             Category A project. Full environmental
                         BP 4.01                                              assessment conducted. EIA and EMP for
                                                                              component 2 and component 3 prepared to
                                                                              address anticipated environmental and social
                                                                              impacts. Information disclosure and public
                                                                              consultation conducted per OP4.01.
                                                                              Environmental and social considerations have
                                                                              been incorporated into the scope of work and
                                                                              TORs of technical assistance activities under
                                                                              component 1.

                                                                              The project will have direct, indirect/induced and
                                                                              cumulative impacts. Manageable impacts that are
                                                                              associated with the project activities include: 1)
                                                                              soil erosion, vegetation clearance and disturbance


                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                                                                     and surface water/river pollution due to
                                                                     earthworks; (b) other construction impacts and
                                                                     social disturbance associated with wastewater,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     noise, dust and solid waste; (c) operational
                                                                     impacts such as noise, dust, air emissions,
                                                                     wastewater discharge, waste management
                                                                     associated with road transportation and
                                                                     wastewater treatment; and (d) operational risks
                                                                     associated with wastewater treatment plant.
                                                                     Besides, the project may induce or facilitate rapid
                                                                     industrial expansion and this induced
                                                                     development in turn will exert cumulative
                                                                     impacts in conjunction with other past, present
                                                                     and future activities. A preliminary assessment of
                                                                     induced and cumulative impact assessment
                                                                     included in the EA indicates that cumulative
                                                                     impact issues may include 1) land use change and
                                                                     loss of green area, 2) increased water, air and
                                                                     noise pollution levels along transport corridor and
                                                                     in urban areas; 3) impacts on regional macro and
                                                                     micro drainage patterns; and 4) loss of
                                                                     agricultural lands and agriculture-based
                                                                     livelihoods. Building upon the assessment, a
                                                                     technical assistance activity will be carried out
                                                                     during project implementation to further the
                                                                     strategic environmental and social assessment of
                                                                     urban-industrial expansion in Linshui County and
                                                                     Qianfeng District Town.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           The project area of influence is predominantly
                                                                     urban, industrial and agricultural, and does not
                                                                     include any critical natural habitats as defined in
                                                                     OP4.04. The policy is triggered because the
                                                                     project will bring both negative and positive
                                                                     impacts to natural habitats in the project area of
                                                                     influence.

                                                                     The project will have impacts on existing green
                                                                     areas and surface water/rivers, such as clearance
                                                                     of vegetation and loss of farmland, and pollution
                                                                     of rivers during construction mainly.

                                                                     The project will bring positive environmental
                                                                     improvement on water quality and ecology of the
                                                                     rivers within the project area of influence due to
                                                                     the installation of interceptors and wastewater
                                                                     treatment facilities.




                                                             Page 4 of 13
                                                                         Both positive and negative impacts on natural
                                                                         habitats are covered in the EIA and EMP.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            There are no natural forests or plantation forests
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         in the project area of influence. Thus the project
                                                                         will not have impacts on the health or quality of
                                                                         any forests. The policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project is not anticipated to result in
                                                                         procurement of pesticides or pesticide application
                                                                         equipment, or introduce new pest management
                                                                         practices, or lead to increased pesticide use.
                                                                         Therefore the policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           A Physical Cultural Resources survey was carried
                         BP 4.11                                         out during project preparation and the findings are
                                                                         included in the EAs. In Linshui County Town, a
                                                                         Lingbaoshan Stone Carving and Bridge Relics
                                                                         site is located in the vicinity of proposed sewage
                                                                         interceptor. The alignment of sewage interceptor
                                                                         pipeline has been adjusted to avoid passing
                                                                         thorough the cultural relics site. Precautionary
                                                                         measures are included in the EMP to avoid
                                                                         potential impacts on the site during construction.

                                                                         In both Linshui County and Qianfeng District
                                                                         Town, family graves will be relocated due to
                                                                         project construction activities. The relocation
                                                                         procedure and compensation have been addressed
                                                                         in the RAPs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Chance-find procedure has been included EMPs.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            The project will support one district and one
                                                                         county in Guangan city in Sichuan province. The
                                                                         task team visited Qianfeng District and Linshui
                                                                         County and had meetings with the municipal
                                                                         departments in charge of minority affairs and the
                                                                         engaged villages. The task team concluded there
                                                                         is not any community of a Chinese minority
                                                                         identified by the Chinese government in the
                                                                         project area, only Han populations reside in those
                                                                         engaged villages. Han populations do not fall into
                                                                         the Bank ethnic minority definition. Thus, OP
                                                                         4.10 is not triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           Involuntary resettlement is unavoidable for the
                         4.12                                            purpose of project construction. Major
                                                                         involuntary resettlement impact consist of
                                                                         collective land acquisition and structure
                                                                         demolition in both rural and urban areas. A



                                                                 Page 5 of 13
                                                                                 Resettlement Action Plan was prepared by the
                                                                                 client in both English and Chinese based on the
                                                                                 requirements of Bank’s OP/BP4.12. The RAP
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 reviewed efforts to ensure that land acquisition
                                                                                 and structure demolition have been minimized in
                                                                                 accordance with Bank’s OP4.12. A Due
                                                                                 Diligence Report was prepared for linkage
                                                                                 activities where land acquisition is already
                                                                                 completed.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No              The project will neither support building of any
                                                                                 new dams, nor involve any existing dams or dams
                                                                                 under construction. The policy is not triggered.
                            Projects on International        No                  The project will not involve any international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 waters. This policy is not triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The project is not located in any disputed areas.
                            7.60                                                 This policy is not triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              OP4.01 Environmental Assessment
                              The project is anticipated to result in environmental and social benefits through improving
                              infrastructure services, enhancing environmental management, and improving opportunities for
                              employment. Although the physical activities of the project are fairly straightforward and the
                              associated environmental impacts are anticipated to be limited, environment and social issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                              related to changes in land use and urban-industrial expansion are potentially significant, therefore,
                              the project is assigned Category A per OP4.01. Three environmental safeguards policies are
                              applicable to the project, including OP4.01, OP4.04 and OP4.11. Applicable World Bank Group
                              Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines have also been taken into account in the
                              Environmental Assessment (EA). An Environmental Impact ASsessment (EIA) and
                              Environmental Management Plan (EMP) have been prepared for the Linshui component and
                              Qianfeng component, respectively. Environmental and social considerations will be incorporated
                              into the scope of work and Terms of Reference (TORs) for technical assistance activities under
                              component 1.

                              Per OP4.01, the EA scope was determined to include both Bank financed activities and locally
                              funded infrastructure investments that complement the overall development plan of the new
                              industrial zones in both Linshui and Qianfeng County Town. Regardless of the source of funding,
                              the EA covers those infrastructure investments that are necessary to meet the project objective and
                              enable the full functioning of these infrastructure services during operation.

                              Due to the nature and scale of construction and operational activities, the project has the potential
                              to cause direct, indirect/induced or cumulative environmental and social impacts. Key
                              environmental and social issues associated with the construction and operation of the project
                              supported infrastructure include: (a) impacts related to soil erosion, vegetation clearance and


                                                                         Page 6 of 13
                         disturbance and surface water/river pollution due to earthworks; (b) other construction impacts and
                         social disturbance associated with wastewater, noise, dust and solid waste; (c) operational impacts
                         such as noise, dust, air emissions, wastewater discharge, waste management associated with road
Public Disclosure Copy




                         transportation and wastewater treatment; and (d) operational risks associated with the wastewater
                         treatment plant. These impacts have been thoroughly assessed and can be adequately avoided,
                         minimized and/or mitigated through measures developed either in the project design or in the
                         project EMPs and the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP).

                         Beyond the direct impacts, the project may induce or facilitate rapid industrial expansion and this
                         induced development in turn will exert cumulative impacts in conjunction with other past, present
                         and future activities. A preliminary assessment of induced and cumulative impact assessment was
                         carried out during project preparation. The assessment examined the expansion of urban and
                         industrial areas, industrial developments and emissions, and environmental quality in the past
                         years; superi mposed with proposed infrastructure developments in coming years; and planed
                         urban-industrial development in the two towns up to 2030. It is noted that Qianfeng County Town
                         currently has a built-up area of 6.15km², of which about 50 percent has been used as industrial
                         land, which holds 29 enterprises including auto parts, electronics, textiles and garment making.
                         According to the regulatory plan for Qianfeng New Town (currently under preparation), by 2030
                         the county town will cover an area of 16.49km². Linshui County Town currently has a built-up
                         area of 18.12km², of which about 7km² has been used as industrial land, which lds about 60
                         enterprises related to food processing and machinery. According to the master plan of Linshui
                         County Town, by 2030 the county town will cover an area of 28.3km².

                         The assessment concluded that cumulative impacts associated with the urban and industrial
                         expansion process may include: 1) land use change and loss of green areas, 2) increased water, air
                         and noise pollution levels along transport corridors and in urban areas; 3) impacts on regional
                         macro and micro drainage patterns; and 4) loss of agricultural lands and agriculture-based
                         livelihoods. The assessment also identified a set of measures to address potential impacts
                         including setting development boundaries, strengthening landscaping and waste management, etc.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Building upon the assessment, a technical assistance activity will be carried out during project
                         implementation to further the assessment and strategies to address environmental and social issues.
                         The assessment will closely look into the environmental and social aspects of urban zoning,
                         industrial development planning, and environmental protection planning processes of both towns
                         up to 2030, the assessment is considered a strategic environmental and social assessment. A Terms
                         of Reference for the assessment has been developed and included in the EMP.

                         OP4.04 Natural Habitats
                         The project area of influence is predominantly urban, industrial and agricultural, and does not
                         include any critical natural habitats as defined in OP4.04. In both Linshui County and Qianfeng
                         County Town, surface vegetation is mainly farmland crops, planted trees and bushes in rural areas.
                         In Linshui the project activities will involve two rivers, i.e. Shiba River and Bajiao River. In
                         Qianfeng, Luxi River crosses the project area. Ecological survey shows there are no protected or
                         endangered plant, animal or aquatic species in the project areas and the rivers.

                         The project will have impacts on terrestrial ecology due to earth excavation, soil erosion, clearance
                         of vegetation/farmland during construction. If not well managed, the project activities, including
                         installation of wastewater interceptors along/crossing the rivers and operation of wastewater
                         treatment plants, may also adversely affect the river ecology. However, the conversion of rural
                         farmland to urban and industrial land will not lead to significant loss of natural habitats or

                                                                   Page 7 of 13
                          biodiversity in the areas. The project design and environmental assessment proposed a set of
                          measures to avoid, minimize and mitigate the ecological impacts. The project will not result in
                          significant degradation, conversion or loss of natural habitats. The project will also bring positive
Public Disclosure Copy




                          environmental improvement on water quality and ecology of the rivers within the project area of
                          influence due to the installation of interceptors and wastewater treatment facilities. Post-
                          construction vegetation and landscaping will be carried out along transport corridors, public spaces
                          and restored sites as well.

                          OP4.11 Physical Cultural Resources
                          In Linshui, a proposed sewage interceptor has been adjusted to avoid the Lingbaoshan Stone
                          Carving and Bridge Relics Site. However, the pipeline is still close to the site. To minimize
                          potential impacts on the relics site, pipe-jacking construction technology will be used for sections
                          crossing the river bed and hill near the protection area. This approach will avoid open excavation
                          and blasting, thus minimizing potential impacts. Training of construction workers on protection of
                          the relics site will be carried out during construction.

                          The project will also involve relocation of 1694 family graves (1626 in Linshui and 68 in
                          Qianfeng) that are scattered in farmland in the project area. Based on field surveys and
                          consultation with local communities, it is concluded that these local family graves do not have
                          significant archaeological or historical value but nevertheless need to be properly relocated in
                          consultation with the families. The relocation and compensation of these family graves have been
                          properly dealt with through the project RAP.

                          Social

                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12
                           The Bank financed project construction and the non-Bank financed land development in the area
                           will cause a combined 22,581 people from 6,434 families to be affected by the acquisition of 500
                           ha of collectively owned land; about 20,494 people from 5,814 families will be affected by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           demolition of 1,321,237 m² of private houses. Although land development activities in Linshui
                           County will be not financed by the Bank, the resettlement activities will be conducted at the same
                           time as the Bank financed project, therefore all related resettlement impact was covered by the
                           prepared Resettlement Action Plan.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Both Linshui and Qianfeng County Town have been going through a process of urban expansion
                           and industrial development over the past years. They also have strategic plans for future
                           development up to 2030. The EA carried out due diligence of past development, overlapping with
                           proposed development in the coming 4-6 years, and projected development up to 2030 to assess
                           induced and cumulative impacts. In order to continuously monitor such impacts, the project will
                           support a technical assistance activity to conduct follow-up strategic environmental and social
                           assessment during project implementation. This effort will enable a more detailed assessment that
                           is adaptive to ongoing actual developments in the two towns.

                          The cumulative impact assessment conducted during project preparation covers urban expansion
                          and industrial development in both towns. Specifically:

                          •        In Linshui County Town, as of April 2014 the town covers an area of 18.12km², of which


                                                                    Page 8 of 13
                         the industrial area (Linshui Economic and Technology Development Zone, ETDZ) covers an area
                         of 7 km². Linshui ETDZ was established in 2006 and holds about 60 enterprises currently,
                         including agricultural food processing, machinery manufacturing, etc. Environmental monitoring
Public Disclosure Copy




                         results show emissions from the industries and ambient environmental quality met applicable
                         environmental standards.

                         •       In Qianfeng County Town, as of April 2014 the town covers an area of 6.15km², of which
                         about 50 percent is industrial. Qianfeng Industrial Park was established in 2006 and holds 29
                         enterprises, including manufacturing of auto spare parts, textiles and garments. Environmental
                         monitoring results show emissions from the industries and ambient environmental quality met
                         applicable environmental standards.

                         The proposed project, by providing some of the basic infrastructure, will facilitate the urban and
                         industrial expansion of these two towns. Therefore induced and cumulative impacts are the main
                         challenge for the project. If not well-planned, rapid urban expansion can be associated with
                         deteriorating environmental quality around core urban areas with long-term consequences on local
                         communities. Induced and cumulative impacts may be exerted beyond the direct area of influence
                         of the project and even beyond the expansion area supported by the Bank loan. Therefore, the
                         induced and cumulative impact assessment considers future development scenarios and identified
                         several key issues.

                         •       According to the Master Plan of Linshui County Town (2009-2030), the built-up area of
                         Linshui county seat will reach an area of 22km² by 2019 and of 28.3 km² by 2030, compared to 18
                         km² in 2014. Some key infrastructure to be developed in the coming years, such as the West Ring
                         Road will facilitate the urbanization of current farmland in Linshui County Town. In Linshui
                         ETDZ, the main industries will include logistics, auto spare parts, machinery manufacturing and
                         non-ferrous metal metallurgy and processing industries.

                         •       According to the Master Plan of the Industrial Park in Qianfeng (2011-2020), the built-up
Public Disclosure Copy




                         area will reach 35.48 km² by 2020, compared to 3.5km² in 2014. Its main industries will include
                         auto spare parts, electronic products, garments, textiles and show manufacturing. As of the project
                         appraisal, Qianfeng District is preparing a Regulatory Planning for Qianfeng New Town
                         (2013-2030), which indicates that by 2030 the Qianfeng New Town will cover an area of 16.49
                         km². Since Qianfeng New Town includes the industrial park and its regulatory planning prevails
                         the master plan for Qianfeng Industrial Park, it is expected that actual conversion of farmland to
                         urban and industrial land from now to 2030 will follow the regulatory plan, i.e. from 6.15km² to
                         16.49km².

                         By combining past, current and future developments, the identified key induced and cumulative
                         impacts include:

                         •        Land use change and loss of green area. In both towns, there will be significant land use
                         change by the end of the planning period. Expansion of the urban and industrial areas will convert
                         farmland and green spaces into urban, resi dential and industrial buildings. Given that most of the
                         converted green area is farmland, it is not anticipated that there will be significant loss of natural
                         habitats or biodiversity in the region.

                         •       Loss of agricultural land. Most of the converted lands are farmland, which will reduce
                         agriculture-based incomes for local farmers. It is expected that rural livelihoods will be converted

                                                                    Page 9 of 13
                          to urban and industrial-based livelihoods, which is already the trend in the project areas.

                          •       Impacts on regional drainage pattern. The planned development will not impact natural
Public Disclosure Copy




                          river channels thus will not have significant impacts on regional drainage patterns. Due to the loss
                          of green space more stormwater runoff may end up in rivers increasing local flooding
                          probabilities. This has been taken into consideration in the design and building of drainage
                          systems which have been designed to a higher flood probability level.

                          •       Social issues. Loss of farmland and agriculture-based livelihoods and conversion to urban-
                          and industrial-based ones presents both opportunities and challenges to local communities.

                          •       Other issues may include increased pressure on environment quality such as air pollution,
                          surface water quality, groundwater, solid waste management, etc.

                           The two towns have taken actions to address these issues, including stipulating development
                           boundaries, building wastewater collection and treatment facilities, solid waste facilities,
                           restricting enterprises to light polluting, labor intensive industries and building environmental
                           monitoring and management institutions. Given the scale of planned development, the complexity
                           level of issues, it is prudent to conduct further assessment during project implementation, taking
                           into account a hybrid of induced, cumulative and strategic environmental and social issues related
                           to urban and industrial development in the two towns. A Terms of Reference for the Strategic
                           Environmental and Social Assessment has been developed building upon the preliminary
                           assessment already conducted during preparation, and included in the EMP.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           During EA preparation, various alternatives have been considered taking into account
                           environmental, social, technical and economic considerations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          At a “without project” versus “with project” level, it is noted that the project will have significant
                          benefits interms of providing skills training and contributing to employment opportunities for local
                          residents, boosting regional economic development, building environmental facilities such as
                          wastewater treatment services. In addition, the project provides a chance to bring international
                          good experiences to the towns in terms of a more healthy approach to urbanization, which is
                          particularly valuable in the context of the country’s rapid urbanization.

                          At the project activity level, several alternatives have been considered. For wastewater treatment
                          plants, the site selection, process, scale, treatment levels, location of effluent discharge and
                          disposal of sludge for wastewater treatment plants have been carefully compared and selected to
                          make sure they are environmental acceptable.

                          For the interceptor in Linshui county, its alignment and construction technology were selected to
                          avoid or minimize potential impacts on Lingbaoshan Stone Carving and Bridge Relics Site.

                          For road building: In Linshui, the No.1 road will cross Hu-Rong Expressway, an overpass option
                          was selected as it will cause less earthworks and present safer construction than the underpass
                          option. In Qianfeng, the Gongye Avenue will cross Luxi River and a one-span beam bridge option
                          is selected for this crossing as it will not affect the river channel by avoiding building in-water
                          piers, which is preferable to a two-span bridge option, which was considered.


                                                                    Page 10 of 13
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environment
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The project owner has engaged an accredited EIA consultant to conduct the EA during project
                          preparation. For each town, a full EA was carried out and includes an EIA Report and an EMP.
                          These have been prepared in compliance with domestic EIA regulations and are consistent with
                          Bank safeguards policies.

                          The EMPs have been prepared based on the findings of the EIAs. The EMPs outline measures to
                          avoid, minimize, and mitigate potential environmental and social impacts as well as a budget for
                          the implementation of EMPs activities. It outlines the roles and responsibilities of relevant
                          organizations and institutions. The EMP incorporates plans for training, monitoring and
                          evaluation, and budget estimates. It includes sets of Environmental Codes of Practice for
                          contractors, which will be incorporated into bidding documents and contracts. The EMP also
                          includes mitigation measures and a comprehensive capacity building plan for the local
                          environmental authority, and a TOR for further induced and cumulative impact assessment.

                          The EMP includes a set of measures to address cumulative impacts identified during project
                          preparation. These include technical measures such as landscaping and waste management, and
                          implementation arrangements such as building a stakeholder dialogue and engagement
                          mechanism. It also includes terms of reference for the strategic environmental and social
                          assessment which will be carried out during project implementation.

                          The project owner has no prior experience in managing a Bank-financed project. The EMP has
                          included a clear institutional arrangement that defines the environmental management
                          responsibilities, supervision and reporting duties at the prefecture-level PMO at Guang’an
                          Prefecture and district/county-level PMO in both Linshui and Qianfeng. An independent
Public Disclosure Copy




                          environmental monitoring consultant will be hired to assist the PMOs in managing environmental
                          safeguard compliance during project implementation.

                          Social

                          Following the relevant Chinese laws, regulations and World Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary
                          Resettlement, the PMO has prepared a RAP to address involuntary resettlement impact caused by
                          project construction. Since land acquisition for the phase development for Linshui Industry Zone
                          will be conducted together with land acquisition caused by Bank-financed activities, the land
                          acquisition for the purpose of Linshui Industry Zone development is covered by the prepared RAP.
                          The resettlement planning work was carried out by the line agencies under the guidance of a team
                          from Southwest Transportation University, with prior experience in resettlement planning for
                          World Bank financed projects. Planning work included project impact inventory surveys, social
                          economic surveys and consultations over resettlement and livelihood rehabilitation measures.

                          The borrower has rich experience in resettlement for domestic projects; however has little
                          experience in Bank support projects. Trainings on Bank’s OP4.12 were delivered by both Bank’s
                          team and social consultant, and all related local departments actively participated in the RAP
                          preparation and SA exercise. At present, the borrower has a much clearer understanding of Bank’s
                          OP4.12. The draft RAP documents were disclosed on the websites of Guang’an DRC on October


                                                                   Page 11 of 13
                           20, 2014 with a newspaper announcement in the Guang’an Daily.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Two rounds of information disclosure and public consultation were carried out during project
                           preparation. Public consultations were undertaken in the form of questionnaires, focus group
                           discussions, and public meetings; such consultations will be on-going throughout project
                           implementation. Project information was disseminated to displaced families and appropriate
                           mitigation measures will be taken to address the public's concerns. Information disclosure on EA
                           preparation was advertised through public bulletins, local newspapers, and the internet. The draft
                           full EA documents were disclosed on the websites of Guang’an DRC on August 22, 2014 with a
                           newspaper announcement in the Guang’an Daily. Pubic concerns raised during these consultations
                           have been incorporated into the project design, the EMP and RAP.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      24-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Sep-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      26-Sep-2014
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            22-Aug-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      11-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Sep-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           China                                                            20-Oct-2014
                           Comments: The RAP was disclosed locally on August 25, 2014 and again on October 20, 2014
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [     ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice     Yes [     ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [     ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats



                                                                    Page 12 of 13
                             Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of critical natural habitats?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Joanna Mclean Masic
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Josefo Tuyor (RSA)                                Date: 18-Nov-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)                            Date: 18-Nov-2014
                            Manager:



                                                                       Page 13 of 13
