INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12056
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Feb-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Jan-2015, 23-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Kazakhstan                  Project ID:  P150183
Project Name: KZ SKILLS AND JOBS PROJECT (P150183)
Task Team       Keiko Inoue,Mohamed Ihsan Ajwad
Leader(s):
Estimated       26-Jan-2015                 Estimated    31-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General education sector (50%), Other social services (50%)
Theme(s):       Education for the knowledge economy (50%), Improving labor markets (50%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     137.00             Total Bank Financing:   100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
0
Borrower                                                                     37.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       100.00
Total                                                                       137.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
To improve employment outcomes and skills of target beneficiaries and to improve the relevance of
technical and vocational education and training and higher education programs.
3. Project Description
The estimated total project cost is US$137 million. The project will contribute to the higher level,
national goal of diversifying the economy and increasing the productivity and earning capacity of the
Page 1 of 7


﻿working age population. The total duration of the project isfive years, and a phased-in approach is
built into the project design to allow activities that are ready to proceed with implementation.
Component 1 builds on the experience of the Technical Vocational Education Modernization Project
(see lessons learned in Section C and further details in Annex 2) and thus will launch upon project
O
effectiveness. Component 2 will start with a pilot, followed by gradual scaling up after a thorough
evaluation.
Component 1. Building the Foundation of a National Qualifications System (Total US$14m). The
purpose of this component is to enhance the institutional capacity for improving the relevance of
technical and vocational education and training (TVET), higher education, and in-service training.
This will be achieved by establishing the key building blocks of a national qualifications system that
is well aligned with labor market demands. Those key building blocks are: Occupational Standards,
Educational Standards and Curricula, and Qualifications Assessment and Certification.
Sub-component 1.1. Enhancement of occupational standards, including improvement of approval and
updating processes (US$5m). This Sub-component will support the following specific activities: (i)
development of a national classification of occupations; (ii) carry out a review of existing regulatory
framework to identify gaps for adjustment; (iii) conduct a harmonization of the processes and
methodologies for the development and approval of the occupational standards, including the
development of occupational qualifications cards; and (iv) maintain a national repository of
occupational standards with technical capacity built for maintenance and oversight.
Sub-component 1.2. Development and implementation of a framework to review and update the
educational and training standards and curricula for technical and vocational education and training
and higher education (US$5m). The Sub-component will support the following activities: (i) review
of international experiences and ongoing pilots on quality assurance practices for providers and
modernization of educational and training standards and curricula within the context of the NQF; (ii)
carry out the competitive selection of developers of educational and training standards and curricula
of TVET and higher education, (iii) develop a framework for regular review and update of
educational and training standards and curricula of TVET and higher education; and (iv) define the
measurement of the learning competencies of national education and training programs by module
and by curriculum. A national body will coordinate this effort through a competitive selection of
developers in accordance with established criteria to assure quality and cost effectiveness. This
a        process will be adopted in higher education on a pilot basis with a small number of universities/
institutes in a limited number of program areas.
Sub-component 1.3. Development of a roadmap for establishing an independent qualifications
assessment and award system through the provision of technical support for piloting sector-specific
skills testing and professional certification (US$4m). The Sub-component will support the following
activities: (i) provide advisory support to pilot sector-specific skills testing for assessing and
recognizing competency for levels 1-4; (ii) launch a pilot program for the creation of professional
certification bodies and mechanism for a select number of professions, selected based on criteria in
the POM; (iii) align higher education qualifications to the NQF; and (iv) evaluate pilot programs and
develop a roadmap and capacity for establishing an independent national qualifications authority
with responsibility for promoting the NQF, guiding the development of new standards and curricula,
awarding qualification diplomas, and establishing quality assurance practices among providers at all
levels.
Component 2. Enhancing Skills for Improved Employment Outcomes and Productivity (Total US
Page 2 of 7


﻿$11 Om). The purpose of this component is to provide relevant workforce training to unemployed
persons, unproductively self-employed persons, and current employees in need of training, all
identified and selected in accordance with the criteria set forth in the POM.
O
Sub-component 2.1: Improvement of public employment services for unemployed and
unproductively self-employed people (US$33m). This Sub-component aims to improve employment
services for unemployed and unproductively self-employed people, especially through enhanced use
of the LMIS. Employment services have traditionally focused on the needs of unemployed people,
and therefore, expanding the mandate of EC or EU to serve unproductively self-employed people
better will require that staff understand the labor market challenges that are specific to this group.
Two key activities are supported. First, it supports the design and implementation of an action plan to
improve and expand public employment services through the EC or EUs, including in rural areas,
based on an assessment of current capacity to serve both unemployed and unproductively self-
employed people (in accordance with the POM), including addressing gaps in staffing, capacity and
qualifications, furniture, and equipment. In particular, the project will focus on training of EC or EU
staff to ensure that they are able to deliver improved employment services to both unemployed and
unproductively self-employed people. Second, it supports the improvement of the capacity of EC or
EU to provide better advice to beneficiaries through introduction of a profiling tool, strengthening of
the existing LMIS to enhance the information available to EC or EU staff, and training of staff to
adopt a more proactive approach to public employment service provision. Rural areas will also be
connected to the LMIS and, hence, jobseekers in remote areas will be able to benefit from job
matching and information about other employment services.
Sub-component 2.2: Improvement of the relevance of workforce training (US$17m). This Sub-
component aims to identify and assess existing workforce training providers, and where needed build
capacity of providers which have the potential but require support to provide more relevant training.
Activities targeted to workforce training providers include: (i) review of the regulatory framework
concerning workforce training provision; (ii) development of an inventory of workforce training
providers; (iii) assessment of relevance of workforce training and, on the basis of such assessment,
development of a list of pre-qualified workforce training providers; and (iv) provision of support to
workforce training providers to improve the relevance of training delivery, including through the
provision of technical assistance and goods. The training providers on the pre-qualified list will
provide training to unemployed, unproductively self-employed, and current employees under Sub-
a        component 2.3. Both public and private training providers are eligible for support, however, only
public providers are eligible for goods. Evaluations will be conducted to assess the outcomes of the
training, the results of which will be made publicly available to address the dearth of information on
the relevance of workforce training.
Sub-component 2.3: Establishment and implementation of a skills enhancement training program
(US$60m). This Sub-component establishes and then finances training offered through the Skills
Enhancement Training Program (SETP), which applies a demand-driven approach to financing
training activities to target beneficiaries. The SETP will first be piloted in three regions and then
rolled out nationally. The pilots will be evaluated and lessons learned will be used to improve
operational guidelines and procedures. During the pilot, different approaches will be tested to
improve incentives to invest in training and align the supply of skills with the demand; these may
relate to different mechanisms for targeting/selection of beneficiaries and firms, contracting and
payment (including performance-based pay) to training providers, and management and
implementation guidelines for the SETP. Two types of training packages will be offered through the
SETP: (i) packages for the unemployed and unproductively self-employed and (ii) packages for
Page 3 of 7


﻿current employees in need of training.
Component 3. Project management and monitoring and evaluation (Total US$13m). This component
will support project management, monitoring and evaluation activities, and operating costs. A Project
O
U         Management Unit (PMU) will be financed within the MHSD to manage the day-to-day
implementation of the project. The project will finance expenses related to the sufficient
implementation and monitoring and evaluation of the project, including goods, consultants' services,
training, and operating costs. A full list of project-related evaluations is included in Annex 2. This
component will also ensure that the activities outlined in Component 2 benefit the hard-to-reach and
vulnerable population, that stakeholder feedback is regularly gathered and integrated into the design,
and that good practice and lessons learned are widely shared. In particular, the component will
support the development and implementation of: (i) an Information and Communication Campaign,
(ii) a Feedback and Resolution Mechanism, and (iii) an Awards of Excellence Program.
ment and implementation of a framework to review and update the educational and training standards
and curricula for technical and vocational education and training and higher education (US$5m). The
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project is expected to cover multiple locations throughout Kazakhstan.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Lola Ibragimova (GSURR)
Rustam Arstanov (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project does not foresee financing civil works.
OP/BP 4.01                              However, civil works may be launched once project
interventions commence, particularly civil works
financed by other sources that include upgrading of
EC, EU, or training provider facilities. Potential
environmental impacts associated with the above
interventions are minor, short-lived, and primarily
limited to the project sites (except for movement of
equipment and materials to/from the site). These
issues are primarily dust, noise, disposal of waste
material and/or older equipment, some traffic
disruption (depending upon specific location),
worker safety (e.g. works at height), etc. All these
impacts are addressed with good engineering and
construction practices and with mitigation measures
specified in the project Environmental Management
Plan (EMP) checklists. An EMP checklist with
project description and potential environmental
issues related to rehabilitation as well as typical
mitigation measures was disclosed on the website of
the MHSD and the Infoshop on December 19, 2014.
The Safeguards Policies are also relevant for
Page 4 of 7


﻿Component 1 in that the educational standards and
the certification standards developed under the
project should incorporate environmental and social
Safeguards aspects that are relevant to the fields in
question (notably for the pilot of sector-specific
skills testing and certification centers, environmental
and social sustainability and protection are important
elements to include in capacity building and
certification/standards processes).
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
Pest Management OP 4.09     No
Physical Cultural Resources  No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No         No resettlement or land acquisition is envisioned
BP 4.12                                  under the project, thus OP 4.12 is not triggered. The
client agreed to ensure that any minor works
requiring upgrading of existing facilities will be done
within the footprint of existing facilities. The POM
will incorporate screening checklist to ensure
compliance.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No
a
Projects on International   No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Most of the potential impacts are limited to small scale construction works and might include
occupational health and safety issues (works on height, limited access/ regress, working with
asbestos, noise and vibration, dust), waste management and traffic safety.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The overall social and gender impacts of the project are expected to be positive, especially in
terms of enhanced employment outcomes. Project activities will pay particular attention to
vulnerable groups, including the unemployed, unproductively self-employed, and current
Page 5 of 7


﻿employees. The project is expected to have a positive impact on women's employment outcomes
by matching them with training programs that will lead to higher earnings and productivity jobs
once the profiling tool is functioning. Rather than reinforce norms about what is considered
desirable skills for vulnerable groups, including women, the project will ensure that they have
O
access to better information about labor market opportunities and more relevant training, therefore
more control over their own career choices. The results of project interventions will be monitored
using gender-disaggregated data. The project is expected to have an ongoing positive impact on
employment outcomes for the beneficiaries and can therefore potentially have a large impact on
shared prosperity.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
No alternatives were considered at the appraisal stage since the exact nature of activities is not
known. Should the activities, once known, include a potential significant impact alternatives will
be considered.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower has developed a Checklist Environmental Management Plan (EMP) which includes
the assessment and typical mitigation measures for major activities associated with the
refurbishment works. In case, any of the project activities will be related to civil works, site
specific EMPs shall be developed. This is the first World Bank project for this particular unit in
the Ministry of Healthcare and Social Protection that triggers Environmental Policies. Should site-
specific EMPs be required, technical environmental, health, and safety knowledge shall be
provided by the environmental professional(s) who will be involved by the borrower presumably
from the other related agencies (environmental protection, emergency management) who have a
relevant expertise. The final EMPs will be reviewed and approved by the environmental
safeguards specialist in the Task Team. The PMU will include a designated specialist to ensure the
POM compliance with the social screening checklist and provide regular monitoring and oversight.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
O
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Checklist EMP was posted on the website of the borrower on Dec 19th, 2014. Two weeks
timeframe was given to the general public to comment on the document.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                11-Dec-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                             19-Dec-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Kazakhstan                                                 19-Dec-2014
Comments: The Checklist EMP was disclosed at the following URL in Russian and Kazakh:
http://www.mzsr.gov.kz/node/319236. At PCN stage, the decision was taken to
require the MHSD to publicly disclose the document on its website, with an
invitation for comments and questions, for at least one week prior to completion of
appraisal. The document was disclosed on December 19 and as of February 19,
2015, no comments or questions have been received.
Page 6 of 7


﻿If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
0          related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
0          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Keiko Inoue,Mohamed Ihsan Ajwad
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Mario Cristian Aedo Inostroza      Date: 23-Feb-2015
Manager:                     (PMGR)
Page 7 of 7


