                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC6322

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mongolia                        Project ID:      P147438
                            Project Name:      MN Export Development Project (P147438)
                            Task Team          Marius Vismantas
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          28-Feb-2014                     Estimated        29-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASFP                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         SME Finance (30%), General finance sector (30%), Other domestic and
                                               international trade (20%), General industry and trade sector (20 %)
                            Theme(s):          Other Financial Sector Development (20%), Micro, Small and Medium
                                               Enterprise support (15%), Other Private Sector Development (25%), Export
                                               development and competitiveness (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     20.00                    Total Bank Financing:         20.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 20.00
                              Total                                                                       20.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the project is to strengthen support to Mongolian exporters towards
                           diversification and expansion of their exports by (i) improving access of Mongolian exporters to
                           export finance products and services, and (ii) capacity building of exporters and quality
                           improvements in export products.
                         C. Project Description
                         The project will have four components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Development of a new line of export finance products ($10 million). This component
                         will provide financial, technical, and institutional development support to the Development Bank of
                         Mongolia (DBM) in building a new line of export finance products. It would enable the DBM to
                         develop and start provision of a full range of export credit, insurance, and guarantee products to
                         Mongolian firms. As an additional outcome from this component, a center of excellence on trade/
                         export finance would be established in the DBM to provide consulting services to other financial
                         institutions and exporting companies. This component will have two parts

                         Sub-component 1.1: Knowledge and expertise transfer and other TA for the Development Bank of
                         Mongolia ($1 million). This sub-component will see, for the duration of the Project, key DBM staff
                         going on short (1- 6 months) fact-finding missions to solid foreign partner/s (Exim or development
                         bank/s to be determined jointly by DBM and WB) for on-site learning related to export finance
                         development. The sub-component will also allow partner bank management and staff to visit DBM
                         for knowledge sharing sessions. It will allow the DBM to draw on the expertize and experience of the
                         relevant partners in developing and launching a full range of export credit, insurance, and guarantee
                         products to Mongolian entrepreneurs engaged in export activities.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Seed capital for DBM’s new export insurance subsidiary ($9 million). This sub-
                         component will provide investment needed for the initial phase of setting up the export insurance
                         subsidiary and making it operational, thus providing a stage for development and launch of export
                         insurance products and services.

                         Component 2: Increasing export know-how of Mongolian exporters ($3 million). This component
                         will provide training on foreign trade to Mongolian firms. It will augment existing public and private
                         sector-provided training programs to Mongolian entrepreneurs interested in starting or increasing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         exports. Furthermore, it will systematize such training, expand its modules, sectoral depth,
                         geographical coverage, and virtual outreach. In addition to exporters, the component will provide
                         training to trainers, public sector officials and Mongolian diplomatic corps responsible for economic
                         representation of Mongolia abroad. A foreign trade research center of excellence would be set up
                         within the structure laid out in the EPP (“Mongolian Exports SOE”) and provide market research to
                         exporting companies.

                         Component 3: Matching grants for stronger competitiveness ($5.8 million). This component will
                         provide matching grants to Mongolian exporters towards acquisition of ISO and other internationally
                         recognized quality certificates and customized consulting services to Mongolian exports/exporters. It
                         will pay part (e.g., half) of the cost towards acquiring ISO or other certificates by Mongolian
                         exporters and thereby improve international competitiveness of their products and services.

                         Component 4: Project Implementation Support ($1.2 million). Under this component, a Project
                         Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established in the MOED. The PIU will be dissolved at Project
                         closing. Technical skills of the PIU staff developed during the Project will be crucial for long-term
                         sustainability of export promotion work, and will remain with the MOED (and DBM) after Project
                         closing.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The Project will generally be implemented in Ulaanbaatar. Individual exporters which would benefit
                           from the project (through finance, training, or matching grants) may be located anywhere in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Mongolia.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Implementing agencies - the DBM, MOED, and other potential (TBD) – have no or very limited
                           experience implementing Bank safeguard policies. As this is an FI, they will need to receive training
                           and support on the WBG's safeguard and other fiduciary policies, including screening of activities of
                           individual exporting firms in regards to environmental and social safeguard impacts The Project may
                           also draw support from the existing PMU (located in the MOF) which is familiar with the WB
                           policies.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Bernard Baratz (LCSEG)
                           Songling Yao (EASCS)
                           Feng Ji (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The Project will reach individual companies
                           BP 4.01                                             through Sub-Component 1.2 (DBM export
                                                                               guarantee/insurance facility) and Component 2.
                                                                               Although the types of activities supported have
                                                                               yet to be identified, these activities may have
                                                                               environmental and social impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               This project is categorized as a Financial
                                                                               Intermediary (FI). Specific activities to be
                                                                               financed will be assessed in terms of their
                                                                               potential environmental and social impacts and
                                                                               be categorized either as a Category A, B or C.

                                                                               It is not anticipated that there will be Category
                                                                               A activities. However, Category A activities
                                                                               will be considered based upon certain eligibility
                                                                               criteria which will include capacity to manage
                                                                               safeguards risks and impacts.

                                                                               An ESMF will be prepared, providing screening
                                                                               procedures, eligibility criteria and procedures
                                                                               for assessment of potential safeguards impacts
                                                                               and developing measures to address impacts.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         TBD             The policy may be triggered if project financing
                                                                               (export guarantees) include activities that may
                                                                               impact and/or benefit natural habitats. The
                                                                               likelihood of such activities will be assessed
                                                                 during project preparation and confirmed prior
                                                                 to project appraisal. If the policy is triggered,
                                                                 the ESMF will include screening procedures to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 identify activities that may affect natural
                                                                 habitats and include measures to address such
                                                                 impacts during project implementation.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                TBD   It is unlikely that the policy is triggered.
                                                                 However, project preparation will assess
                                                                 whether the project may finance (guarantee)
                                                                 activities that will trigger OP 4.36 and
                                                                 triggering of the policy will be confirmed prior
                                                                 to appraisal. The ESMF will include procedures
                                                                 for screening impacts of activities to be
                                                                 supported by the project during project
                                                                 implementation.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project is not envisaged to finance activities
                                                                 that will trigger the policy.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Project preparation will assess whether the
                         BP 4.11                                 project may finance (export guarantees)
                                                                 activities that may impact physical cultural
                                                                 resources. If this is the case, the ESMF will
                                                                 include screening procedures and measures to
                                                                 identify and address impacts on physical
                                                                 cultural resources. It will also include chance
                                                                 find procedures to be followed during project
                                                                 implementation.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The policy is triggered as project financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 (export guarantees and business planning) may
                                                                 include companies operating in areas with social
                                                                 groups covered by the Bank’s indigenous
                                                                 people’s policy. An IPPF will be developed and
                                                                 included in the ESMF.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    TBD   The policy may be triggered if the project
                         4.12                                    (export guarantees) includes public sector
                                                                 entities that may use eminent domain to acquire
                                                                 land related to the guaranteed activity. If the
                                                                 export guarantees are limited to the private
                                                                 sector and/or activities that do not require land
                                                                 acquisition the policy will not be triggered. This
                                                                 will be assessed during project preparation and
                                                                 confirmed prior to project appraisal. If triggered
                                                                 an RPF will be developed and included in the
                                                                 ESMF.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No    It is not anticipated that any activities will rely
                                                                 or be potentially affected by dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             It is not anticipated that this policy will be
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             It is not anticipated that this policy will be
                                 7.60                                                                                            triggered.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 18-Feb-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared during project
                                      preparation and disclosed prior to project appraisal. The ESMF will cover OP 4.01 and other
                                      policies that are determined to be triggered during project preparation. If OP 4.10 is triggered the
                                      ESMF will include an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF); if OP 4.12 is triggered the
                                      ESMF will include a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The ESMF will be disclosed in
                                      country and be subject to public consultations prior to project appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Marius Vismantas

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (RSA)                                                                                           Date: 11-Feb-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Hormoz Aghdaey (SM)                                                                                                  Date: 11-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
