                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA7918
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Micronesia, Federated States of Project ID:        P148560
                            Project Name:      Energy Sector Development (P148560)
                            Task Team          Roberto Gabriel Aiello
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          24-Mar-2014                         Estimated   29-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASNS                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General energy sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Other public sector governance (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         13.90               Total Bank Financing: 13.90
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                             0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                     13.90
                              Total                                                                                         13.90
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objectives are to improve the efficiency and reliability of electricity
                           supply, and strengthen the planning and technical capacities at the state power utilities and the
                           national Government.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project, with an estimated cost of US$13.9 million, will include the following three

                                                                         Page 1 of 9
                         components:

                         Component 1: Improvement in technical performance of the state utilities (IDA US$9.0 million).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will support fuel savings through improved fuel efficiency of power generation and
                         increased penetration of renewable energy sources, loss reduction, reliability increases, and
                         performance improvement activities and maintenance plans for the four utilities, including key
                         investments in equipment needed to increase revenues and reduce energy losses.
                         The key investments planned for each utility are:

                         Component 2: National and state energy planning (IDA US$3.4 million). This component will
                         finance the preparation of an Energy Master Plans for the four FSM states and the development of a
                         National Energy Sector Master Plan. These plans would follow a ‘whole-of-sector’ approach for
                         assessing the energy needs. They would confirm the power infrastructure investments needed in the
                         first five years and reflect the results of grid stability analysis to identify reinforcements to the grid
                         required to ensure that potential new projects are properly integrated to the systems. The plans would
                         also reflect the results of feasibility studies and environmental and social impact assessments of the
                         top priority projects. Feasibility and other project specific studies to be undertaken under this
                         component will be selected based on criteria that will include technical, financial, social and
                         environmental impacts, as well as their contribution to NEP’s goals of increasing energy efficiency
                         and the share of renewable energy in the nation’s overall energy supply. The preparation of the
                         Master Plans will use other studies that have been undertaken or are planned in the sector, such as the
                         least cost plans to be prepared by ADB for Pohnpei and Chuuk, as inputs.

                         Component 3: Technical assistance and project management (IDA US$1.5 million). This component
                         will build the capacity of the Energy Division of the NDRD and the Association of Micronesian
                         Utilities (AMU) for: (i) sector data collection, statistics, and development of an information
                         management system, (ii) benchmarking of the utilities, and (iii) implementing the NEP. This
                         component will broaden the dialogue on important matters affecting the energy sector, including
                         developing a utilities reform program to improve sustainability of their operations. This dialogue and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reform program will be developed in close consultation with other development partners to avoid
                         overlap, and to leverage existing initiatives in that space.

                         This component will also support the overall coordination, management and monitoring functions of
                         the project carried out by the Energy Division of the NDRD in its role as Implementing Agency.
                         Furthermore, it will finance project implementation costs, including technical assistance (individuals
                         or firms), consultant fees (including a project implementation officer, a technical specialist, a finance
                         officer, a procurement advisor and a safeguards advisor), meetings of the Steering and Technical
                         committees, production of reports and other documentation or reference materials, studies,
                         workshops, training, and limited goods and equipment.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Component 1 and Component 2 have different safeguards issues and different approaches to
                         safeguards:

                         Component 1 investments are known and detailed in the project description. They are based on a
                         recently completed assessment of the state utilities’ technical performance and the priorities
                         identified in the State Action Plans under the National Energy Policy. The ESDP will fund the
                         following investments (all within power station footprints, except street light upgrades and


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         installation of prepaid meters) and provide technical assistance to the utilities for improving their
                         technical performance and implementing maintenance plans:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         a.      Kosrae Utility Authority (KUA): (i) Acquisition and installation of a new genset of 1.2MW
                         to improve fuel efficiency and reliability, and (ii) fuel injection services in all gensets, energy audits
                         and improvements to reduce consumption of power station internal services.

                         b.       Pohnpei Utilities Corporation (PUC): Acquisition and installation of new gensets of 24MW
                         total capacity to improve reliability and fuel efficiency to replace two inoperative gensets.

                         c.      Yap State Public Service Corporation (YSPSC): (i) Acquisition and installation of capacitor
                         banks, temperature compensated digital fuel meters and prepaid meters, and (ii) a major overhaul of
                         two White Superior gensets and acquisition and installation of new radiators.

                         d.       Chuuk Public Utility Corporation (CPUC): (i) Acquisition and installation of 200kW of grid
                         connected photovoltaic (PV) installed in the site of CPUC’s power plant and properties owned by the
                         State, and (ii) upgrade to a more efficient street public lighting system.

                         There will be no investments funded under Component 2, but the Energy Master Plans will prepare a
                         program of downstream investments. Feasibility studies for priority investments will include the
                         preparation of safeguards instruments so that the projects are ‘investment ready’. The locations of
                         downstream projects that may be identified and prioritized under the Master Plans are not yet known.
                         As an indication, technical studies and/or investment projects which are listed as priorities in the
                         State Energy Action Plans and which have potential environmental or social impacts include:

                         •        Grid connected solar PV on public buildings;
                         •        Hybridizing existing generation facilities with solar or wind power; studies for additional
                         application in un-electrified areas;
                         •        Sea wave power 4 MW plant construction;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Ocean technology/wave energy studies;
                         •        Waste oil-diesel blend pilot project;
                         •        Nanpil hydro plant refurbishment and assessment of expansion potential, including possible
                         river diversion;
                         •        Mini- and micro-hydro feasibility study reassessment;
                         •        Wind mapping; and
                         •        Solid waste, sewage and biomass studies.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Beverly Ann McLean (EASNS)
                         Penelope Ruth Ferguson (EASIS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              Component 1 will involve the replacement and
                         BP 4.01                                                upgrade of equipment within the existing power
                                                                                station footprints. Impacts will be manageable
                                                                                using routine mitigation measures common to the
                                                                                industry. An Environmental Management Plan
                                                                                (EMP) has been prepared for Component 1. The


                                                                        Page 3 of 9
                                                                         Master Planning process under Component 2 will
                                                                         lead to downstream investments. The location,
                                                                         nature and scale of these investments are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         currently unknown. An Environmental and Social
                                                                         Management Framework (ESMF) has been
                                                                         prepared to inform the studies, screen the
                                                                         downstream investments for environment and
                                                                         social impacts and outputs for the Master
                                                                         Planning process, capacity building and training.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           No natural habitats will be significantly degraded
                                                                         or converted for this project, however there is a
                                                                         possibility that they could be at risk from
                                                                         downstream investments identified under the
                                                                         Master Plans. The ESMF has provision for
                                                                         screening the investments for impacts on natural
                                                                         habitats and measures to mitigate these impacts.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes           The project is not envisaged to affect forests but
                                                                         the downstream investments emerging from the
                                                                         master plan may have impacts once implemented.
                                                                         The ESMF has provision for screening impacts of
                                                                         downstream investments on forests, including
                                                                         mitigating measures.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            There will be no pest management or
                                                                         procurement of pesticides for agricultural or
                                                                         public health purposes.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           No physical cultural resources will be impacted
                         BP 4.11                                         during Component 1 activities, as the physical
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         works are within existing power station footprints
                                                                         or government buildings. However there is a
                                                                         possibility that they could be at risk from
                                                                         downstream investments. The ESMF provides
                                                                         guidance on identification and protection of
                                                                         physical cultural resources for downstream
                                                                         investments in the Master Plan, consistent with
                                                                         this policy.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            The population of the FSM is predominantly
                                                                         Micronesian (99.9%) and does not conform to the
                                                                         World Bank definition of Indigenous Peoples.
                                                                         The policy is therefore not triggered. However, a
                                                                         Country-level social assessment is included in the
                                                                         ESMF and identifies areas for State-level social
                                                                         assessment to guide State energy sector Master
                                                                         Planning. This assessment will identify any
                                                                         pockets of Indigenous Peoples or other sources of
                                                                         vulnerability that will inform downstream project
                                                                         design.



                                                                 Page 4 of 9
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes             Though the present project will have no currently
                            4.12                                                known land acquisition and resettlement impacts,
                                                                                downstream projects to be identified and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                prioritized under the Master Plans that are one of
                                                                                the outputs of the project may have resettlement
                                                                                implications. A Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                                (RPF) has been prepared to guide development of
                                                                                resettlement instruments for land acquisition as a
                                                                                result of future investments in the energy sector.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           Yes             Dams are not part of the proposed physical works
                                                                                in Component 1. Renovation of the existing
                                                                                hydropower scheme is a potential downstream
                                                                                project. The ESMF provides guidance on the
                                                                                requirements of this policy for downstream
                                                                                investments under the Master Plan.
                            Projects on International        No                 There are no international waterways within the
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                area of influence of the project.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 There are no disputed areas in FSM.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The issues associated with the power station and network upgrades in Component 1 are routine
                              and can be mitigated using standard practices as documented in the EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The future investments planned in Component 2 are currently unknown, and therefore the
                             safeguards issues are undefined. It is foreseeable that, without mitigation, there could be large
                             scale or significant impacts from potential investments such as wave energy, waste to energy
                             projects, and the renovation of the Nanpil hydropower scheme.

                             The benefits from the Energy Master Plans include a focus energy efficiency improvements on the
                             supply and demand side of the grid, education and awareness of energy efficiency, and a focus on
                             increasing the percentage of renewable energy generation across the FSM.

                              A key consideration is ensuring that the screening and impact assessment in the Master Planning is
                              consistent with the safeguard policies and that the safeguards documents prepared for priority
                              projects meet Bank requirements. The procurement of a safeguards advisor, the procurement of
                              social and environmental specialists as part of the Master Planning team, integrating the principles
                              and guidelines of the safeguard policies into the Master Plan, and the close supervision by the task
                              team will ensure that the Bank requirements are met throughout this process.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Component 2 will not fund any investments, but will prepare Master Plans that will detail a future
                              investment program. Priority investments will have feasibility studies and safeguard documents


                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                           prepared during project implementation in order to be ‘investment ready’. Therefore there is
                           potential for the Master Plans to have long term or indirect impacts through the implementation of
                           future investments. These may or may not be funded by the Bank.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Indirect and long term issues are not yet defined, and will depend on the screening and
                           prioritization processes, and the final list of investments, however, they may include land
                           acquisition and resettlement, land clearance, the use of the coastal and marine area (wave energy),
                           use of water (hydro) and discharges to air (waste to energy plants, biogas, diesel gensets).

                           The long term benefits of the project will be improved efficiency and reliability of electricity
                           supply and in some areas will mean electrification. This directly benefits all consumers
                           (commercial, government and residential) and will mean less interruptions/black outs, and could
                           lead to more affordable and sustainable tariffs.

                           Integrating the principles and guidelines of the safeguard policies into the Master Plan will help to
                           guide the identification and management of impacts in downstream projects in a manner consistent
                           with World Bank policies.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The activities for Component 1 were selected on the basis that the impacts were low and/or easily
                           mitigated. The assessment of alternatives for future investments will be integrated into the Master
                           Planning process, with the aim to ensure that projects with significant, unmitigated impacts are not
                           considered viable alternatives.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           There is currently no capacity for safeguards in the implementing agency and very little in the
                           utilities. Institutional capacity for safeguards will be developed during the project. A part-time
                           safeguards advisor will assist the implementing agency and state utilities implement and monitor
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the safeguards requirements of the project. Key tasks will be to: (i) conduct training on World
                           Bank safeguards policies and the EMP and ESMF with the implementing agency, Association of
                           Micronesian Utilities and state utility representatives; (ii) integrate the EMP and ESMF
                           requirements into the Project Implementation Manual; and (iii) integrate the EMP and the ESMF
                           into TORs and contracts for all suppliers and consultants, reviewing and commenting on bid
                           responses to TORs, reviewing and commenting on the safeguards components of the Master
                           Planning process (including any ESIA, EMP or RPFs prepared), assist with consultation strategies,
                           and otherwise assisting the implementing agency to implement and supervise actions under the
                           EMP and the ESMF.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The Energy Master Plans have a wide range of stakeholders because of the impact energy has on
                           commerce and livelihood. A consultation plan is provided in the ESMF. The plan has identified
                           the following stakeholders:

                           • National Energy Workgroup, comprising key national government departments; State Energy
                           Workgroups; departments responsible for women’s and youth development; Division of
                           Environment and Sustainable Development; Office of Environment and Emergency Management,
                           Health and Social Affairs, and Education at national level; commercial operational arms of


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                           Departments such as the FSM Telecommunications Corporation, and the equivalent agencies at
                           State level (including the four State EPA);
                           • Local/municipal governments, tribal councils and traditional village leaders;
Public Disclosure Copy




                           • Civil society and non-governmental organizations (organized under the umbrella Federated
                           States of Micronesia Alliance of Non-Governmental Organizations (FANGO));
                           • Residential and commercial electricity users; and
                           • Neighborhoods surrounding project investments in Component 1, and priority investments
                           prepared under Component 2.

                           Consultation has been planned across the four year project time frame, but will be most intense
                           during the Master Plan preparation phase. The information from consultation will be used to
                           inform the content of the Master Plans, the priority projects and the key mitigation methods in the
                           safeguard documents.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                             21-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                          20-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Micronesia, Federated States of                                         10-Mar-2014
                           Comments: March 10 in Yap, Chuuk and Kosrae; March 12 in Pohnpei. Documents were
                                         disclosed at the utilities' offices and, in the case of Chuuk, also on the utility website.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                             21-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                          20-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Micronesia, Federated States of                                         10-Mar-2014
                           Comments: March 10 in Yap, Chuuk and Kosrae; March 12 in Pohnpei. Documents were
                                         disclosed at the utilities' offices and, in the case of Chuuk, also on the utility website.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [          ]   No [    ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector       Yes [          ]   No [    ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [          ]   No [    ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?

                                                                        Page 7 of 9
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?




                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Roberto Gabriel Aiello
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Michel Kerf (SM)                          Date: 20-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
