                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA1064
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Uruguay                           Project ID:    P149069
                            Project Name:     Uruguay Drought Events’ Impact Mitigating Investment Project Financing
                                              (P149069)
                            Task Team         Cristina Savescu
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       20-Oct-2014                         Estimated   02-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GMFDR                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Energy and mining (50%), General public administration
                                              sector (30%), Hydropower (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Other economic management (70%), Other public sector governance (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       150.00           Total Bank Financing:  150.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   150.00
                              Total                                                                                   150.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Program Development Objectives of this proposed operation are to enhance the Government of
                           Uruguay’s efforts to mitigate the effect of adverse weather conditions on its fiscal accounts and
                           enhannce the efficiency of the Government’s risk management framework used to mitigate these
                           risks.

                                                                      Page 1 of 5
                         3. Project Description
                         This proposed operation will provide contingent financing to the FEE, through the National
                         Development Corporation, in events that combine drought shocks with insufficient resources at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         FEE to cope with them. The loan will be accompanied by the sovereign guarantee from the Oriental
                         Republic of Uruguay. The contingent financing will be triggered according to:

                         i.       The rules of use of the FEE funds set in the decree 422/011 ensuring that funds can be
                         transferred to UTE only in specific adverse weather conditions.

                         ii.     The contingent financing will be triggered once the FEE own funds fall to or below a
                         minimum level set at US$50 million to ensure that the GoU will use its own resources accumulated
                         at the FEE in circumstances in which, despite the fact that the first trigger is activated (adverse
                         weather conditions), there is no need to disburse as the FEE has sufficient funds to face the probable
                         increased electricity generation costs associated to the weather shock.

                         As the project seeks to contribute to further strengthening of the governance and efficiency of the
                         FEE, the following will form legal covenants of the Loan Agreement:

                         iii.    Not later than March 30th of each year during Project implementation, the Borrower shall
                         cause CONAFIN AFI S.A. to: (i) submit to the MEF for its review and approval an annual operating
                         budget relating to expenses incurred by CONAFIN AFI S.A. in managing the FEE; and (ii) make
                         said budget publicly available [on CONAFIN AFI S.A.’s website].

                         iv.     During Project Implementation, the Borrower shall cause CONAFIN AFI S.A. to prepare
                         and publish [on CONAFIN AFI S.A.’s website], on a quarterly basis, a report on the current balance
                         of the FEE and the investments made with its funds during the corresponding period.

                         v.       Not later than April 30th of each year during Project implementation, the Borrower shall
Public Disclosure Copy




                         cause CONAFIN AFI S.A. to prepare, a report assessing the Objective Value of the Fund’s Coverage
                         for the purposes set forth in Article 3 of Decree 442/011.

                         vi.     The Borrower shall cause CONAFIN AFI S.A. to ensure that the FEE maintains, throughout
                         the implementation of the Project, a minimum balance of $500,000 to cover for the costs relating to
                         the management of FEE’s funds.

                         Given that the Borrower CND and CONAFIN AFISA are separate entities vested with legal
                         personality a subsidiary agreement between these two would be required as an Effectiveness
                         Condition. The Subsidiary Agreement would ensure the obligation of CONAFIN AFISA to comply
                         with the Anti-Corruption Guidelines.


                         The project will have one component: Leveraging the FEE ability to cushion drought shocks. This is
                         the only component of this operation. The component consists of the contingent financing provided
                         to CND that will on-lend the proceeds to the FEE through the trustee CONAFIN AFI S.A for the
                         purposes set in the Decree 442 in the event of drought conditions. This contingent financing will
                         contribute to reducing the probability of Government having to transfer resources to UTE and the
                         amount of these additional transfers needed by UTE to face drought related unexpected costs of
                         electricity generation.


                                                                      Page 2 of 5
                         The Financial Management (FM) implementation arrangements will be the same operating at the
                         company level at National Development Corporation (CND) and its 100 percent controlled company
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Corporación Nacional Financiera Administradora de Fondos de Inversión S.A. (CONAFIN AFI S.
                         A.), since the project comprises an operation with a contingent payment upon meeting the
                         disbursement –linked indicators.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed Project, which involves 100 percent contingency, does not contemplate any physical
                         investments but rather will provide funding to an Energy Stabilization Fund. In addition, none of the
                         disbursements will be linked to carrying out any specific activities. Therefore, there will be no a
                         physical Project location and the Project does not have any safeguards implications.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       No               The proposed Project, which involves 100 percent
                          BP 4.01                                             contingency, would provide funding to an Energy
                                                                              Stabilization Fund under certain conditions
                                                                              (parametric disbursement linked indicators, level
                                                                              of the FEE and the GOU’s request), aimed at
                                                                              providing buffers to help manage temporary
                                                                              drought and energy price shocks, avoiding
                                                                              disruptive shutdowns or sharp tariff increases that
                                                                              would affect households, mainly the poorest ones,
                                                                              and businesses. Since none of the disbursements
                                                                              are linked to carrying out any specific investment
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              or physical works/interventions, the Project is not
                                                                              expected to cause any adverse environmental
                                                                              impacts.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No               This policy is not triggered since the Project does
                                                                              not require the significant conversion of natural
                                                                              habitats or critical natural habitats and will not
                                                                              take place in protected areas or ecologically
                                                                              important sites.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No               The policy is not triggered as the proposed
                                                                              Project will not finance any activity that could
                                                                              affect forest, the welfare of forest-dependent
                                                                              communities or the management of forests.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09            No               This policy is not triggered as the proposed
                                                                              Project will not finance any activity that involve
                                                                              the procurement or increased use of pesticides.




                                                                      Page 3 of 5
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No              The policy is not triggered as the proposed
                            BP 4.11                                             Project will not finance any activity that could
                                                                                affect sites with archeological, paleontological,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                historical, religious, or unique natural values.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No              This policy does not apply since indigenous
                                                                                peoples, as defined by the four required
                                                                                characteristics in OP 4.10, are not present in the
                                                                                project's area of influence.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No              This policy is not triggered because the proposed
                            4.12                                                Project will neither cause involuntary physical
                                                                                resettlement, nor negative impacts on livelihoods
                                                                                due to involuntary land taking or restriction of
                                                                                access to natural resources.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              The Policy is not triggered since the Project will
                                                                                not support the construction or rehabilitation of
                                                                                dams nor will it support other investments which
                                                                                rely on the services of existing dams.
                            Projects on International        No                 The proposed Project will not involve
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                international waterways as defined in the policy.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 This policy is not triggered since the proposed
                            7.60                                                Project will not involve disputed areas as defined
                                                                                under the Policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The disbursement category in this operation is the contingent capitalization, through the CND, of
                              the Energy Stabilization Fund, which is considered the final destination of the funds from the point
                              of view of the World Bank operation. As such there is no procurement as the operation does not
                              finance acquisition of goods, services, works, or infrastructure spending, and no safeguards are
                              triggered.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:

                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.

                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.



                                                                        Page 4 of 5
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Cristina Savescu
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/      Name: Auguste Tano Kouame (PMGR)                  Date: 21-Oct-2014
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 5 of 5
