                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA6276

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Dec-2013
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Dec-2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Congo, Republic of                Project ID:    P145627
                                                       Parent         P095251
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     Additional Financing for the Agricultural Development and Rural Roads
                     Rehabilitation Project (P145627)
   Parent Project    Agricultural Development and Rural Roads Rehabilitation Project (P095251)
   Name:
   Task Team       Amadou Oumar Ba
   Leader:
   Estimated       12-Nov-2013                         Estimated   29-Jan-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit: AFTA2                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (40%), General agriculture, fishing
                     and forestry sector (27%), Central government administr ation (17%),
                     Agricultural extension and research (8%), Crops (8%)
   Theme(s):         Rural markets (29%), Rural non-farm income generation (29%), Rural policies
                     and institutions (14%), Rural services and infrastructur e (14%), Other rural
                     development (14%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      10.50           Total Bank Financing:                2.50
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                      Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       8.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                              2.50
     Total                                                                                   10.50
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:



                                             Page 1 of 8
Is this a           No
Repeater
project?

2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The primary objective of the project is to assist the Republic of Congo to increase the ability of
   the rural poor to raise their income through the generation and promotion of improved agricultural
   technologies, the provision of market infrastructure, and the formulation and implementation of
   poverty-focused agricultural policies and expenditure programs.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
There are no fundamental changes in the design of the proposed additional financing. The AF has the
same PDO and four (4) components as the parent project.

Component 1: Building capacity in the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock and the Ministry of
Fisheries and Aquaculture (Original IDA US$2.36 million, Revised IDA US$2.86 million). The
objective of this component continues to be the strengthening of capacities in pro-poor policy
formulation, budgeting, and public expenditure management of the ministries in charge of
Agriculture and Fisheries, so that it can increase the efficacy and efficiency of their expenditure
programs. The AF will strengthen the staff’s basic skills in policy planning, budgeting, and
implementation (technical capacity) as well as the public expenditure management system, including
monitoring and evaluation, public finance management, and procurement. Of the total IDA funding
under the AF, US$ 0.5 million is earmarked for this component. This Component has 2 sub-
components:
Sub-component 1.1: Support to Ministries’ central and decentralized key services.
The sub-component will support services in charge of planning and monitoring and evaluation at
central level to ensure adequate monitoring of project activities and on the other hand, a specific and
targeted support will be given to decentralized services of the Ministries to deliver agricultural
services to beneficiaries. This support will especially cover the three departmental directorates of
agriculture, livestock and fisheries and their decentralized services (“secteurs”).
Sub-component 1.2: Support to specialized executing entities and NGOs. The sub-component will
support two entities involved with research, production and distribution of agricultural inputs,
namely the CNSA (Centre National des Semences Améliorées) and the CRAL (Centre de
Recherches Agricoles de Loudima). The sub-component will also finance Ministries’ entities which
are involved in agriculture extension services, smallholders’ support and other agricultural public
services, namely the CAT (Centre d’Appui Technique/Livestock), AGRI-CONGO, CDTA (Centre
de Démonstration des Techniques Agricoles), the pisiculture station and farms at Djoumouna and
Gamboma, and the CVTE (Centre de Vulgarisation des Techniques d’Elevage).

Component 2: Rehabilitating rural roads and market infrastructure (Original IDA US$7.97 million,
Revised IDA US$8.97 million). The objective of this component continues to be the provision and


                                             Page 2 of 8
maintenance of reliable all-season rural road infrastructure that connects rural communities to
markets (and other social services) so that they can sell marketable production at remunerative prices
and have access to affordable agricultural inputs. To achieve this objective, the project will finance
two types of activities: rehabilitation of rural roads and construction and rehabilitation of rural
market infrastructure. More specifically, in the selected areas of concentration, the AF will finance
activities related to rehabilitation and maintenance of rural roads, construction and maintenance of
market infrastructure. Under the AF, 80 km of rural roads will be rehabilitated and some 4 market
infrastructures will be constructed or rehabilitated. Of the IDA funding under the AF, US$1.0 million
is earmarked for this component.

Component 3: Supporting productive activities and sustainable livelihoods in rural areas (Original
IDA US$3.80 million, Revised IDA US$4.80 million). The objective of this component continues to
be the increase in capacity of rural producers, especially subsistence-oriented farmers, in targeted
areas to raise their productivity and income. This objective will be achieved by financing
complementary activities that meet the specific needs of farmers, livestock raisers, fish breeders, and
selected non-farm producers. Project support will be in the form of micro projects which will be
selected according to a value chain logic, i.e., micro projects that reinforce and benefit each other and
that cover activities from production, to processing, storage, transportation, and marketing. The
project will provide financial incentives through a matching grant mechanism to fund Producer
Associations to ease the adoption of improved technologies. The typical bundle of complementary
activities will include generating and disseminating improved production technologies (including
accessing improved agricultural, fisheries and livestock inputs, dissemination and demonstration of
new technologies), drying facilities, acquisition of small transformation and processing equipment,
collection and distribution platforms for agricultural and fisheries products, and market information,
and strengthening the capacity of Producer Associations.
This component will strengthen the capacity of Producer Associations through training and easy
access to ICT. It will also support the development and intensification of horticulture and poultry
production in the vicinity of urban areas of Brazzaville and Pointe Noire, and also pursue the
rehabilitation of centers of production and multiplication of fish breeding. To make improved seeds
and planting material available to farmers and to demonstrate their benefits, and to encourage the
diffusion and adoption on a large scale of these improved technologies, agricultural extension advice
will be provided to select Producer Associations. The PIU will pass a contract with the Chefs de
Secteur of MAE and private extension advisors if necessary to establish nurseries and demonstration
plots. These sites will be used to familiarize farmers with new production technologies.
The matching grants are one-time capital grants awarded to Producer Associations for the adoption
of superior technologies in the production and post-harvest areas. The matching grant is open to all
eligible Producer Associations or cooperatives organized around given productive and/or commercial
activity. Following criteria will guide the selection of proposals: (i) the Beneficiary shall be a
Producer Association organized around given productive and/or commercial activity; (ii) the
proposed innovative activity must be technically viable; (iii) it must have a public good element; and
(iv) it must be economically and financially viable. The formula for the matching grant will build on
the existing mechanism of the parent project (with a 5-10 percent beneficiary contribution). For the
introduction of new more market oriented technology like processing equipment and production of
fish food, the matching grant will be a maximum of 85 percent contribution from the project,
depending on the costs and economic and financial viability of the particular technology.

Component 4: Conducting project coordination and management (Original IDA US$2.98 million,
Revised IDA US$2.98 million). The objective of this component is to finance: (i) the operating costs
of the PIU and of the different project executing agencies; (ii) the monitoring and evaluation of

                                              Page 3 of 8
  project activities; (iii) the communication of project activities to different audiences; (iv) the hiring
  of staff (in addition to the existing staff), consultant services, workshops, and training.
   4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
  analysis (if known)
  Departments of Brazzaville/Pool (Peri-urban areas of Brazzaville, Boko, Louingui, Goma Tse-Tse,
  Ignié et Ngabé) ;
  Departments of Plateaux/Cuvette (Ngo, Gamboma, Ollombo, Abala, Oyo, Owando et Makoua);
  Departments of Kouilou/Niari/Pointe Noire (Hinda, Mvouti, Dolisie, Louvakou, zones périurbaines
  de pointe Noire)
  Departments of Bouenza/Lekoumou (Madingou, Mfouati, Mabombo, Yamba, Sibiti et Mayéyé)
   5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
  Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTSN)
  Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)
  Melissa C. Landesz (AFTSG)

   6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
   Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes
   BP 4.01
   Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes               The Additional Financing triggers OP 4.04, as
                                                         some of the project activities involve or affect
                                                         some natural habitats (e.g. roads in forest areas).
   Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

   Pest Management OP 4.09              Yes

   Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
   BP 4.11
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        Yes

   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes
   4.12
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The envisaged nature of the activities to be supported under the proposed Additional Financing is
     not expected to generate any different and/or additional negative environmental and social impacts


                                                 Page 4 of 8
  than initial activities. The PIU is responsible for ensuring that operators of new technologies and
  micro-projects comply with safeguard obligations. The PIU environmental and social specialist is
  responsible for the implementation of all the provisions of the safeguard instruments. In that
  respect, the specialist will ensure inter alia that: (i) the sub-projects and micro-projects are duly
  screened for their environmental impact, and, where required, their ESMPs are prepared and
  executed in a timely manner; (ii) the bidding documents for the constructions include the relevant
  environmental and social aspects the contractors must consider in their proposals, and (iii) the
  building contracts include appropriate descriptions of the management of potentially dangerous
  wastes. To date, it has not been necessary to prepare Resettlement Action Plans, but, if they are
  needed, they will be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed according to the guidance in the RPF.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  Project impacts before and after Additional Financing will be similar. No large scale, significant
  and/irreversible impacts are expected after restructuring the project.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  The environmental and social mitigation measures summarized in the ESMF, PMP, and the RPF,
  as well as the approved specific mitigation measures, will be executed, monitored and reported in:
  (i) a specific Safeguard Monitoring Report and (ii) the Environmental and Social Safeguards
  section of the periodic project progress reports. Follow-up responsibility for the above is vested in
  the PCU.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The original project was classified as Category B. An Environmental and Social Management
  Framework (ESMF), Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and Pest Management Plan were
  prepared, consulted upon and disclosed in October/November 2006. Between 2010 and 2013, 26
  Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) were prepared and implemented for 36
  road segments financed in the original project. During the same period, 20 ESMPs for 22 market
  infrastructures financed by the project. Between March and December 2011, as part of the mid-
  term review of project implementation, twelve environmental audits were undertaken, 9 focused
  on road segments and the other 3 on market infrastructures.. The audits the road segments
  concluded that, while the ESMPs were satisfactorily implemented in about half of the road
  segments, a number of measures (e.g. site clean-up, waste management, drainage, and awareness-
  raising with local communities) were found lacking in several segments. The audits of market
  infrastructures found that ESMPs had been partially implemented and that measures related to
  security and safety of work sites, waste management, adequate facilities and equipment for
  workers, and awareness-raising with local communities had not been adequately implemented.
  The safeguards instruments have been updated to include additional guidance on due diligence.

  During implementation of the AF, the project will undertake environmental audits in some of the
  longer road segments to ensure that environmental management measures have been implemented;
  remedial measures will be undertaken if necessary.
  At the mid-term review, Management decided that OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) should be
  triggered, as certain aspects of the project could apply to all “departements” in the country,
  including areas inhabited by indigenous communities. An Indigenous Peoples Planning
  Framework (IPPF) was prepared, consulted upon and disclosed in 2012. The IPPF has guided
  consultations and helped communities with benefit-sharing for the micro-projects. Indigenous


                                             Page 5 of 8
  Peoples Plans will be prepared during project implementation. This AF triggers OP 4.04, as some
  of the project activities involve or affect some natural habitats (e.g. roads in forest areas). The
  updated ESMF includes guidance for mitigating impacts on natural habitats.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Key stakeholders include: project affected persons and communities, host communities, local
  governments (communal and departmental councils), NGOs, and local and national staff of the
  ministries of Agriculture and fishery. Project preparation has been participatory at village level, at
  civil society level, as well as at local and departmental administration level.
  The result of the public consultations, carried out in conjunction with the preparation of the
  safeguards instruments, confirm a solid support for the implementation of the project. The
  implementation of the project has further enhanced project support at all levels of stakeholders.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01-Oct-2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               08-Dec-2006
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Congo, Republic of                                           01-Oct-2006
  Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01-Oct-2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               08-Dec-2006
"In country" Disclosure
  Congo, Republic of                                           01-Oct-2006
  Comments:
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01-Jun-2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               12-Dec-2012
"In country" Disclosure
  Congo, Republic of                                           01-Jun-2012
  Comments:
 Pest Management Plan
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?               Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01-Oct-2006
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               08-Dec-2006
"In country" Disclosure
  Congo, Republic of                                           01-Oct-2006
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the


                                              Page 6 of 8
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
 project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
 in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
 Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
 Indigenous Peoples?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Sector Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the project cost?



                                            Page 7 of 8
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Amadou Oumar Ba
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 20-Dec-2013
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Severin L. Kodderitzsch (SM)                 Date: 21-Dec-2013




                                             Page 8 of 8
