                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA7281
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kyrgyz Republic                    Project ID:    P133446
                            Project Name:      Electricity Supply Accountability and Reliability Improvement Project
                                               (P133446)
                            Task Team          Ani Balabanyan
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       21-Apr-2014                           Estimated   25-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: ECSEG                                  Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (80%), Energy efficiency in Heat
                                               and Power (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Other accountability/anti-corruption (50%), Other urban development (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        25.47           Total Bank Financing:  25.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                  25.00
                              Free-standing TF for ECA                                                                      0.47
                              Total                                                                                        25.47
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed development objective is to improve the reliability of electricity supply in the project
                           area and strengthen the governance of Severelectro’s operations.


                                                                        Page 1 of 6
                          3. Project Description
                         The project involves three components: (i) investments in targeted segments of distribution
                         infrastructure, (ii) incorporation of Management Information Systems, and (iii) institutional
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strengthening.

                         Component 1 – Distribution infrastructure strengthening: This component will help improve power
                         supply reliability and reduce losses in the distribution network by supporting priority investments to
                         strengthen the distribution infrastructure of Severelectro (SE). The targeted assets are part of a
                         comprehensive investment plan prepared during the project preparation, and are selected based on
                         their potential for reducing losses and improving power supply reliability. The selected investments
                         include construction of new medium-voltage substations in Bishkek, and replacement of meters for
                         high-consumption customers in Chui region.

                         Component 2 – Customer Service and Corporate Management System Improvement: This
                         component will provide SE with information tools to improve quality of services provided to its
                         customers (power supply and commercial matters), and to enhance overall efficiency of its
                         performance in all business areas; the latter will also help the company in identifying losses and
                         revenue leakages in its operations. To that end, the component will finance supply, installation and
                         commissioning of selected MISs, training to SE employees to apply them, and limited investments
                         into hardware to support the MISs. The MISs will be set-up company-wide and capture all three key
                         areas of SE’s operations: commercial management, corporate resources management, and power
                         network planning and operations. The specific MISs and their technical and functional specifications
                         will be determined based on ongoing assessments and will likely include incorporation of a
                         Commercial Management System, an Incidents Recording and Management System, and a Corporate
                         Resource Management System.

                         27.     Component 3 – Institutional Strengthening and Project Implementation Support: This
                         component will support two key activities for the smooth implementation of the project and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sustainability of project outcomes: (i) implementation support for project management, including
                         monitoring and evaluation and incremental operating expenses of the Project Implementation Unit
                         (PIU) under SE; and (ii) technical assistance to SE to improve its business processes, strengthen its
                         governance and make the company more customer focused. The technical assistance will include
                         strengthening of SE’s procurement system and financial reporting and accountability mechanism,
                         and improving SE’s business processes.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will capture the service area of Severelectro involving around 527,000 customers
                         (504,000 residential and 23,000 non-residential customers) in Bishkek city, and Chui and Talas
                         regions.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Arcadii Capcelea (ECSEN)
                         Asli Gurkan (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                                                              Yes



                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                            Environmental Assessment OP/
                            BP 4.01Habitats OP/BP 4.04
                            Natural                               No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09               No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/       No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP        Yes
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The safeguards issues in the project are expected to arise from Component 1 (Distribution
Public Disclosure Copy




                              infrastructure strengthening), which will support construction of three new medium voltage
                              substations. These constructions are of very small scale (facilities with the size of about 20x20
                              meters) and would use so called “sandwich panels” technology, and thus the potential
                              environmental impacts will be associated only with removing the asphalt and of the top soil,
                              constructing foundations and installing new electricity equipment. Overall, the project is expected
                              to bring social and economic benefits such as improvements in social conditions through better
                              quality and availability of power supply and reductions of power losses. At the same time,
                              construction of the substations may generate some adverse environmental impacts, such as: (a)
                              dust and noise: these impacts occur during the construction activities; (b) waste handling and spill
                              response: the construction activities will generate some solid and liquid wastes including, machine
                              oil, paints, and solvents. Minor spills of fuel and other materials are likely to occur during the
                              course of civil works. Improper handling of on-site wastes and response to spills could result in
                              adverse effects on the local environment including groundwater and soil; (c) health and safety
                              risks while implementing construction activities and installing of electrical equipment, etc.; (d)
                              traffic disturbance in the vicinity of the construction sites. All these impacts are site specific, short
                              term and could be easily avoided or reduced by applying relevant preventive or mitigation
                              measures as well as best construction practices, which are well known and applied in the country
                              and detailed in the EMP. Given that the above specified risks are minor and the project was
                              classified by the World Bank’s safeguards team as Category “B”.



                                                                           Page 3 of 6
                           Income losses are expected for a small number of individuals as a result of the construction of sub-
                           station in one of the project sites. The impacted individuals include: an entrepreneur, who is
                           currently leasing the land plot from the municipality to manage a parking lot in Bishkek, and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           guards that he has hired to help manage the parking lot. The 5-year lease that is currently in effect
                           for the parking lot will need to be terminated early as a result of construction activities. The Bank
                           team visited this project site during the pre-appraisal mission together with safeguards consultant
                           hired by the PIU and SE staff. SE has prepared a RAP, which documents anticipated impacts and
                           affected individuals from the construction of the substation (Orto-Say).
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Long term project impacts are indirect and associated with the social and economic benefits, such
                           as improvements in social conditions through better quality and availability of power supply and
                           reductions of power losses.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           To address the project impacts the borrower has prepared for all three substations to be constructed
                           under the project Checklist Environment Management Plans (EMPs) which follow simplified
                           safeguards procedure for projects involving small-scale, low risk construction works. The EMPs
                           cover typical preventive and mitigation approaches to common civil works contracts with
                           localized impacts, specifying also monitoring and implementing arrangements. While SE has
                           overall project implementation responsibility, the implementation of EMPs is assigned to the
                           dedicated Project Implementation Unit (PIU) of SE. The responsibilities of the company and the
                           PIU with respect to safeguards issues will include the following: (a) ensuring that the requirements
                           of the World Bank safeguards policies as well as national environmental laws and regulations are
Public Disclosure Copy




                           met and that all measures set out in the EMPs are implemented; (b) ensuring that Project
                           environmental and social commitments of the construction contractors are fulfilled; (c) reporting
                           on the status of EMPs’ implementation to SE and the World Bank. During the construction phase,
                           monitoring of the implementation of the EMPs will be funded as part of incremental operating
                           costs under Component 3. The construction works contracts will include a provision requiring
                           implementation of mitigation measures stipulated in the EMP during the civil works, and will be
                           the responsibility of the firm selected to execute these works. The provisions of the EMPs will be
                           used for the following: (i) inclusion of the environmental requirements in the project Operational
                           Manual; (ii) inclusion of the environmental requirements in the construction contracts, for both the
                           technical specifications and bills of quantities; the contractors will be required to include relevant
                           costs in their financial bids; (iii) defining the responsibility of the PIU to ensure compliance with
                           the EMPs; (d) specifying mitigation and avoidance measures during implementation of the
                           proposed activities; and (e) monitoring and evaluating mitigation/avoidance measures identified in
                           site-specific reviews and in the EMPs. The PIU will report on implementation of the EMPs and on
                           environmental performance of substations’ construction as part of semi-annual Progress Reports to
                           be presented to the WB.

                           SE prepared a site-specific Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and screening reports. The objective
                           of the RAP is to help identify the profile of individuals that would be impacted, and to describe the
                           actions that would be used to address impacts in terms of involuntary resettlement, termination of


                                                                      Page 4 of 6
                           lease, job and income losses. Under OP 4.12 policy, information disclosure, periodic
                           consultations, and setting up a robust grievance redress system to document and monitor social
                           impacts (not only on resettlement, but also other issues caused by the project-funded activities)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           throughout the implementation are required.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The draft EMPs were disclosed in the country on February 19, 2014 (http://www.severelectro.kg/
                           ru/ and http://www.energoforum.kg) for their public consultation. The public consultation of
                           EMPs took place on February 26, 2014 and concluded that the documents specify all potential
                           impacts and necessary avoidance and mitigation measures. The draft RAP was disclosed on
                           February 10, 2014 and consulted with PAPs on February 13, 2014. The finalized versions of the
                           EMPs, the RAP and the screening reports (in English and Russian) were sent to Infoshop and
                           posted on SE's website on March 2, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   28-Feb-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kyrgyz Republic                                                  19-Feb-2014
                           Comments: The EMPs for three substations two be constructed under the project were disclosed
                                         in the country
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   28-Feb-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kyrgyz Republic                                                  10-Feb-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [     ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector       Yes [     ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [     ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?


                                                                     Page 5 of 6
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Ani Balabanyan
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                               Date: 12-Mar-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (SM)                             Date: 12-Mar-2014




                                                                        Page 6 of 6
