                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA6723
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bosnia and Herzegovina              Project ID:    P143844
                            Project Name:      DRINA FLOOD PROTECTION PROJECT (P143844)
                            Task Team          Guy J. Alaerts
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          28-Jan-2014                         Estimated   16-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSAR                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Irrigation and drainage (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (67%), Rural services and infrastructure (33%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          28.00               Total Bank Financing:      24.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            4.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                  24.00
                              Total                                                                                        28.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project's objective is to provide increased protection from flood events to agricultural and
                           commercial interests and communities in the project areas.
                            3. Project Description
                           This proposed Project has been identified as a key priority by BiH, which have been underlined by
                           the authorities after the December 2010 and February 2013 floods. The Project will address high-

                                                                        Page 1 of 10
                         priority flood protection investments as defined by the 2012 analytic study conducted under the
                         Regional Drina River Basin Program. The Project would only include those investments that do not
                         negatively impact neighboring or downstream countries; would not require extensive additional
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis; nor require additional management agreements amongst the riparians, thus averting
                         potential preparation and/or implementation delays

                         The key results will be a reduced land area prone to floods and increased flood protection for project
                         areas. The proposed PDO indicators are: (i) Land area prone to floods in each location (hectares) and
                         (ii) Flood protection level for each location (1-in-40 year flood protection for agricultural lands; 1-
                         in-100 year flood for semi-urban/urban communities).

                         The project would have the following components:

                         a.        Component 1 - Flood protection works and support for Bijelijna area (about US$17.60
                         million): This component will fund the civil engineering works and related investments for the flood
                         protection in the Bijeljina area, in the downstream flat plains near the confluence with the Sava. This
                         includes resources for the APCU at MAFWM including fiduciary personnel for procurement and
                         Financial Management, as well as Technical assistance as may be required for supervision of works
                         and contract management and providing administrative and coordination support to the Sava Water
                         Water Agency in Bijelijna. Funding will cover works, equipment purchase and land acquisition, as
                         well as project management support, the detailed designs and preparation of Bidding Documents, and
                         institutional strengthening. It is expected that this component will consist mostly of earth moving,
                         dike construction and/or re-construction, and limited river bank shaping work (culverts, rip-rap
                         cover, gabion placement, etc.). The dike will protect the Bijeljina town and the Janja and Amajlije,
                         as well as other smaller settlements, on the Lower Drina. The alignment of the new dike will be
                         parallel to the river and is based on an optimization depending on the distance to the river. It will
                         skirt the large natural floodplain to the east containing the Drina meanders and mouth, and which,
                         further east, is bounded by the Serbian territory. Thus, the dike would allow the continued function
                         of this floodplain as a natural overflow area which supports a healthy natural habitat for flora, fish
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and fowl. The preferred trajectory runs partly over government-owned land, but mostly over private
                         agricultural and some residential land. The dike will comprise three sections with a total length of
                         30.2 km, of which the middle part (from Glogovac pumping station to the road towards the Pavlovica
                         bridge) is considered the priority and to have the highest readiness. The dike will be about 1-2 m in
                         height. The upstream section, near Janja, has second priority. Funding will also provide for the
                         effective implementation of the social safeguards and environmental measures identified in the
                         Environmental and Social Assessment and accompanying documents.

                         b.      Component 2 - Flood protection works and support for Gorazde area (about US$10.40
                         million): This component will fundthe civil engineering works and related investments for the flood
                         protection in four clusters of works in the Bosnia Podrinje Canton (around Gorazde), in the Middle
                         Drina. This includes resources for the PIU at MAWFM including fiduciary personnel for
                         procurement and Financial Management, as well as Technical assistance as may be required for
                         supervision of works and contract management and providing administrative and coordination
                         support to the Sava River Watershed Agency in Sarajevo. The project will fund the works,
                         equipment, land acquisition, as well as the project management support, the detailed designs and
                         preparation of Bidding Documents, and institutional strengthening. It is expected that this
                         component will consist mostly of measures for river bed and bank consolidation (revetments,
                         parapets, culverts, rip-rap cover, gabion placement, etc.), the building of similar protective structures
                         for roads, bridges and other infrastructure along the river, and earth moving, dike construction and/or

                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                         re-construction. Works are envisaged along the Drina main stem (in, and near Gorazde town center)
                         as well as on the Praca, Hrenovica and Pothranjanski potok torrents in the Municipalities of Pale-
                         Praca and Ustikolina. The vulnerable land and inhabited areas are strung along both banks of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         river and its tributaries inside narrow and steep valleys. Most of the dikes and bank reinforcements
                         already exist, and where they need to be constructed anew, they will be located on government-
                         owned land. Funding will also provide for the effective implementation of the social safeguards and
                         environme ntal measures identified in the Environmental and Social Assessment and accompanying
                         documents.

                         Institutional and Implementation Arrangements:
                         The project will be implemented by the FBiH Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water (MoAFW)
                         Project ImplementationUnit (PIU) and the Agriculture Project Coordination Unit (APCU) in the RS
                         Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry (MoAWF). In the FBiH, the project is technically
                         supported by the Water Agency for the Sava River (based in Sarajevo); it operates under the FBiH
                         MoAFW and has significant experience in planning and managing the implementation of flood
                         protection works. The Ministry’s PIU will carry out project management including procurement, FM
                         and M&E. In the RS, the Public Institution “RS Waters” in Bijeljina, under supervision of the RS
                         MoAWF APCU will support the project at the technical level. Although the name and legal status of
                         this latter institution are new, it has long-term experience in implementing similar works on river
                         bank and flood control infrastructure. The Ministry’s APCU will carry out project management
                         including the procurement, FM and M&E. Both PIU and APCU are staffed with experienced staff for
                         the execution of daily project activities. The Bank assesses the PIU and APCU as adequate and
                         acceptable. The land acquisition will be carried out by the respective Municipalities, and these
                         committed budget for this purpose in 2015 - 2016.

                         The environmental permitting and land acquisition systems are in place in BiH, and are carried out at
                         the level of the Entities with functional ministries dealing with environment. The EIA laws and
                         requirements are in line with those established in the EU. The Entities handle water management
                         through two semi-independent Water Agencies (in FBiH) and the Public Institution “RS Waters” in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Bijeljina (in RS) that are operational and that focus on integrated river basin management, guided by
                         the EU Water Framework Directive; as such they are better positioned to manage water than some of
                         the neighboring countries. Water permits are issued for all developments and activities that require
                         water use or wastewater releases. Such Water Management Permits are issued based on the water
                         balance and assessment of the competing demands for water.

                         Social (including Safeguards)
                         Social Impact: The social impact of the project activities is expected to be generally positive as the
                         construction and rehabilitation works of dike systems in the locations of Bijeljina and Gorazde will
                         benefit both rural and urban populations living along the Drina river. Reconstructed and new
                         embankments will enhance the livelihoods of farmers who have their agriculture and horticulture
                         land in close proximity to the river as the land area prone to floods will be reduced and flood
                         protection increased. The dike system works will significantly increase the profitability of
                         agricultural activities in the area. In the short term, the project will likely generate temporary
                         employment for the local population in rehabilitation and construction works. Although men are
                         likely to benefit more than women from these opportunities, their family members will also benefit
                         from the increase in household income. An estimated 175,000 people live within the main
                         municipalities along the river of which an estimated 20,000 suffered direct economic losses caused
                         by flooding.



                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         Safeguards: The Project triggers OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. As the detailed designs
                         are not available at the appraisal stage and the entire alignments are not known yet, the exact
                         magnitude of footprints of the works and the land lots to be acquired has not been fully defined.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         However, based on the results of feasibility studies, some preliminary designs, field visits and
                         discussions held, the potential social impact that civil works may entail in terms of land acquisition
                         and resettlement is considered to be acceptably low to moderate. No physical displacement of
                         occupants (legal or illegal) or restriction of access to resources or income streams is expected under
                         the Project. As a guiding resettlement instrument, two separate Resettlement Policy Framework
                         (RPFs) have been developed for the Bijeljina and Gorazde areas. Positive and negative social effects
                         and mitigating measures related to potential resettlement impacts have been identified in line with the
                         provisions of OP/BP 4.12. Concrete mitigation measures will be spelled out in site-specific
                         Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) needed for the locations of Bijeljina and Gorazde. Preparation of
                         RAPs with full population census and an inventory of assets to be acquired has been initiated. For the
                         Bijeljina area, priority is on the development of the RAP for the 16 km long middle section (from the
                         settlement of Badovinci /Pavlovica road to Dasnica) which will be first constructed and the works
                         commencement is expected in mid-2015. The first drafts of RAPs will be submitted to the Bank by
                         February 15, 2014 for the Gorazde area and February 25, 2014 for Bijeljina. Advanced drafts are
                         expected in early March 2014.

                         As per the current available data, the construction of 33.7 km long dike in Bijeljina will affect some
                         238 ha of land but the exact number of land to be acquired is not known yet at this stage, nor is the
                         exact percentages of municipal land and privately owned land. The site-specific RAPs will provide
                         the necessary information and the exact nature of the land to be acquired; the number of the project
                         affected people based on the census and inventory of assets that have just been initiated. According
                         to the available data, it is expected that the Project will not affect any residential houses, objects or
                         business in either of locations. The rehabilitation works in Gorazde area will mainly be effected on
                         municipal land (though some works in the Pothranjenski creek may entail some land acquisition on
                         private land for securing the right-of-way). The affected people will receive compensation in
                         accordance with compensation standards specified in the RPFs and site-specific RAPs. The land
Public Disclosure Copy




                         acquisition costs have been estimated to amount approximately US$ 4.0 million. This will be
                         financed from counterpart funds.

                         Public Consultations and Disclosure: Public consultations were held during the preparation and
                         development of Resettlement Policy Framework (RPFs) and will continue for the preparation and
                         development of site-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for the locations of Bijeljina and
                         Gorazde respectively in order to: (i) limit the adverse impact on affected households; (ii) confirm
                         appropriate compensation entitlements; and (iii) identify vulnerable persons. Joint public
                         consultations meetings for the draft EA; EMPs and RPF were held in January 13, 2014 in Bijeljina
                         and January 16, 2014 in Gorazde and were disclosed on January 8, 2014 on the websites of the
                         respective line ministries. Final RPF in both English and local language was disclosed on January 10,
                         2014 in accordance with the relevant BiH laws and regulations, and the World Bank Operational
                         Policy 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.

                         Environment (including Safeguards)
                         The Project has been categorized as a World Bank Category B project, triggering OP 4.01 on
                         Environmental Assessment. The works envisaged under the project include construction,
                         rehabilitation and modernization of the drainage and flood protection infrastructure at selected sites
                         alond the Drina river and its tributaries – specifically in Bijeljina (RS), Gorazde, Ustikolina and Pale-
                         Praca (FBiH). At the upstream area of Gorazde where the river runs through narrow, steep terrain,

                                                                       Page 4 of 10
                         the identified priority works include river bank stabilization and erosion control. Further downstream
                         and closer to the confluence with the Sava river, in the Bijeljina and Janja area a new dike will be
                         constructed to prevent flooding in an expansive, flat floodplain. The Project will ensure that the new
Public Disclosure Copy




                         dike is conceived in such a manner so that it skirts the natural flood plain adjacent to the river, so that
                         this habitat can be maintained for fish, birds, native vegetation, etc. and as a natural overflow area
                         during high flow periods.

                         An Environmental Assessment for each of th e entities has been prepared prior to Appraisal, with one
                         Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for RS and five EMPs for FBiH. The documents were
                         subject to public consultations held in Bijeljina on January 13, 2014 and in Gorazde on January 16,
                         2014.

                         The EA also provides a review of the optimal placement of the dike in Bijeljina and Janja, while site-
                         specific provisions ensure that there are no long-term downstream hydrological impacts on the other
                         users. The EMPs have also confirmed that there are no sensitive natural habitats, forests or
                         ecosystems in the project area. The EMPs also includes provisions on chance findings during works
                         on the river, even though no specific cultural heritage sites have been identified during the
                         preparation missions, and as such OP 4.11 is not triggered.

                         The works envisaged on the river bank stabilization will include construction or reconstruction works
                         where standard environmentally sound practices will be implemented, on ensuring minimal
                         disturbances to the surrounding areas, flora, fauna and the population (dust, noise, leaks, spills,
                         machinery use, working hours, and safety on site). Protection of the river and re-routing the flow is
                         addressed in site-specific EMPs, as well as hydrologic implications of the construction works but
                         also once the river banks works are completed on the downstream users. The EMPs/EIA for the dike
                         sections in Bijeljina also focus on feasibility studies that include hydrologic assessments of the
                         downstream user impacts. The EMPS also include sound environmental provisions, on the sources
                         for the material that will be used in construction of the dike. All materials supplied will need to be
                         from licensed quarries or suppliers.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Other Safeguards Policies Triggered
                         OP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways is triggered as Drina is an international waterway and is
                         a tributary of the Sava and by extension the Danube Rivers. A notification has been sent by the
                         Client to the International Sava River Commission which was discussed at a session of the
                         Commission on October 8, 2013. Based on the minutes of meeting received from this session, there
                         have been no comments during the presentation and no objections or suggestions received in the time
                         period of 45 days after the presentation. The Sava Commission shall remain an open-communication
                         channel during the implementation of this Project.

                         On December 25, 2013 a letter was sent by th eMinister of Agriculture, Forestry and Water
                         Management of the Republic of Serbia in which support to the project is noted, along with a request
                         to be involved in the review of the technical aspects of the Project, once defined. The Client has
                         agreed to do so
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will span municipalities of Bijeljina, Janja, Gorazde, Foca-Ustikolina and Pale-Praca,
                         located in the watershed of the Drina river, and in both Entities of Bosnia and Herzegovina -
                         Republika Srpska and Federation BiH.


                                                                       Page 5 of 10
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Vera Dugandzic (ECSSO)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Esma Kreso (ECSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes           The civil engineering works on flood protection
                         BP 4.01                                         that will be financed under Component 1 will
                                                                         most likely have some adverse environmental
                                                                         impacts during the construction phase. The works
                                                                         will need to be carried out fully in line with the
                                                                         prepared Environmental Assessment and
                                                                         Environmental Management Plans that have been
                                                                         prepared and disclosed with public consultations.
                                                                         The works will most likely generate noise, dust,
                                                                         require adequate storage and management of
                                                                         wastes and protection of waterways during works.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The project implementation will require land
                         4.12                                            acquisition. The scope will be determined with
                                                                         precision as soon as the detailed designs will
                                                                         become available. For each works stage a RAP
                                                                         will be prepared, based on the agree RFPs. More
                                                                         information on potential social impact will be
                                                                         known after the field verification analyses for the
                                                                         RAPs ino the locations of selected municipalities
                                                                         of Bijeljina, and Gorazde. However, based on
                                                                         project information to date, planned civil works in
                                                                         the municipality of Gorazde will entail
                                                                         rehabilitation infrastructure works on public land
                                                                         - on the river bank itself. Works along the
                                                                         Pothranjenski Creek, however, while involving
                                                                         mostly municipally owned land, may involve also
                                                                         some private land. In the municipality of
                                                                         Bijeljina, new dike is planned to be constructed
                                                                         on both private and public land. Consultations
                                                                         with the affected farmers, owners of the private



                                                                 Page 6 of 10
                                                                                 land plots, have been held. Farmers have
                                                                                 expressed keen interest to sell their land plots to
                                                                                 the municipality as they are tired of seeing their
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 land flooded and crops/yields ruined.

                                                                                 No physical relocation or displacement is
                                                                                 anticipated under the project. As a guiding
                                                                                 resettlement instrument the Resettlement Policy
                                                                                 Frameworks (RPFs) have been developed and
                                                                                 disclosed. Public consultations with local officials
                                                                                 and affected farmers have been concluded and the
                                                                                 approved RFPs have been posted on public
                                                                                 websites and Infoshop in English and local
                                                                                 language on January 27 and 28, 2014.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No              Dikes and works to retain water will not exceed
                                                                                 1.5 meters at their highest points. Dikes are of a
                                                                                 dry design only in contact with water during
                                                                                 periods of flooding. Upper reaches of river
                                                                                 involves rehabilitation of existing banks.
                            Projects on International            Yes             No alteration in the quality and quantity of water
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 are expected, however due to the fact that the
                                                                                 Drina river is an international waterway between
                                                                                 Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as a
                                                                                 large tributary of the Sava River (Croatia is also
                                                                                 riparian country) the International Sava River
                                                                                 Commission has been used to notify riparian
                                                                                 countries, together with separate letters being sent
                                                                                 to both countries. No objections or complaints
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 have been received through the Sava
                                                                                 Commission, while the Government of Serbia has
                                                                                 sent a letter expressing their willingness to further
                                                                                 participate in the technical designs of the project.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project will involve a number of construction and re-construction activities on the flood
                              protection systems in the larger area of Bijeljina and Gorazde. In Gorazde (Gorazde, Ustikolna,
                              Praca, and Hrenovica municipalities) works are envisaged on river bank stabilization, erosion
                              control and river training. In Bijeljina a flood-protection dike is to be constructed. The anticipated
                              environmental impacts are small and can be easily mitigated through sound construction practices
                              and proper engineering works. The project implementation units will also develop hydrological
                              models to help anticipate further changes in the downstream areas, which as of now, are not


                                                                         Page 7 of 10
                           anticipated. Throughout project implementation the International Sava River Basin Commission
                           will remain a channel of communication with the other riparian countries - namely Serbia and
                           Croatia.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           None are expected.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The project will be implemented through existing PIUs in both entities, with long-term experience
                           in implementing World Bank projects. The Client has hired consultants to prepare the EA and
                           EMP documents, while the supervision of the implementation will remain within the PIUs.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders include the local population that will benefit the most from proper flood
                           protection measures, local government levels (municipalities), and the cantonal and entity-level
                           ministries responsible for water management and protection from waters, along with the
                           responsible water agencies.
                           During the preparation of the EA and EMP documents for all project sites, a number of meetings
                           was organized to bring together all levels of stakeholders, with a particular emphasis on the project
                           affected people.
                           The public consultations were organized together for the EA and RPF documents in order to reach
                           a broader project-affected audience. The consultations were held in Gorazde on January 16, 2014
                           while the consultations in Bijeljina were held on January 13, 2014. Both consultations have been
                           announced in the local papers, targetted invitations have been sent and the draft documents were
Public Disclosure Copy




                           made available for review (disclosed).
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        24-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     28-Jan-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bosnia and Herzegovina                                             24-Jan-2014
                           Comments: Disclosed on the PIU/ Ministry websites.
                                         http://portal.piusum.ba/Projekti/ProjekatzaštiteodpoplavauBiH/tabid/78/language/en-
                                         US/Default.aspx
                                         http://www.vladars.net/sr-SP-Cyr l/Vlada/Ministarstva/mps/media/vijesti/Pages/
                                         Plan_upravljanja_zivotnom_sredinom_i.aspx
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        28-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     28-Jan-2014


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bosnia and Herzegovina                                           10-Jan-2014
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?


                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Guy J. Alaerts
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)                 Date: 25-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
