                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSR5486
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Jul-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Uruguay                                      Project ID:           P124181
                            Project Name:      Sustainable Management of Natural Resources and Climate Change (P124181)
                            Task Team          Holger A. Kray
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          16-Sep-2011                                  Estimated   17-Nov-2011
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GFADR                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            Agricultural extension and research (28%), General agriculture, fishing and
                                               forestry sector (25%), Irrigation and drainage (18%), Pu blic administration-
                                               Agriculture, fishing and forestry (16%), Other Renewable Energy (13%)
                            Theme:             Climate change (33%), Other rural development (33%), Water resource
                                               management (27%), Land administration and management (4%), Envir onmental
                                               policies and institutions (3%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        55.00           Total Bank Financing:                                       49.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                              6.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                49.00
                              Total                                                                                                55.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                                                                                 Page 1 of 7
                         The development objective of the project is to support Uruguay’s efforts to promote farmer adoption
                         of improved environmentally sustainable agricultural and livestock practices that are climate smart.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         MGAP is promoting an innovative approach to management of natural resources and reduced impact
                         of climate variability in agriculture while improving agricultural competitiveness. Without such
                         integrated approach, climate change in the anthropogenic impacts on the country's natural resources
                         could result in accelerated degradation. The project intends to make agriculture in Uruguay more
                         productive                                    and more sustainable as a key to achieve a "green
                         growth" path and contribute to its climate change adaptation and mitigation priorities. The proposed
                         components would support policies and actions that make the environment a potential source of
                         growth from efficiency, innovation, and resilience to climate variability and change. In addition, the
                         proposed project will support the deployment of a #Climate Smart Agriculture# approach, which is a
                         core component of such growth, by promoting agricultural systems that can enhance productivity,
                         improve sustainable development and resilience, and support low carbon growth. The Project will
                         undertake a holistic landscape approach to land and water management, forestry, pastures, livestock,
                         ecosystem services and adaptation to climate change. Accordingly, the project will represent a
                         pioneering pilot approach and a unique opportunity to disseminate lessons and share country
                         experiences and information on emerging applications in the areas of climate-smart agriculture and
                         risk management in the Latin America region.

                         The project objective would be achieved through the following four components:

                          Component 1: Establishment of an Agricultural Information and Decision Support System (IDSS)
                         (Total cost $6.5 million of which $5.2m would be financed by IBRD and the balance by GOU). This
                         component would finance the creation of an online agriculture and climate information platform,
                         namely the Agricultural Information and Decision Support System (IDSS) that will integrate,
                         synthesize, and generate critical and timely information in relation to natural resource management,
                         short and medium term climate forecast as well as potential long term changes and impacts. Key
Public Disclosure Copy




                         outcomes of this component are: a) integrated climate and agriculture information and decision
                         support systems accessible to different users; b) expanded overall sector information to enable
                         MGAP to improve the targeting of it s future programs, including activities financed under
                         Component 2 of the project; c) identification of vulnerabilities and potential opportunities for natural
                         resources management and agricultural production systems due to climate variability; d)
                         quantification of uncertainties in climate information to increase confidence in the use of that
                         information; e) identification of technologies and methodologies that enhance the outcomes of on-
                         farm investments and reduce vulnerabilities to extreme climatic events; f) wider use of insurance to
                         cover climatic risks; g) identification of climate smart interventions and best practices, and h)
                         improved exchange of Uruguayan experience related to climate change mitigation and adaptation
                         measures with other countries, mainly through South-South exchanges.

                          Component 2: On Farm Investments for "Climate-Smart" Agriculture and Livestock Management
                         (Total cost $32.2 million of which $30.9 million would be financed by IBRD, and $1.3 million by
                         counterpart funds. This component would be implemented by MGAP's Rural Development
                         Directorate (DGDR) and would finance demand-driven subprojects presented by family producers
                         and medium-size farmers, with emphasis on on-farm investment proposals that would: a) reduce
                         farm vulnerability to extreme climatic events; b) improve farm productivity and sustainability; c)
                         increase the availability of water resources for irrigation and livestock consumption ; d) promote
                         adoption of an integrated approach to natural resources management practices in agriculture and

                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         livestock production systems, including improved water use efficiency and generation of biodiversity
                         benefits in natural pastures; and e) promote the adoption of energy efficiency measures and the
                         generation of cost effective and clean biomass energy in the agriculture sector. A comprehensive set
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of beneficiary and subproject eligibility criteria to screen investment proposals have been developed
                         and included in the Project Manual, a condition for Negotiations. In addition to technical assistance,
                         the project would provide training to farmers, regardless of their size, and to rural workers engaged
                         in natural resources management activities. Farmers# organization would receive institutional
                         strengthening to enhance their capabilities to assist their membership in the implementation of
                         natural resources management and climate change adaptation and mitigation activities. Key
                         outcomes of this component are: (i) the adoption of integrated natural resources management
                         practices and adaptation measures, with particular emphasis on increased on-farm availability of
                         water and improve d water resources management, to improve the long-term sustainability of farmers
                         # production systems as well as their resilience to extreme climatic events; (ii ) the implementation of
                         pilot investments aimed at mitigating emissions and increasing utilization of biomass for energy
                         generation; and (iii) by promoting investments that internalize the extreme climatic variability, the
                         project would minimize long term costs, enhance farm productivity, and reduce overall vulnerability.

                          Component 3: Capacity Building and Training (Total cost of $11.1 million, of which $9.3 million
                         would be financed by IBRD and $1.8 million by GOU). This component would finance activities
                         aimed at strengthening the capacity of farmers to address integrated natural resource and water
                         management approaches, as well as the institutional capacity of MGAP, specifically of its Natural
                         Resources Directorate (RENARE), to implement its natural resources management programs and
                         climate change strategy in the agricultural sector. Key outcomes of this component are: a) The
                         development and utilization of modern cartographic information integrated climate and agriculture
                         information and decision support systems accessible to different users; b) the updating of the
                         country's soil use maps; c) The improvement and integration of the existing GIS system in RENARE,
                         as a critical element of the ISDS, together with the cartography and soil information to be developed;
                         d) the adoption of modern methodologies for planning of land use at the farm level; e) the
                         development of an improved policy framework for water resources management; and f) a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         comprehensive training program for producers and service providers on sustainable techniques for
                         improved soil and water management.

                          Component 4: Project Management and M&E (Total cost of $4.1million, of which $3.6m would be
                         financed by IBRD and $1.2 million would be financed by GOU). This component would provide the
                         funds required for the efficient coordination and management of the project, including the
                         implementation of the entire subproject cycle, as well as financial management and procurement, In
                         addition, the component                  would include activities that cut across all project
                         components, including the operation of the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System, the
                         organization of the training program described in Component 3, and the design and implementation
                         of a communication strategy to disseminate results and lessons learned within the country and the
                         region.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The entire country, as proposals for potential sub-projects could be received from all rural areas of
                         the country. However, based on the current geographical distribution of the main production
                         systems, and therelative levels of climatic vulnerability, the project would be implemented with
                         emphasis in the northern and north/central regions of the country.



                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Angel Alberto Yanosky ()
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Marcelo Hector Acerbi (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes
                         BP 4.01
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           Through a letter submitted to the Bank in October
                                                                         2013, the GoU requested to trigger the Pest
                                                                         Management Safeguard Policy OP4.09. This GoU
                                                                         initiative is proactive. In full compliance with the
                                                                         Project Development Objective, the Project will
                                                                         not promote pesticide use, but promote its control
                                                                         and monitoring.

                                                                         The main rationale for the activation of OP4.09 is
                                                                         (i) to allow the Project to finance activities in
                                                                         support of Uruguay's efforts to improve its
                                                                         Integrated Pest Management (IPM) systems,
                                                                         mainly through support to technical assistance,
                                                                         consulting services, and knowledge management
                                                                         and (ii) to respond to current reform on the
                                                                         national legal framework for pest management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         The Borrower has included the above activities in
                                                                         the ESMF and incorporated the Pest Management
                                                                         Document into the ESMF as an annex.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No
                         4.12
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International        No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                         7.60




                                                                 Page 4 of 7
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The proposed project is not expected to have negative impact on the environment. No large or
                              significant impact is envisaged. Given the nature of the project, most project-financed
                              interventions are expected to be small investments at the farm level, with a substantial positive
                              impact on the environment as a result of better practices on natural resource management being
                              incorporated into the main production systems, especially on-farm soil and water management.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                Due to the fact that improved natural resources management is a key outcome of the project,
                              potential indirect and/or long-term impacts would be positive.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                Given the nature of the project, no alternatives relevant to safeguards were considered.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                In the context of a comprehensive ESMP prepared as part of project preparation, a detailed
                              assessment of environmental and social aspects was conducted, resulting in specific sections of a
                              detailed Project Manual, that includes environmental screening procedures, provisions to address
                              exceptional cases that could involve unforeseen safeguard issues, a restrictive list of investments
                              not financed by the project, training activities, and an M&E system that includes indicators and
                              targets relevant to safeguards. As part of the implementation of the ongoing Bank-financed
                              project, the PEU, as well as the Natural Resources Management staff of MGAPs Regional Offices,
                              have received training in EIA methodology and other safeguard-related matters, and therefore are
Public Disclosure Copy




                              well qualified to contract environmental specialist to assist in various phases of the sub-project
                              cycle. MGAPs capacity in GIS and EIA would continue to be strengthened, and an adequately
                              staffed PEU would be established to support MGAP in project implementation, including
                              safeguards.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                Key stakeholders are Uruguay's family and medium farmers. The main project features, including
                              eligibility criteria, investments to be supported and restricted, and screening /mitigation
                              mechanisms were presented and extensively discussed with individual farmers, area- and
                              production-based farmer organizations, service providers, as well as social entities (NGOs, Mesas
                              de Desarrollo Rural) through an extensive consultation process, mainly supported by the network
                              established by MGAP's Directorate of Rural Development (DGDR) and the highly decentralized
                              structure of the ongoing PPR project. The feedback obtained was duly processed, incorporated into
                              project design, and reflected in the Project Manual.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                             Date of receipt by the Bank                                        19-Sep-2011
                             Date of submission to InfoShop                                     19-Sep-2011


                                                                        Page 5 of 7
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          23-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       25-Jun-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uruguay                                                              24-Jun-2014
                           Comments: Originally, the GoU had prepared and in-country-disclosed a PMP on the project
                                         website in December 2013. However, and based on additional guidance by the
                                         Bank's Pest Management Safeguards Specialist for LAC, the PMP was later
                                         incorportaed in the ESMF. The revised ESMF has now being disclosed for in-
                                         country consultations, the results of which will be incorporated into the final version.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?



                                                                      Page 6 of 7
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Holger A. Kray
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Dianna M. Pizarro (RSA)                        Date: 15-Jul-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Laurent Msellati (SM)                          Date: 22-Jul-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
