                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC6351

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Egypt, Arab Republic of        Project ID:      P146007
                            Project Name:      EG: Household Natural Gas Connection Project (P146007)
                            Task Team          Husam Mohamed Beides
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          03-Feb-2014                    Estimated        27-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSEE                          Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Oil and gas (100%)
                            Theme(s):          City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (40%), Urban services and
                                               housing for the poor (30%), Other economic management (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    860.00                    Total Bank Financing:       500.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                  360.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     500.00
                              Total                                                                     860.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objective is to support the Government of Egypt goal of reducing
                           LPG subsidies through scaling up natural gas connections to households.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project will support the Government of Egypton-going program to expand the
                           household access to piped natural gas which aims to connect 800,000 households annually. EGAS
                         proposed that the World Bank financing focuses on investment targeted to connecting about 1.1
                         million households in 11 governorates over the three year implementation period of the proposed
                         project. The proposed investments are part of the household gas connection investments in services
Public Disclosure Copy




                         areas in these governorates under the concessions of two LDCs; Town Gas in the Giza, Ismaillia
                         Marsa Matrouh and Alexndria governorates and Egypt Gas in Qalubia, Menofia, Gharbia, Daqahlia,
                         Qena. Sohaj and Aswan governorates.

                         The proposed project’s design draws from the successful implementation experience of the Egypt
                         Natural Gas Connections project that supported the expansion of access to natural gas connections to
                         residents in Greater Cairo area and will have the following similar type of project components:

                         •       Component 1: Gas Distribution Network and Connection. This includes expansion of the
                         intermediate and low pressure gas distribution networks, installation of control units and conversions
                         of costumer’s appliances to allow connection of and supply of gas to the proposed new 1.1 million
                         households.

                         • Component 2: Pressure Reduction Stations (PRSs). The construction of PRSs to connect the
                         distribution networks in the project areas to the high pressure gas transmission networks. Currently
                         25 new PRSs area being considered for financing by the proposed project

                         • Component 3: Gas Transmission Connection. This component includes extending the gas high
                         pressure transmission network to supply gas to the new PRSs in the project areas. Twenty two high
                         pressure pipeline connections are currently being considered ranging from 50m – 38km of 185 km
                         total length.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be financing gas connection to about 1.1 million households in 11 governorates;
                         Giza, Alexandria, Marsa Matrouh, Ismaillia, Qalubia, Menofia, Gharbia, Daqahlia, Qena, Sohaj and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Aswan. The project will extend gas networks and services to areas in these governorates which are
                         currently covered and new areas as well.

                         The project is also a follow-up to an ongoing gas connection project supported by Bank covering the
                         greater Cairo area..
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The implementing agency of the proposed project will be the same as the on-going project gas
                         connection project. They know the Bank safeguards policy well. During implementation of on-going
                         gas connection project, the environment department of EGAS has established strict criteria for
                         construction of gas distribution infrastructure with an aim to ensure safety and to avoid any
                         disturbance to cultural and archeological properties. They also formulated an Environmental and
                         Social Management and Monitoring Framework which works well in mitigating the social and
                         environmental impacts. Through implementation of the on-going project, EGAS has strengthened its
                         existing Health, Safety, and Environment (HSE) Department. The on-going project implementation
                         demonstrates that environmental aspects have been adequately addressed by following sound
                         environmental procedures.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)
                           Africa Eshogba Olojoba (MNSEE)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes          Planned interventions trigger this policy due to
                           BP 4.01                                        due to the potential multi-dimensional
                                                                          environmental and social concerns that could be
                                                                          sensitive, diverse or unprecedented. Given that
                                                                          routing of the high pressure pipelines and exact
                                                                          locations of the PRS’es would not be known
                                                                          with certainty at appraisal time, an
                                                                          Environmental and Social Impacts Assessment
                                                                          Framework (ESIAF) will be the appropriate
                                                                          environmental assessment instrument. The
                                                                          ESIAF will be disclosed in-country and at the
                                                                          Infoshop prior to appraisal. in consideration of
                                                                          the fact that the project will finance construction
                                                                          of 25 Pressure Reduction Stations (PRS) and
                                                                          about 180 km of high pressure transmission
                                                                          pipelines. Site specific Environmental and
                                                                          Social Management Plans (ESMPs) will need to
                                                                          be prepared and disclosed by project appraisal
                                                                          for any PRS or high pressure pipeline of know
                                                                          site before appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No           This policy is not triggered.

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                No           This policy is not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Pest Management OP 4.09           No           The use of pesticides is not envisaged in this
                                                                          project.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes          This policy is triggered because of the project’s
                           BP 4.11                                        potential to affect archeological or cultural or
                                                                          religious sites. A chance find procedures will be
                                                                          prepared an attached as annex to the ESIAF.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No           There are no indigenous people in the project
                                                                          project areas.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes          This policy is triggered as the land acquisition
                           4.12                                           will not be avoidable for the construction of
                                                                          pressure reducing stations (PRS) and high
                                                                          pressure gas pipelines. The client will make
                                                                          efforts to minimize or avoid the impacts of
                                                                          involuntary resettlement, for instance using the
                                                                          vacant government land for the construction of
                                                                          PRSs and obtaining the land through a willing
                                                                          buyer and willing seller process. However,
                                                                          involuntary taking of land will not be avoidable,
                                                                          particularly for the high pressure gas pipelines.
                                                                                                                                 In consideration that exact the location of PRSs
                                                                                                                                 and alignment of high pressure gas pipeline
                                                                                                                                 would not have been determined by project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 appraisal, a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                                                                                 (RPF) will be prepared by appraisal.
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) or
                                                                                                                                 Abbreviated RAP will be prepared during
                                                                                                                                 project implementation by following the
                                                                                                                                 principles and procedures as set forth in the
                                                                                                                                 RFP. In case the location of any PRS and
                                                                                                                                 alignment of high pressure pipeline are known
                                                                                                                                 before project appraisal, A RAP or ARAP will
                                                                                                                                 be prepared by project appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This policy is not triggered as project activities
                                                                                                                                 does not involve new or existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         TBD                           TBD based on confirmation by EGAS on high
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            pressure pipeline crossing of any rivers
                                                                                                                                 considered international waterways..
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This policy is not triggered
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Jan-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The ESIAF and RPF are the safeguards instruments that will be prepared by appraisal. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      preparation of these instruments have started in November 2013 ; and they will be reviewed,
                                      approved, and disclosed in-country and at the infoshop prior to appraisal planned to begin by
                                      February 3, 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Husam Mohamed Beides

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Nina Chee (RSA)                                                                                                      Date: 16-Dec-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (SM)                                                                                          Date: 22-Dec-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
