INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCIO25
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Dec-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Mali                       Project ID:   P151318
Project Name:    Higher Education Support Project (P151318)
Task Team        Pierre Joseph Kamano
Leader(s):
Estimated        26-Jan-2015                Estimated     26-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Tertiary education (70%), Vocational training (30%)
Theme(s):        Education for the knowledge economy (80%), Other human development (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      30.00             Total Bank Financing:    30.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                      30.00
Total                                                            30.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The development objective of the proposed Mali Higher Education Support Project (HESD) is to
improve the relevance of selected higher education programs and the stewardship of the higher
education system in Mali.
C. Project Description
The project will focus on improving training in three sectors that are key contributors to the country
economic growth - Agriculture, livestock, and mining, by supporting related programs in selected


﻿institutions, while also supporting some broader improvements in the stewardship of the higher
education system. Under the institutional support, to be comprehensive while targeting selected
programs, the project would support both at programs level and at institutional levels activities
aimed at rapidly improving the teaching and learning environment, while tackling longer-term
governance challenges:
(i)    Improving quality and relevance of the teaching-learning process with the introduction of
pedagogical inputs and innovations, and updated programs and curriculum;
(ii)   Improving management which will enhance internal and external efficiency, and provide
more equitable access to higher education;
and
(iii)  Increasing system and institutional financing (or budgetary) efficiency through disbursement
linked indicators funds to catalyze innovation.
The project would have three main components: (i) Support to selected programs in public HEls; (ii)
System institutional development and private HEls support; and (iii) Project management and
Technical Assistance. Component 1 will be financed using Development Linked Indicators (DLIs),
while Components 2 and 3 will be financed using regular investments instrument.
Component 1: Support to selected programs in public HEls (US$20 million). This component would
improve the governance, quality and relevance of selected programs targeted to agriculture and
livestock and mining and related fields by supporting key indicators of the HEls' development plans
related to teaching and learning and governance. The component is also expected to generate broader
positive impacts on the governance of the higher education system.
Possible participating HEls are selected based on the availability of programs in targeted economic
sectors; they are the University of Science and Technology of Bamako (USTB), The National School
of Engineering of Bamako (ENI), The University of Segou (US) and The Institute Polytechnic Rural
of Katibougou (IPR). Final HEls to be directly supported will have to demonstrate willingness to
reform through the following actions to be completed before the finalization of project preparation:
(i) setting-up a functional Conseil d'administration with one third of members from non-public
institutions (private sector, diaspora, etc.); (ii) setting-up a functional Conseil de perfectionnement
with effective participation of private businesses representatives to review programs and content; (iii)
a      development and adoption of implementation manual and management tools and schedule for audits;
and (iv) finalization of the institutional strategic plan with clear objectives and annual targets which
will be used as DLIs. The Project Preparation Advance (PPA) will provide support for addressing
these criteria, and each HEI which has completed these minimum requirements will be eligible for
further support.
This component will help participating HEls implement their institutional development plans which
were drafted during the stopped project preparation in 2011-2012. Implementation of HEls medium-
term development plans to be finalized will further raise the quality and relevance of HEls and foster
the emergence of a diversified and dynamic higher education landscape. It will create conditions for:
(i) HEls to begin generating their own resources, and (ii) government to develop capacity to regulate
the sector including accreditation and monitoring of accredited institutions. Beyond immediate
improvements in the teaching and learning environment, support provided to specific programs
through HEls will serve as a cornerstone for the introduction of a number of organizational
innovations and new forms of governance that include but are not limited to institutional autonomy,
accountability for results and academic excellence, budget preparation determined by the academic


﻿missions of the HEls (results-based budgeting), and increased internal cash generation by the
institution. The component would be divided into four sub-components articulated around the
support to each individual institution.
Sub-Component 1: Support to the Institute Polytechnic Rural of Katibougou (IPRK): IPRK was
created in 1902 first as a school which would train technicians in agriculture. In 1952, IPRK became
a sub-regional school, when in 1995 it was transformed into a Training and Research Institute in
agriculture. The Institute has around 1,400 students from Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroun,
Central African Republic, Comoros Island, Congo Republic, la Democratic Republic of Congo, la
C6te d'Ivoire, le Gabon, Guinea, Madagascar, Mauritania, Niger, Rwanda, Senegal, Chad, and Togo.
The project would support the institution's objectives by disbursing according to selected indicators
in the strategic plan (DLIs) related to programs targeted to agriculture and livestock. Examples of
target indicators would be linked to proposed PDO indicators mentioned above and specified at the
institutional level. Also, the project would provide support for the rehabilitation of existing
infrastructures to improve the learning conditions.
Sub-Component 2: Support to the University of Segou (US): established in 2010, the US is the only
public university outside of Bamako. Located at Segou near the office du Niger-the institution that
manages lands and investment in the Niger delta which has a potential of more than 1 million km2 of
exploitable land, the University of Segou is in a region also known to have a substantial livestock.
The project would support the institution's objectives by disbursing according to selected indicators
in the strategic plan in relation to agriculture and livestock relevant programs. Civil works (new
construction) may further be financed within the existing fenced facilities to improve the working
environment of the university.
Sub-Component 3: Support to the University of Science and Technology (USTB): the University of
S&T has four faculties: the Faculty of Medicine, the Faculty of Pharmacy, the Faculty of Science and
Technology, and the Institute of Applied Science. The project would support the Faculty of Science
and Technology and the Institute of Applied Science; the two first faculties mentioned have already
many partnership and collaboration activities with international institutions and universities. The
project would support the institution's objectives by disbursing according to selected indicators in the
strategic plan in relation with science and technology programs for the three sectors. Indicators
a      would cover activities such as upgrading of programs (including content, teaching methodology, new
programs relevant to the economy, and equipment to be provided only in facilities owned by the
university (not in rented facilities)), and teachers' training programs including visiting missions, as
well as improved management and governance system.
Sub-Component 4: Support to the National School of Engineering (ENI): established in 1939 as a
regional school for training technicians, the ENI became in 1969 the National school of Engineering
with nearly 700 students in two main areas: Engineering and High level technicians. The school
offers STEM programs in energy, water management, environment, civil works, mining, and
industry. The project would support the institution's objectives by disbursing according to selected
indicators in the strategic plan in relation to science and technology for the three key sectors.
Selected DLIs to be monitored would cover upgrading of programs (including content, teaching
methodology, new programs relevant to the economy, and equipment), and teachers training
programs including visiting missions, as well as improved management and governance system.
Component 2: System, Institutional, and Private HEls Support (US$7 million). This component


﻿would improve the stewardship of the higher education system by financing the introduction of
management information systems and strengthening the capacity of the Ministry of Higher Education
in management, data collection and analysis, and monitoring and evaluation. Investments in a
system-wide ICT network to support teaching, learning and research, including libraries, as well as
O
U       improved management will include the provision of high-quality connectivity to research and higher
education institutions, the implementation of a digital library system to enable the higher education
community to gain access to science and research databases and e-learning resources for teachers and
students to enhance the efficiency and quality of classroom teaching and learning, and give students
and teachers access to network-based electronic resources. An essential element will be the
development of capacity to manage the system and provide quality services and train the university
community to make the best use of the resources. The component will also support the development
and implementation of a strong communication plan to be carried out from the inception of the
project to generate support for reforms.
In addition, Component 2 will finance innovative ways of developing and expanding private HEls
through IDA-IFC collaboration to explore alternatives with local Banks. A study on the factors
which constraint private HEls development will be conducted and will provide the basis for the
support to be provided. The study will: (i) identify the key constraint for expansion of private higher
education in Mali; (ii) examine the importance and constraints for increased commercial lending to
private institutions to expand capacity and quality, (iii) identify options for PPPs, including a private
investment/guarantee fund for private higher education and could include a PPP element for "land-
grant/leasing" for new private institutions outside of Bamako; and (iv) develop models for joint
IDA-IFC-Government (guarantee) fund for expansion of private higher education and identify any
needed improvements to the regulatory framework.
Component 3: Project Management and Technical Assistance (US$3 million). This Component will
fund project management activities and operating costs, technical assistance (TA) required as well as
studies and other analytical work needed. In alignment with component 1, the component will
finance exchange programs with internationally-renown institutions of higher learning, and
innovations that bring about better learning outcome, academic excellence and responsiveness to
market demand. There will be an allocation for TA to help academic institutions prepare strategic
plans and the ministry conduct studies such as labour market information to help the ministry and
institutions make the right decisions on the relevant programs. The TA sub-component will finance
a      provision of higher education services to the institutions supported in Component 1 from 19 Africa
Centers of Excellence in West and Central Africa. These Centers of Excellences within Science,
Technology, Engineering and Math, Health and Agriculture sciences are supported by a Bank-
supported regional project. Malian institutions would define their needs and competitively purchase
support packages that could include short-term specialized training, longer term faculty development,
visiting faculty, and curriculum development. This would build upon a similar arrangement in place
for Gambian institutions. The project team would explore if the national IDA funding could be
leveraged with regional IDA given the regional objective of collaboration in higher education.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project sites will be located in Bamako, Katibougou, and Segou cities. There are no specific
physical characteristics of safeguard concerned in the project sites or nearby.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Republic of Mali has set a comprehensive institutional and regulatory frameworks for the


﻿enforcement of the environmental and social safeguard procedures and due diligence. The National
Directorate of Sanitation, Pollution and Nuisances Control (DNACPN) holds with the mandate of
enforcing environmental and social assessment procedures in collaboration with project developer
either public or private. Though, many Bank funded projects have been implemented by national
O
U       entities which capacity in managing Bank safeguard requirements are improving, the overall country
performance in safeguard policies remain weak; this is due to lack of dedicated expertise, tools and
financial resources in the Ministry in charge of environment from national down to local level.
Therefore, the project implementation unit (PIU) to establish within the Ministry of Higher
Education and Scientific Research (MoHE) will be supported for this particular matter.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Maman-Sani Issa (GENDR)
Salamata Bal (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         Though the envisioned civil works (construction and
OP/BP 4.01                              rehabilitation of facilities) will take place in
delineated, even fenced, owned by the two
institutions to support (University of Segou and the
Katibougou Polytechnic Institute for Rural studies-
IPRk) even temporary risks and nuisances may
occur. Given the expected low significance of the
said potential adverse effects, the Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) of the
ongoing Emergency Education Project will be
updated for use during the implementation.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No          The project will not finance activity related to natural
habitat exploitation or that will threaten such
ecosystem.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          The project will not finance activity linked to forest
exploitation.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          The project will not finance activity intended to
purchasing, storing or distributing pesticides or any
other chemical harmful product.
Physical Cultural Resources  TBD        The project activities will not be deployed in known
OP/BP 4.11                              historical area. However, the chance find procedure
as described in the ESMF will be implemented if
matter arises.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No          There are no indigenous people in the project
4.10                                    implementation areas.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes       The project will not finance activity that induces land
BP 4.12                                 acquisition of economic displacement because the
civil works will be executed within the beneficiary
institutions' facilities. However the existing


﻿Resettlement Policy Frame (RPF) of the Emergency
education project will be used if case arises.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           The project will not finance any activity related to
dams.
Projects on International    No           The project will not finance activity located on
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      international waterways or that necessitate the
withdraw of substantial quantity of water from such
a                                                  waterways.
&        Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         There are no disputed areas in the project location.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Dec-2014
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The existing ESMF and RPF of the Mali Emergency Education Project will be updated to serve as
the safeguard management tool of the project. This will be completed by end of November 2014.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Pierre Joseph Kamano
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards    Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)               Date: 25-Dec-2014
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/      Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (PMGR)               Date: 26-Dec-2014
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


