INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC8445
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Feb-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Niger                      Project ID:   P147638
Project Name:   Population and Health Support Project (P 147638)
Task Team       Djibrilla Karamoko
Leader(s):
Estimated       25-Feb-2015                Estimated     23-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GHNDR                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Health (100%)
Theme(s):       Population and reproductive health (45%), Child health (25%), Nutrition and
food security (20%), Health system performance (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     103.00            Total Bank Financing:  103.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                      9.00
.          IDA Grant                                                      94.00
Total                                                          103.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
22.    The project development objective is to increase the utilization of reproductive, maternal,
newborn, child health and nutrition (RMNCHN) services, including by adolescent girls, in targeted
areas.
23.    The PDO will be achieved by implementing:


﻿-      high impact interventions which increase the supply of RMNCHN services especially in
remote and underserved communities;
  -   social and behavior change communication (SBCC) and women's and girls' empowerment
U       activities to overcome demand-side constraints
24.   In doing so, the project will contribute to: (i) strengthening the health system in areas of
access, financing, human resources, and drug supply chain management, which will be critical to
maintaining the project's benefits after its closing date; and (ii) strengthening demand for RINCHN
services through improved knowledge, life skills, livelihood training, and schooling.
25.    The project will support the introduction or scaling-up of global innovations adapted to the
Nigerien context that the global experience has shown to be effective to promote gender equality,
better reproductive health and slow down the growth of the population. The design will also include
multi-sectoral approach on project preparation, implementation and to carry out joint annual reviews
of work plans and sector performance (including expenditures and budget) which will be monitored
based on jointly derived performance indicators.
26.    The proposed project takes into account the lessons learned from the implementation of the
previous projects including: (i) addressing the population agenda needs to be anchored in the highest
level of government; (ii) ownership of the project design and implementation by the government is
key for successful implementation; (iii) IEC/BCC campaigns should be linked to the support for
women empowerment in order to impact on women's economic conditions which then can reinforce
the awareness messages and activities in the general population; (iv) interventions should be
designed and implemented through a bottom-up approach, using decentralized and community-based
approaches; and, (v) there is a need for specialized SBCC expertise and for the design and
implementation of interventions to be cognizant of local culture, needs, and issues. The project will
aim to help the Government of Niger to be more strategic and selective, prioritize, and use the
existing capacity for implementing programs that will have the greatest impact on the behavior
change and the use of the reproductive health program. Based on the demographic trend, the project
will be implemented through a phased approach, focusing initially on four regions - Zinder, Maradi,
Tahoua, and Tillabery - which not only have the largest populations but also the poorest performance
on health, nutrition and population indicators.
C. Project Description
29.    The experience gained in the implementation of a sector-wide approach as well as the use of
pooled funding made the health sector the key entity for the multi-sectoral project management.
Tackling health, nutrition and population dynamics will require, among other factors: (i) improved
provision of quality RMNCHN services; (ii) expanded community-level interventions to overcome
demand-side barriers; and (iii) improvements in educational outcomes for boys and girls while
addressing gender gaps. Women's education is negatively associated with infant mortality and
fertility and positively associated with female labor force participation, which in turn results in
increased opportunity costs of women's time and thus contributes to reducing family size. It is the
combination between improved empowerment of women and better access to RMNCHN services
which will eventually improve health, nutrition and population outcomes.
30. The project is organized around: (i) improving the supply of high quality RMNCHN services,
and (ii) improving the demand for RMNCHN services through SBCC and women's and girls'
empowerment.


﻿31.    Component 1: Improving the provision of high quality RMNCHN services. This component
aims to strengthen the delivery of health services for women of reproductive age (including young
women, pregnant women) and children under age five through improvements in the quantity and
O
quality of services. Specifically, it will help strengthen the supply of health services by addressing
constraints related to service delivery, commodities and human resources for health. A gradual shift
from financing inputs to paying for results, making M&E a core function, and improving
transparency and accountability in the sector will be envisaged during the project life through a
combination of results-based financing (RBF) approaches. Disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs)
will be used to incentivize the development and implementation of improved management structures
and processes while performance-based financing (PBF) will be used to contract health facilities to
achieve service delivery results. This component will benefit from complementary efforts of the
regional Sahel Women's Empowerment and Demographic Dividend (SWEDD) Project. The
activities and complementarities are summarized in Table 3 and described in greater detail thereafter.
32.    The component will be implemented by the MoH through the existing pooling arrangements
(supported by UNICEF, GAVI, UNFPA, Spain, and France) which support the priority needs of the
health system. Results-based approaches will be used by the project to determine the contribution to
the pooling of funds. Funds will be disbursed to the pool after a performance assessment carried out
by a third party, allowing the financing of the eligible expenditures for the activities in the annual
sector plan.
33.    The PBF mechanism will incentivize providers using a fee-for-service payment scheme
based on both the quantity and quality of services provided. Payments will be made once results
have been independently verified. The contracts with health facilities may explicitly include the role
of community health workers who are associated with each health facility to deliver services at the
community level in addition to services delivered in the health facility. Furthermore, an equity
bonus may be incorporated to offset the extra costs and hardships faced by facilities in remote or
hard-to-reach areas. Upon completion and evaluation of the PBF pilot under the current HIV/AIDS
project (P116167), further arrangements will be detailed out for RMNCHN services and scale-up of
the PBF to other facilities.
34.    The component will also support the establishment of a PBF Technical Unit as well as the
a       preparation activities identified for the PBF strategy implementation in the sector. This PBF
Technical Unit will be strengthened with procurement, logistical and technical capacity to ensure
fluid implementation of PBF. The component will also support strengthening of the health
information system to improve M&E within the health sector and some initial start-up costs (in the
form of investment units) for material and equipment during the start-up phase to strengthen the
capacity of health facilities to deliver quality services
35.    Component 2: Increasing the demand for and utilization of RMNCHN services. This
component aims to increase demand for and utilization of RMNCHN services by promoting social
and behavior change among the main stakeholders and decision makers and empowering women.
This component will support innovative strategies that can help ensure sustainable results which will
be achieved through culturally-sensitive, context-appropriate, and gender-aware approaches. Several
synergies and complementarities have been identified between the proposed activities in this
component, the SWEDD Project, and the ongoing Social Safety Nets (SSN) Project and Education
and Skills projects in Niger. The activities and complementarities are summarized in Table 4 and
described in greater detail below.


﻿*      Sub-component 2.1. Promote Social and Behavioral Change. The project will support
community-level SBCC activities on RMNCHN, population, and development issues using
performance contracts with NGOs and supported by community agents (relais communautaires).
SBCC will be used to increase the demand for RMNCHN services by addressing knowledge, social,
cultural and gender barriers. With technical support from the SWEDD Project, various SBCC
approaches will be developed and implemented to discuss with women best practices during and
after pregnancy (e.g. ANC visits, assisted deliveries and post-natal care visits), delayed marriage and
childbirth, healthy birth intervals (birth spacing), and benefits of investing in children's health and
education. Complemented by edutainment (television and/or radio messages) and mass media
supported by the SWEDD Project, this component will operate at the community level with
interpersonal communication and social marketing. Community-level SBCC strategies also include
targeting male partners and other family members. The contracts for SBCC may also be expanded to
include community-based distribution (CBD) of commodities (e.g. contraceptives, ORS, mosquito
nets, etc.). The role of the Relais communautaires will be complementary to that of the community
health worker to strengthen the links between the health facility and the community and better reach
beneficiaries. Given the current high variance in performance of NGOs, it will be helpful to use a
performance-based approach to ensure quality of activities conducted as well as the CBD protocols
developed under the SWEDD Project.
*      Sub-component 2.2. Reaching opinion leaders. The sub-component aims to expand peer
education for behavior change among decision makers at the community level. The sub-component
will support the implementation of initiatives to reach opinion leaders, especially men in the
community and religious and traditional leaders. Men in the community - including religious and
community leaders - shape the ideas and social norms of the community and decisions that are made
at the household level. These decisions extend to their wives' use of health services, fertility, their
daughters going to school, and the use of family planning. As such, it is essential to involve them in
the SBCC efforts. This sub-component will engage religious leaders and support implementation of
peer-education programs at community-level with SBCC targeted to these specific stakeholders. An
initiative that targets men in the community - Ecole des Maris (EdM - Husband Schools) - is
already bein g piloted in selected communities in Niger. These are community groups for
"discussion, decision-making and action". There is an opportunity to implement and evaluate this
approach rigorously before scaling up nationally, especially given costs of implementati on. This
a      sub-component will additionally benefit from the SWEDD Project's establishment of a regional
network of religious leaders - the participation in the regional network of peers will strengthen
implementation of the sub-component at the community level.
*      Sub-component 2.3. Women's and Adolescent Girls' Empowerment. This sub-component
would improve community-level demand for RMNCHN services by empowering women and
adolescent girls with the knowledge and skills needed to make informed use of RINCHN services
coupled with economic incentives for participation in key initiatives. Initiatives aimed at
empowering adolescent girls (age 10-19) can be focused on (i) life skills (SBCC on RMNCHN, self-
esteem, leadership, peer pressure, etc.); (ii) economic and livelihood training (e.g. literacy, job skills,
business or livelihood, and financial assets); or (iii) schooling (e.g. unconditional or conditional cash
transfers). These interventions can be implemented separately or in combination and are designed to
promote healthy behaviors, change behaviors and create a lasting effect as these adolescent girls
become older and assume leadership roles within their communities. This sub-component will
support a packaged approach that includes all three categories of interventions to reinforce efforts to
improve female school enrollment, life and vocational skills and strengthen women's economic


﻿opportunities. It will build synergies with the Niger Skills Development for Growth project by
providing access to 14-19 years old girls to the dual apprenticeships cum entrepreneurship programs
put in place under that project. Thus, the project will reach both in-school and out-of-school
adolescent girls, a critical combination for maximum impact.
0
Furthermore, mechanisms are being explored to further leverage and build on ongoing IDA
operations in education and social protection to support economic incentives. This could include the
use of "girls' stipends" to encourage attendance and use of services building on the already tested
safety net program put in place by the Niger SSN Project. The geographical areas where the SSN
Project is being implemented overlap with the proposed areas for this project as they are the most
disadvantaged, so poor families targeted by the SSN project with daughters of adolescent ages could
receive a small parallel cash amount conditional upon girls staying in school, attending skills
development initiatives, and/or staying unmarried until finishing school. Those families would also
get exposed to SBCC activities building on the behavioral package put in place by the SSN Project.
Alternative approaches to providing financial support to girl's education could include scaling-up the
scholarship pilot that will be implemented by the Global Partnership for Education Basic Education
Project after it has been evaluated, or scaling-up the girl's scholarship pilot put in place by UNICEF
which provides financial support to both girls and their host families through selected sc hools. The
sub-component will be carried out by NGOs or existing structures (including building on the
institutional arrangements supported by other projects). Interventions will be rigorously evaluated to
build upon the growing evidence base on girls' and women's empowerment - while implementation
of these interventions will be supported by this project, the evaluation will be support ed by the
SWEDD Project.
36.    Component 3: Management, Monitoring and evaluation of the project. The component aims
to support project implementation by strengthening management and supervision. It will strengthen
MoH and MoP capacities in management and coordinatio n through the provision of (i)
administrative, management and fiduciary support, (ii) capacity building at the central, regional and
local levels; (iii) technical support to enhance the design of policies and strategies and (iv) implement
U       monitoring and evaluation. The component will finance goods, consultants, training, and operating
costs.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Project activities will take place at health facilities (hospital, clinics, centers) throughout the country,
and at community level through the implement of BCC/IEC activities on population issues. All
region will be targeted and both urban and rural zones.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
In 2003, MOH developed a National Plan for Medical Waste Management which, when submitted in
the context of the MAP project, was found satisfactory to the IDA ISG group. This plan has been
updated and implemented through the sector wide approach closed in June 2011. The same plan has
also been updated for the ongoing HIV/AIDS support project (P116167). Despite the MOH's
capacity, the plan will be assess and updated consequently in order to contribute to the financing of
its parts during the project implementation. It is expected that no special safeguard-related studies
will be needed.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


﻿II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment   Yes         The project's environmental impacts are related to
OP/BP 4.01                               medical waste resulting from the expanded use of
clinical facilities. The current health waste care waste
management plan will be assessed, updated and
disclosed before appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No           The project does not affect or involve natural
habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           The project does not involve forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No           The project does not involve pest management.
Physical Cultural Resources  No          The project does not affect or involve physical
OP/BP 4.11                               natural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No         The project does not involve land acquisition leading
BP 4.12                                  to involuntary resettlement or restrictions of access
to resources.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No           N/A
Projects on International   No           N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No        N/A
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-Feb-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The assessment of the Waste Management Plan will be conduct after the identification mission
which will be held in May 2014. The new plan will be approved and disseminate before the
appraisal mission in September 2014.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Djibrilla Karamoko
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards    Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)             Date: 11-Feb-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/      Name: Sybille Crystal (PMGR)                  Date: 12-Feb-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


