                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA1056

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Nov-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Nov-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Vietnam                           Project ID:    P148733
                                                       Parent         P113493
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     NMPRP-2 Additional Financing (P148733)
   Parent Project    Second Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction Project (P113493)
   Name:
   Task Team         Lan Thi Thu Nguyen
   Leader:
   Estimated         27-Oct-2014                       Estimated   14-Jan-2015
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    GFADR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Agricultural extension and research (80%), Animal production (20%)
   Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (80%), Rural markets (20%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:        110.00                 Total Bank Financing:      100.00
   Financing Gap:                0.00
     Financing Source                                                                     Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     10.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                           100.00
     Total                                                                                 110.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)



                                            Page 1 of 12
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The development objective for the proposed project is to Enhance the living standards of the
   project beneficiaries by improving: (i) their access to productive infrastructures; (ii) the
   productive and institutional capacity of local governments and communities; and (iii) market
   linkages and business innovations. The key outcome indicators to assess achievement of the PDO
   are as follows:
    # At least 60% of the project beneficiaries report satisfaction on the selection, design, and
   implementation of project activities.
    # The project beneficiaries report an improvement in on- and off- farm income of at least 10%
   over the life of the project.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   The AF focuses on institutionalizing and mainstreaming the socio-economic development
   planning approach in the broader planning and budget allocation processes in the project area.
   The PDO will, therefore, be revised to capture this important element of the AF.

   Project Development Objective for the AF is revised to read: The Project Development Objective
   (PDO) is to enhance the living standards of the Project Beneficiaries by improving: (i) their
   access to productive infrastructure; (ii) the productive and institutional capacity of local
   governments and communities; (iii) commune integrated investment planning and (iv) market
   linkages and business innovations.
3. Project Description
The proposed AF will support deepening the project impacts and scaling up the existing project
modalities to additional Communes and Districts and would contribute to their long term
sustainability. The AF will give a stronger focus on supporting sustainable livelihoods of the farmers
and further devolving fund and decision making power to commune level. The following summarizes
the key elements and main activities of each component.

Component 1: District Economic Development (about 30% of total allocated provincial project
funds, equivalent to US$28.8 million). The objective of this component is to provide investment
support to the District Socio-Economic Development Plans, focusing on productive and economic
infrastructure for increased agriculture productivity, direct local employment and income generation,
and facilitation of business innovation. This component supports specific efforts to link the supply
side, namely the market and business institutions, with the poor.

Component 2: Commune Development Budget (about 58% of total allocated provincial project
budget, equivalent to US$55.68 million). This component will provide block grants to communes to
finance small-scale sub-projects at the village level for productive infrastructure and livelihood
improvement activities that are identified through participatory planning processes. Livelihood
support will assist the poor with strengthening the operations of Common Interest Groups (CIGs),
develop necessary skills and the further development of market linkages and ensure that women
participate in and benefit from the project through targeted support to village level women’s groups.

Component 3: Capacity Building and Communication (about 6% of the total project provincial
allocation budget and CPO’s component, equivalent to US$6.76million). Under the AF, this


                                            Page 2 of 12
component will mostly focus on the farmers and other beneficiaries to help sustain their capacity for
implementing project activities during the AF period and beyond. This component will continue to
help improve the capacity of project implementation agencies at all levels, especially of the local
governments and the communities to plan, manage, implement, supervise, and maintain productive
infrastructure and livelihood improvement programs, communication and information sharing and
learning. This component will also support the scaling up and institutionalization of the participatory
local development planning through the Socio-Economic Development Plan (SEDP) planning
process from Communes upward and include additional activities on “Institutional Development” to
help deepen the policy dialogue between the project provinces and the GoV on poverty reduction.

Component 4: Project Management (about 6% of total allocated provincial project budget and CPO’s
component, equivalent to US$8.76 million). This component is to ensure effective and efficient
project management through facilitation of various implementation, monitoring and evaluation
(M&E), reporting, coordination, and quality enhancement efforts.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project’s AF phase (from July 2015 – June 2018) continues to be implemented in 6 existing
provinces of the poorest Northeast region of Vietnam, including: Lao Cai, Yen Bai, Hoa Binh, Son
La, Dien Bien and Lai Chau, with 29 districts and 259 communes; in which 27 districts with 232
communes are under the NMPRP-2; 2 districts (Si Ma Cai and Bac Ha districts, Lao Cai province)
with 15 communes are added to replicate sustainable livelihood support approach through the CIGs
and 16 poor communes are newly added to participate in the activities under Component 2. Four
communes under the current project “graduate” given their good tracked records on poverty
reduction over the past four years of project implementation. The communes selected to participate
in the project are those of the most difficult to reach communes. The great majority of the project
beneficiaries (94 - 100%) are members of diverse ethnic minority groups each with its own culture
and language. Success of the project will largely depend on their full access to project activities, and
participation in identification, designing, implementation, management, and evaluation of the
activities. The ethnic minorities' diversity, isolation, and language differences present challenges.

Safeguards Performance under NMPRP-2: Overall the Project implementation is fully compliant
with the Bank’s safeguards policies. The safeguards implementation is independently monitored by
an independent agency and has been found to be satisfactory. The Project invested in small scale
infrastructures in the rural and remote areas with low level of impacts on environment and social.
Environmental impacts during construction include dust, noise, wastes, accident risk and disturbance
and are mitigated by the ECOP which are included in the civil works contracts to be implemented by
the contractors under close supervision of internal and external parties including the communities.
An Environment Protection Commitment is prepared for each subproject which is reviewed and
approved by the District People’s Committee before commencing the sub-project. The small
infrastructures are mainly for upgrading of existing structures with already established alignment.
Land acquisition, if any, for this purpose has been limited to very small scale and affected
households are compensated for their losses under a Resettlement Plan reviewed and endorsed by the
Bank. Ethnic minorities (EMs) in the Project areas are participating in all stages for the Project, eg.
participatory planning, implementation, supervision and M&E. The Project’s benefits are culturally
acceptable to the EMs and are highly appreciated by them as having tangible impacts on their lives
and livelihoods.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                                              Page 3 of 12
Lan Thi Thu Nguyen (GENDR)
Dunia Lujan (GENDR)
Khang Van Pham (GENDR)

6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes           This policy is triggered due to potential sub-
BP 4.01                                      projects’ environmental and social impacts. The
                                             NMPRP-2 AF will continue financing small scale
                                             productive infrastructures. Although the Project
                                             would have positive environmental and social
                                             impacts by improving rural road, bridges, small
                                             buildings, local irrigation systems and agriculture
                                             production, these subprojects may cause negative
                                             environmental and social impacts during the
                                             construction or implementation phase like dust,
                                             noise, affected water quality, land acquisition and
                                             human health. To ensure that the potential
                                             negative impacts of the Project are properly
                                             mitigated, and since the Project includes
                                             subprojects that are not yet been identified (due to
                                             the CDD nature of the Project) and therefore the
                                             impacts cannot be determined in a specific way,
                                             the EA instrument will be the Environment and
                                             Social Management Framework (ESMF), which
                                             lays out screening procedures for the sub-projects
                                             and includes the measures to prevent or reduce
                                             the negative impacts. The ESMF includes a set of
                                             Environmental codes of Practice (ECOP),
                                             covering prevention and mitigation measures for
                                             the mostly known impacts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No            The NMPRP-2 AF Project would not invest in
                                             any infrastructure in protected areas such as
                                             natural reserve, national parks, primary forests or
                                             wetland, because of the nature of this kind of
                                             project (CDD) and the capacity required.
                                             The policy OP/BP 4.04 is not triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36             No            The Project doesn’t affect forests. The Project
                                             will not involve any forest restoration, plantation
                                             development, changes in forest use, management
                                             or protection forest. OP/BP 4.36 is, therefore, not
                                             triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09        Yes           Agriculture livelihood will benefit poor
                                             households from increasing income through
                                             application of good practices of cultivation and
                                             raising. However, agriculture livelihood may
                                             involve potential use of pesticides and fertilizers



                                     Page 4 of 12
                                                and subsequently would cause pollution to health,
                                                air, water and soil. Hence OP 4.09 on Pest
                                                Management is triggered. The ECOP does not
                                                only include a set of guidelines on sustainable use
                                                of pesticide and fertilizers but also prohibits the
                                                use of certain pesticides specified under the
                                                Vietnam environmental regulation which was
                                                developed based on the World Health
                                                Organization's Recommended Classification of
                                                Pesticides by Hazard and Guidelines to
                                                Classification 2009.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            Sub-projects are of very small scale and are
BP 4.11                                         mostly upgrades of the existing structures without
                                                impacting physical cultural resources. In addition,
                                                sub-projects are selected based on a list of
                                                screening criteria which excludes those areas
                                                having potential impacts on cultural heritage.
                                                Thus OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources
                                                don’t be triggered.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           The majority of the beneficiaries of the parent
                                                project and the AF are ethnic minorities. The
                                                Project as a whole was considered to be an Ethnic
                                                Minority Development Plan and therefore there
                                                was no need for a stand-alone instrument
                                                regarding ethnic minority issues. The following
                                                technical points were, however, incorporated in
                                                the design of the project: (i) documentation of
                                                EM’s broad community support to the project; (ii)
                                                consultation with the EMs was carried out at an
                                                early stage of project design and throughout the
                                                planning process, implementation and monitoring
                                                and evaluation; (iii) capacity building for EMs to
                                                ensure that they would meaningfully participate
                                                in and benefit from the project activities; and (iv)
                                                public information campaigns taking into account
                                                the EM’s language barriers.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           Component 1 finances the construction of small
4.12                                            scale village and commune infrastructure which
                                                requires the acquisition of residential or
                                                productive land, at marginal level though. The
                                                parent project has an approved Resettlement
                                                Policy Framework (RPF) which is applicable to
                                                the AF. The RPF is updated to include new
                                                districts and communes as well as latest GoV’s
                                                relevant policies.




                                        Page 5 of 12
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No              The NMPRP-2 AF does not involve any activities
                                                      relating to dam.
   Projects on International        No                The NMPRP-2 AF does not work in International
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               Waterways.
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                The NMPRP-2 AF is not located in any disputed
   7.60                                               areas.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) – The construction, rehabilitation and maintenance
     works of rural roads, bridges, erosion protection and small buildings, will improve the quality of
     life and the safety of the community members. However during the construction, there will be in
     small-scale, some negative environmental impacts such as dust generation, increase noise levels,
     and inadequate wastes disposal affecting human health, water quality and soil quality. The social
     factor may be also affected due to land acquisition and loss of assets.
     The construction of sanitary water points in some villages including shallow wells and piped water
     systems will improve the health, sanitation and hygiene of the communities, although this activity
     could affect land for placing these elements.
     The construction, rehabilitation and improving the irrigation systems, not only will enhance the
     farmers life due to increased productivity, but also will help to reduce the expansion of upland
     agriculture that would degrade the catchment. The negative impacts are limited to using a small
     land size due to the location of the works.

    OP 4.09 (Pest Management) – The agricultural livelihood activities under sub-components 1.2; 2.2
    and 2.3 may increase the use of pesticides and fertilizers. The increase in the use and improper
    handling may cause negative impacts on human health in the communes, may affect soil quality
    and water quality.

    OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) – This policy was triggered due to potential land
    acquisition and remains applicable under the AF. The project will invest in upgrading small-scale
    rural infrastructures (e.g. access roads, irrigation, water supply and market) and therefore some
    level of land acquisition is anticipated. However, no major resettlement is foreseen and only
    limited land acquisition will be entailed. Experience from the NMPRP-2 confirmed that each of
    these small infrastructure improvements would have a low-intensive impact.

     OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) – Since the overwhelming majority of project beneficiaries are
     ethnic minorities (94-100%), this policy was triggered and remains applicable under the AF.
     However, a stand-alone Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) was not required as the entire
     project was considered as an EMDP. The AF will follow the same approach.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     None is expected.
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.


                                              Page 6 of 12
  To avoid or minimize the adverse impacts in this project, the ESMF considers some conditions
  that the subproject has meet to be selected. The conditions are:

  •       The project would not invest subprojects in protected areas, whether there is involvement
  of unexploded ordnance (UXO), and potential impacts on cultural heritage.
  •       The project would not invest in subprojects that are listed in Appendix II and III of Decree
  29/2011/ND-CP, in order to ensure that the sub projects won't cause significant impacts.
  •       The project would not invest in subprojects that are listed in Annex 3 and Annex 4 of
  ESMF.
  •       The project prohibits use of pesticides banned by MARD and/or World Health
  Organization's Recommended Classification of Pesticides by Hazard and Guidelines to
  Classification 2009, listed in Annex 2 ESMF.

  The NMPRP-2 AF project will continue to support the rehabilitation of small rural roads including
  provision of adequate cross-drainage, soil compaction, gutters, surface, signing, new
  embankments, bridges and erosion protection. Roads will be constructed in locations where there
  are existing tracks, so no natural habitats or cultural/historical/burial sites will be disturbed. Land
  acquisition is also minimized.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment): In order to avoid and mitigate the potential impacts, an
  ESMF was prepared for the Parent Project in accordance with the World Bank policy requirements
  and National Law on Environmental Protection. The NMPRP 2- AF includes new districts and
  communes in 6 provinces and triggers OP 4.09 (Pest Management), so the original ESMF has been
  updated.

  The ESMF includes the environmental measures and environmental safeguards instruments that
  the borrower has taken to avoid or mitigate the impacts described in II.A.1, as below:

  •        Measures for impacts due to civil works in Component 1 and 2: The ESMF elaborated for
  the AF includes an ECOP to address construction-related impacts, which are mostly temporary
  and similar in different locations, it contains guidelines on good practices in managing
  construction activities, The ECOP for AF includes: environmental codes applicable to most
  construction activities to address environmental issues like dust generation, noise impacts on
  communities/sensitive areas (schools/houses), soil erosion, spoil/waste disposal, pollution of water
  sources; degradation of water quality and health and safety, it also includes some measures in case
  to find Physical Cultural Resources.
  •        If the construction will be done by sub- contractors, the ECOP will be included in the
  bidding documents binding the construction contractors to implement and comply with.
  •        In case the construction will be done by the community, the ECOP should be known by
  the community.
  •        In addition, the borrower has to elaborate an Environmental Protection Commitment
  (EPC) to address environmental and social impacts, based on the Government requirements
  (Article 30th, Chapter 4 of the Decree 29/2011/ND-CP and Circular 26/2011/TT-BTNMT dated
  July 18, 2011).

  OP 4.09 (Pest Management): ECOP for agricultural livelihood activities includes a set of
  guidelines on sustainable use of pesticides and fertilizers, including training in pest management


                                             Page 7 of 12
carried out by provincial DARD and District Agriculture Unit, the list of pesticides stores certified
by the responsible agency (i.e. DARD), the guidance on proper storage and handling of pesticides
and fertilizers, proper disposal of pesticide bottles and containers and an awareness raising and
communication program for local people on pest management and pesticide and fertilizer
handling, storage and disposal.

OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples): An iterated process of free, prior and informed consultations
has demonstrated broad support for the project. During the project preparation, a large number of
consultations had been carried out with the ethnic minority communities to better understand their
needs and priorities. All the communes and villages under the project had organized public
meetings several times to discuss about the project activities and to develop their village
development plans to be supported by the project. Since the preparation of the parent project in
2009 and throughout the project implementation and preparation of the AF, several hundreds of
commune meetings and thousands of village meetings had been organized with meaningful
participation of EMs and women participating. As a CDD project, NMPRP-2 employs a
participatory approach in which project activities are prioritized and selected by the local people
through community meetings which are facilitated by well-trained Commune Facilitators, most of
them are ethnic minorities themselves, coming from those communities. In compliance with the
OP4.10, social assessment has been carried out to carefully review the social aspects of current
project implementation and to inform the technical changes of the AF. The assessments and
surveys include (i) the Livelihood Study which looked at the current livelihoods options of the
ethnic minorities and their recommendation for improvements in the AF; and (ii) the Mid-Term
Review and light survey which looked all project’s performance indicators including largely
beneficiaries’ satisfaction on various aspects of participation, voice and decision making, gender
and economic benefit.

The design changes coming out from those assessments include (i) further devolution of decision
making power to the commune center; (ii) support for institutionalization of the participatory
planning approach at the commune level; (iii) further support to sanitation and nutrition activities
given the very low indicators in these areas among the ethnic minorities; and (iii) focusing the
project training activities on skill and agriculture extensions training for the ethnic minorities/
CIGs. The AF maintains the well-established communications strategy and materials that apply
different and literacy appropriate media forms, community facilitation and women well-
represented commune development boards, among others.

The MTR and light survey of the NMPRP-2 showed that over 88% of beneficiaries reported
decreased time, labor and cost of transportation which is attributable to the established rural roads
invested under the project. Improved irrigation systems have helped to increase the irrigated areas
to around 25%, turning the one-crop production land into two-crop land, helping to increase the
overall rice outputs and reduce food insecurity among the ethnic minorities in the project areas.
There are also reported impacts of reduced distance and time in water fetching, and increase
amount of water for villagers. These in turn bring positive effects on health, sanitation and well-
being of the project beneficiaries. M&E data shows that of all surveyed farmers’ groups (CIGs),
around 78% of groups reported an increase in asset value, of which 39% reported a 200% increase
in asset value (compared to the capital investment at the beginning of the first production cycle).
The surveyed households expressed their satisfaction with the project’s investments as having
tangible use value.

OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement): The Government has updated the project’s Resettlement

                                           Page 8 of 12
 Policy Framework (RPF) which, in accordance with OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement,
 addresses issues relating to acquisition of land and/or other assets under the project. The final
 updated RPF will be approved by the Ministry of Planning and Investment and adopted by the
 project provinces for implementation at negotiation. The RPF presents the principles and
 objectives, eligibility criteria of displaced persons, modes of compensation and rehabilitation,
 participation features and grievance procedures that will guide the compensation and potential
 resettlement of affected persons. Prior to approval by local Government of the annual subproject
 investment plans, the provinces would review subproject designs, screening for social impacts and
 prepare an annual resettlement plan if subprojects involve acquisition of land and/or other assets of
 affected people, based on guidance stipulated in RPF. Voluntary land donation would be allowed
 under very specific guidelines/limitations, to be outlined in the PIM, and would be monitored
 closely. The Project Implementation Manual would include due diligent procedures concerning
 project activities involving voluntary land donations to ensure that (i) there are no legacy issues;
 (ii) such donations meet the Bank's criteria for voluntary land donations; i.e. that they indeed are
 voluntary, made without coercion and with a choice to say no; and (iii) that in cases where land
 donations do not meet the Bank's criteria measures are in place to fill such gaps.

 Given the small scale of infrastructure sub-projects under the parent project (at the averaged value
 of around USD80,000 – 140,000 per subproject) and of rehabilitation nature on existing
 alignments, impact on land and other assets was minimal. By end of June 2014, 15 annual
 Resettlement Plans were developed for compensation for 1,006 affected households with the total
 payment value of VND8,022,554,000 (USD378,000 or USD375/household on average). While the
 scale of subprojects under the AF remains the same as in the parent project, it is expected that the
 AF will even have lower impact, given that the proportion of overall funding for infrastructure
 investments has been reduced. Independent monitoring of safeguards implementation, capacity
 building for project staff at all level and information transparency were maintained throughout
 project implementation. The same arrangements and mechanism will apply under the AF.

  Borrower Capacity: Central Project Office had a considerable experience on safeguards through
  implementation of the parent project. A staff at CPO in charge of environmental and social
  safeguards will continue the task of managing and supervising safeguards implementation. There
  is also an experienced technical assistant team including social and environmental staff who is
  charged with monitoring and supervising the safeguards implementation in the field. Each
  participating PPMU has also appointed a position for safeguard implementation in their respective
  province. An independent agency was hired to monitor compliance throughout project
  implementation. Training will be further provided to project staff for implementing/supervising
  the ECOPs and RPs.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders of the Project are:
    -      The Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI)
    -      The Ministry of Finance (MOF)
   -       The Provincial People’s Committees of 6 project provinces
    -      The Provincial Department of Planning and Investment (DPI) of 6 project provinces and
  other Provincial Departments (DARD, DOF, DOIT, DONRE and Treasury)
    -      Project District People’s Committees and Districts Sections
    -      All project communes
    -      Ethnic minorities in all project villages


                                           Page 9 of 12
  Community assessments are the first step in both project identification and in local peoples'
  participation in project activities. Consistent with the Project's participatory framework, key
  beneficiaries, including women's groups, have participated in the first round of consultations.
  Inclusion of the smaller minority groups in remote and high-altitude villages is designed into
  consultation activities by means of outreach activities that have been established. The Project
  Implementation Manual (PIM) included guidelines and detailed steps for participatory planning
  which involve everyone in the villages.

  The revised ESMF and RPF in local language were disclosed to the public through MPI website
  and in the project sites and in English in the Bank’s InfoShop prior to appraisal.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                         11-Oct-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                      16-Oct-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Vietnam                                                             16-Oct-2014
  Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                         11-Oct-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                      16-Oct-2014
"In country" Disclosure
  Vietnam                                                             16-Oct-2014
  Comments:
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                         11-Oct-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                      16-Oct-2014
"In country" Disclosure
  Vietnam                                                             16-Oct-2014
  Comments: Since the whole project is designed to benefit IP, given the majority of project
                beneficiaries being ethnic minorities (94-100%), a stand-alone EMDP was not
                required. The OP4.10 elements have been incorporated into the project design,
                however.
 Pest Management Plan
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                         11-Oct-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                      16-Oct-2014




                                           Page 10 of 12
"In country" Disclosure
  Vietnam                                                            16-Oct-2014
  Comments: In response to OP 4.09, pest management is handled through the use of an
                Environmental Code of Practice that includes a set of guidelines on sustainable use
                of pesticides and fertilizers, included in the ESMF.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
 in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
 Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
 Indigenous Peoples?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the project cost?



                                           Page 11 of 12
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:      Name: Lan Thi Thu Nguyen
   Approved By
   Practice Manager/      Name: Nathan M. Belete (PMGR)                   Date: 26-Nov-2014
   Manager:




                                            Page 12 of 12
