                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA7129
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Africa                            Project ID:    P126848
                            Project Name:     Support for Capacity Dev't of the AUC and other African Union Organs
                                              (P126848)
                            Task Team         Waleed Haider Malik
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       20-Mar-2014                         Estimated   24-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTP2                                Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Central government administration (50%), General public administration sector
                                              (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Managing for development results (50%), Other public sector governance (30%),
                                              Regional integration (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      25.00           Total Bank Financing:                25.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                25.00
                              Total                                                                                    25.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           Strengthen AUC’s capacity to facilitate economic development results and transformation through
                           enhanced institutional efficiency. This will be achieved by means of enhancing the AUC's internal
                           human resources and management systems, and supporting result-oriented external partnerships and

                                                                      Page 1 of 6
                         collective actions designed to enhance the implementation of regional economic development
                         initiatives in priority areas (e.g. regional trade, energy, infrastructure, governance, natural resource
                         management) relevant to the AFR IDA portfolio for the benefit of African Union member states, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional economic communities and African citizens.
                         3. Project Description
                         The project will assist AUC operationalize its Strategic Plan 2014-17 and the Agenda 2063 regional
                         transformation priorities by encouraging the participation of all stakeholders including-member
                         states, AU Organs, PRC, RECs, private sector, civil society, media, development partners, African
                         Diaspora and citizens. Effort will also be made to draw on the AUC’s vast peacekeeping
                         experiences. It plans to adopt a learning process of institutional development to facilitate collective
                         actions . The proposed support will tie in with the ongoing institution building effort of AUC and
                         build on, collaborate with and complement other development partner efforts (e.g. EU, GIZ,
                         DFATD, DFID, SIDA, USAID, AusAID).

                         The World Bank’s support will focus on enhancing AUC’s institutional capacity to facilitate
                         collective actions through two interrelated components.

                         Component I. Strengthening Institutional Capacity. The aim of this component is to improve
                         strategic planning and management systems, budget execution, staff capacity, and ICT to provide
                         efficient functional, knowledge and corporate services in the AUC and other AU organs and generate
                         awareness of AUC and other AU organs activities among stakeholders to promote collaboration and
                         enhance financial viability.

                         This will be achieved through:
                         (a) Enhancing Corporate Governance and Management Systems: (i) This will involve provision of
                         support for the improvement of organization, systems and procedures in strategic planning, financial
                         management, budgeting, procurement, recruitment, administration and all other corporate services
                         for quality service provision in the AUC and select AU organs as per world standards (e.g. adoption
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) in financial reporting; ISO 20121:
                         Events Sustainability Management System in conference, translation and protocol services; and ISO/
                         IEC 27031:2011 Information and Communication Technology readiness principles in business
                         continuity of data services).

                         (b) Driving Operational Efficiency. (i) ICT Infrastructure. The design and set up of a state-of-the-art
                         AUC ICT center on the ground floor of the new AUC building with modern ICT infrastructure,
                         applications, and mobile devices for use by AUC staff and visiting delegations, featuring data
                         warehousing, distance learning, video conferencing capabilities. This will also support office
                         refurbishing to accommodate modern technology; (ii) Human Resources. The development of a
                         culture of continuous improvement among the professional, technical and general services staff by
                         organizing executive-development programs, skills training and offering specialized courses; and
                         (iii) Peer-to-Peer Learning. This will involve promotion of peer-to-peer learning for decision makers
                         in the AUC, AU organs, RECs and Permanent Representative Committee (PRC) with strategic
                         partners (e.g. OAS, ASEAN, EU) to benchmark institutional performance by using technologies,
                         retreats and exchange visits based on annual work plan.

                         (c) Enhancing Stakeholder Communication, Feedback and Participation. This would involve support
                         for Integrated Development Oriented results based communication, information, branding and
                         linking stakeholders via TV, radio, social media, mobile technology, and other means. Outreach


                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                         activities that enhance greater ownership and support for AUC led development initiatives amongst
                         different levels of stakeholders both public and private would also be supported.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This Component 1 will fund technical assistance, consultant services, training, communication,
                         outreach and dissemination materials and support for office refurbishing and ICT equipment and
                         software applications design and implementation. This Component will also fund awareness raising
                         activities with stakeholders that will help identify and prioritize partnerships for results oriented
                         engagements for collective action for regional transformation programs which will be promoted
                         under Component 2.
                         Component II. Facilitating Economic Development Results with Stakeholders.

                         Based on positive momentum gathered through the AUC’s awareness raising and operational
                         improvements in Component 1, this Component aims to commence supporting the difficult and long
                         term challenges of implementing regional transformational efforts.

                         This component endeavors to leverage AUC’s unique convening role and support results-oriented
                         external partnerships and collective actions designed to enhance the implementation of regional
                         economic development initiatives (e.g. CFTA, PIDA) through AUC’s policy harmonization,
                         knowledge and standard setting programs. It also aims to monitor the ratification and implementation
                         status of AU agreements in line with the AUC’s Strategic Plan 2014-18 and Agenda 2063, in priority
                         economic development areas relevant to the IDA portfolio (e.g. regional trade, agriculture, energy,
                         infrastructure, governance, natural resource management). This component is designed to promote
                         the AUC’s collaboration with its development partners (e.g. EU, USAID, GIZ, DFID, DFATD and
                         others) who have expressed interest in helping develop and partner in activities to be supported
                         under this project, and to permit the scale-up of innovative and promising initiatives that collectively
                         help to advance regional integration, transformation and African economic development.

                         This will be achieved through:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (a) Supporting Effective External Partnerships for Regional Transformation and Inclusive Growth.
                         Support would encourage innovations by RECs and civil society in promoting and sustaining intra-
                         African trade and good governance, in collaboration with development partners, relevant
                         stakeholders and beneficiary groups. These innovative pilots would include: (i) efforts led by
                         ECOSSOC’s CSO sectoral cluster committees to channel civil society views into the implementation
                         and monitoring of CFTA and other integration agreement; (ii) ‘smart’ methods for strengthening
                         government statistical capacity to measure progress in regional integration and its development
                         results; and (iii) developing and implementing good practice governance standards for investment
                         contract negotiation and enforcement (e.g. in extractives, energy) in member states. During
                         implementation, a consistent and sustained effort will be made to document the outcomes and lessons
                         of these pilots so that their relevance and effectiveness can be assessed, and appropriate steps can be
                         taken to disseminate and scale up those efforts that have been successful.

                         (b) Monitoring of AU Agreements and Program Implementation. This will involve development of
                         an AUC results monitoring and evaluation system, whereby AU agreement and program monitoring
                         would be improved through: (i) AUC Corporate Scorecard); (ii) AU Treaties Ratification and
                         Implementation Update; and (iii) Client Surveys through AU Organs and AU Regional Offices.

                         (c) Project Annual Work Plan, M&E, Learning and Coordination. This would involve provision of
                         implementation and coordination support, audit assistance and project dissemination. Annual work

                                                                       Page 3 of 6
                           plans (AWP) will be prepared and will be the basis of ongoing project M&E, lessons learning and
                           adjustments. In view of the challenges associated with collective action initiatives, a learning-by-
                           doing approach is proposed for project implementation which seeks to capture the art and science of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           service delivery for institutional outcomes and results where possible.

                           The funding support under Component 2 would involve technical assistance to the AUC and
                           participating AU Organs and entities for the organization of dialogues for consensus building and
                           partnership development, and piloting of initiatives and dissemination of their results. These
                           partnership initiatives would be encouraged, catalyzed and facilitated with development partners and
                           other stakeholders to promote synergies, enhance coordination and build joint actions for sustainable
                           change and monitoring of results.

                           Parallel financing commitments by donors for the first and second year of project implementation.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Alexandra C. Bezeredi (AFTSG)

                            6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/       No
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues



                                                                        Page 4 of 6
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           NA
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           NA
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           NA
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           NA
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           NA
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                          Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                          be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                          issue, been prepared
                          Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the OP?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?



                                                                      Page 5 of 6
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Waleed Haider Malik
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Abdoul Wahabi Seini (RSA)                    Date: 25-Mar-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Pablo Fajnzylber (SM)                        Date: 25-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
