                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                          ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                   Report No.: ISDSA6017

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Nov-2013
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Dec-2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:        Africa                            Project ID:    P146036
                                                     Parent         P112600
                                                     Project ID:
   Project Name:   Association for Strengthening Agricultural Research in East and Central Africa
                   Multi Donor Trust Fund (P146036)
   Parent Project  Association for Strengthening Agricultural Research in Eastern and Central
   Name:           Africa (ASARECA) Trust Fund (P112600)
   Task Team       Assaye Legesse
   Leader:
   Estimated       16-Sep-2013                       Estimated   31-Oct-2013
   Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
   Managing Unit: AFTA1                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                     Instrument:
   Sector(s):      Agricultural extension and research (60%), Tertiary education (25%), Public
                   administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (15%)
   Theme(s):       Rural policies and institutions (50%), Rural services and infrastructure (50%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:        30.00           Total Bank Financing:   0.00
   Financing Gap:              0.00
     Financing Source                                                                       Amount
     Borrower                                                                                  0.00
     CAADP Pillar 4 institutions                                                              30.00
     Total                                                                                    30.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a       Yes
   Repeater
   project?



                                           Page 1 of 9
2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   To support a program of integrated agricultural research for development (IAR4D) as described in
   ASARECA's Operational Plan. This will contribute to more effective use of resources devoted to
   agricultural research among the member countries and wider access to the results of research in
   the regional agricultural systems of Eastern and Central Africa.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   The objective of the ASARECA MDTF is to “to enhance access and utilization of agricultural
   research technologies and innovations in the regional agricultural systems of Eastern & Central
   Africa”.
3. Project Description
This is proposed additional financing to the ongoing ASARECA MDTF to support continued
investments in integrated agricultural research for development (IAR4D) in the East and Central
Africa (ECA) Region.

The original MDTF has four components, three of which are recipient-executed and one is Bank-
executed:

Component 1: Support to Research for Development;
Component 2: Support to ASARECA’s Governance Structures;
Component 3: Support to ASARECA’s Management; and Administration Structures; and
Component 4: World Bank MDTF Administration and Supervision.

Major activities under the first three components include agricultural research, dissemination and
adoption/adaptation of technologies; agricultural policy analysis and dissemination; strengthening of
national agricultural research systems, agricultural extension systems, agricultural education systems;
and institutional strengthening of the ASARECA Secretariat.

For purposes of this additional financing, the bulk of the funds will be allocated primarily to sub-
grants to support the scale-up, dissemination, adoption, and adaptation of existing technologies,
innovations and best practices generated under the original MDTF, which are expected to have
immediate positive economic impact for the intended beneficiaries. A portion of the funds would
also support continued generation of new technologies.

The funds will also support activities under a proposed new component: "Support to the
establishment of ASARECA as a sub-regional knowledge and information hub". The goal of the
Knowledge and Information Hub (KI-hub) is to increase the competitiveness of the agricultural
sector in the East and Central Africa region through influencing the uptake and up-scaling of
agricultural technologies, innovations and management practices (TIMPs); and policy and
information among stakeholders. The KI-hub will be a focal point for the generation and exchange of
knowledge, networking and development of new ideas. Among other things, it will mainstream new
scientific concepts in technology innovation, management practices and policies in the region. It will
serve to facilitate learning and increase the capabilities of ASARECA’s stakeholders which include


                                              Page 2 of 9
farmers, policy makers, national agricultural extension, research and academic institutions, relevant
government institutions, private sector, NGOs, the CGIAR, RECs and the media amongst others.

A portion of the funds will also finance the associated ASARECA M&E activities; ASARECA's
operational costs; and World Bank costs for continued grant oversight and administration.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Sub-grants approved for financing are designed as regional projects and will be implemented in all
the ASARECA member countries; Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Kenya, Madagascar, Rwanda, South Sudan, Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda. Specific sites where the
sub-projects will be implemented are not known at this stage. However, it is anticipated that most of
the research will be carried out in laboratories, on research stations or in identified farmer fields.
Scaling up activities will be carried out with identified farmers. Therefore, the Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be used to ensure environmental and social
sustainability. Overall the proposed AF is beneficial in supporting research activities that will help
boost agricultural production and productivity. It will also help in establishing an effective
knowledge and information hub coupled with building on lessons learned through a robust
monitoring, evaluation and learning system. The AF will also strengthen the existing mechanisms for
environmental and social safeguards (ESS). Sub-projects involved with exchange of genetic
materials and use of pesticides can cause adverse impacts on the environment if appropriate
mitigation measures are not implemented. As such, in line with the provisions of the ESMF, such
sub-projects will be required to prepare integrated pest management plans (IPMP) or environmental
management plan (EMP) to guide the implementation of mitigation measures.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Asferachew Abate Abebe (AFTN3)
Herbert Oule (AFTN3)
Constance Nekessa-Ouma (AFTCS)

 6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The AF is a category B, since the potential
 BP 4.01                                             environmental and social impacts are expected to
                                                     be minor, noncumulative, and site-specific, and
                                                     can be easily managed to an acceptable level. At
                                                     preparation of the parent MDTF, ASARECA
                                                     prepared an ESMF which provides guidelines for
                                                     addressing identified potential negative
                                                     environmental and social impacts and mitigation
                                                     measures. A screening and environmental
                                                     categorization process and criteria for monitoring
                                                     compliance are also provided. For the proposed
                                                     AF operation, the current ESMF has been
                                                     updated in a consultative manner and shall be
                                                     disclosed both by ASARECA and at the Infoshop
                                                     after approval. Where necessary (as determined
                                                     through screening) ESMPs and IPMPs shall be




                                             Page 3 of 9
                                                developed before implementation of the relevant
                                                sub-projects.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              Per the ESMF ASARECA funded projects
                                                cannot be implemented inside protected areas or
                                                other critical habitats. In addition, ASARECA
                                                resources cannot be used for activities that
                                                involve a significant conversion or degradation of
                                                critical natural habitats either directly or
                                                indirectly.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes             The Forests Policy is triggered as ASARECA’s
                                                eight programs include some aspects of Forestry.
                                                However ASARECA does not intend to change
                                                the management, protection, or utilization of
                                                forests. ASARECA's ESMF includes measures to
                                                ensure that relevant requirements of this policy
                                                are met, including: (i) preference for the siting of
                                                plantations on unforested sites or lands already
                                                converted; and (ii) measures to prevent the
                                                introduction of invasive species that threaten
                                                biodiversity.
Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes             The policy is triggered. The generation and
                                                adoption of improved agricultural technologies by
                                                ASARECA funded sub-projects could potentially
                                                and indirectly result in the increased use of
                                                pesticides and agrochemicals by farmers, but the
                                                scale of this indirect impact is not known. Basing
                                                on the experience gained during OP1 and as per
                                                the provisions of the ESMF, such sub-projects
                                                must include a project specific pest management
                                                plan that includes the application of integrated
                                                pest management (IPM) practices, incorporating
                                                the promotion of biological and environmental
                                                control methods over chemical pesticides where
                                                possible; and the application and promotion of
                                                pesticide management practices outlined in the
                                                guidelines of the International Code of Conduct
                                                on the Distribution and Use of Pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              Per the ESMF ASARECA cannot fund activities
BP 4.11                                         that would damage physical cultural property.
                                                ASARECA sub-project activities will not expand
                                                technology generation and dissemination
                                                activities to research areas or on-farm
                                                demonstration plots that include physical cultural
                                                resources. The ASARECA research projects are
                                                conducted either in laboratories, research stations




                                        Page 4 of 9
                                                     or on farmland identified and offered by the
                                                     farmers themselves.
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No                There are no Indigenous Peoples in any of the
                                                     anticipated project areas.
   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No                No physical resettlement is anticipated due to
   4.12                                              the nature of ASARECA's anticipated research
                                                     activities under the proposed AF. Furthermore,
                                                     per the stipulations of ASARECA's ESMF,
                                                     ASARECA resources cannot be used for any
                                                     activity that would require involuntary
                                                     resettlement. Any change of land use to
                                                     agriculture will be the decision of the farmers
                                                     themselves.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No                ASARECA sub-projects will not fund any large
                                                     dams, as defined by OP 4.37. However in the
                                                     event, some projects fund simple diversion weirs
                                                     and other small-scale water control structures,
                                                     they cannot per the ESMF guidelines, exceed ten
                                                     meters in height. Mitigation measures for any
                                                     identified impacts shall be well highlighted in an
                                                     EMP.
   Projects on International         No                ASARECA funded sub-projects will not invest
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                              in any large-scale irrigation works in general, and
                                                     more specifically, any that would adversely affect
                                                     the quality or quantity of water flow within
                                                     shared international waterways. Small-scale
                                                     irrigation within the context of technology
                                                     demonstration or research may potentially be
                                                     included in some of the sub-projects, however,
                                                     this would be within the context of relatively
                                                     small research facilities.
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 Anticipated project areas are not known to
   7.60                                              include any disputed areas.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     Anticipated Additional Financing sub-project activities will fall under category B, (partial
     assessment). The safeguards policies that are triggered are Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
     4.01) Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09) and Forests (OP/BP 4.36). As a result, there will be no
     change in the current MDTF’s environmental B categorization or safeguards implementation
     arrangements, and as such the MDTF's safeguards categorization for the additional financing is
     also a category B. No significant and/or irreversible impacts are anticipated.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:


                                             Page 5 of 9
  The bulk of the AF resources will be used to validate and scale up available agricultural
  technologies generated under the original grant financing and are rated an environmental category
  B. No irreversible environmental and social impacts from technologies generated under the
  original grant have been recorded thus far. Consequently, the anticipated AF project activities are
  not expected to have any significant adverse effect on the environment nor trigger major
  safeguards issues.

  The proposed activities could however potentially induce indirect but manageable impacts
  associated with handling and use of agricultural chemicals. These are expected to be minor, of low
  intensity, and site specific. While the new AF sub-projects have not yet been identified, based on
  ongoing and past experience and the nature of ASARECA’s research activities, these activities are
  not expected to have any significant negative social impacts. They will not involve any land
  acquisition or resettlement and implementation will take place within existing research stations,
  other implementing institutions or on farmland of interested farmers. The beneficiaries are
  predominantly small-scale farmers who dominate African agriculture in which women play a
  pivotal role. ASARECA’s project vetting process ensures that sub-grantees approved for funding
  also take into consideration the critical role of gender and youth, and respond to their specific
  circumstances.

  Overall, the net environmental and social impacts of the funded activities are expected to be
  positive since they will support the up-scaling of environmentally and socially sound agricultural
  technologies along with improvement of livelihoods.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  The possible alternative considered here is that of no project support which may lead to a no
  research or drastically reduced research scenario. This is not a desirable situation for ASARECA
  and for the ECA region as a whole.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  ASARECA has an ESMF which was approved by the Bank in 2008 at the time of preparation of
  the parent MDTF and disclosed to the public through the Bank's infoShop and in-country by
  ASARECA. It has been updated for purposes of the Additional Financing. The ESMF incorporates
  the necessary requirements to ensure that the applicable safeguard policies are applied to all
  activities supported by the MDTF, as appropriate. All proposals for sub-projects are subject to
  environmental and social screening to identify potential negative impacts, covering both those
  directly pertaining to the research to be undertaken, as well as those associated with the
  application on a larger scale of the results of research. They are then subsequently categorized to
  ensure that the appropriate assessment level is determined. Projects that involve land acquisition or
  resettlement will not be allowed. Where applicable, ESMPs and IPMPs will be prepared for the
  new sub-projects. Since 2008 many environmental management plans have been prepared based
  on an EMP prepared by ASARECA. For example, the EMPs prepared for the Projects “Validation
  and Dissemination of Quality Fruit Trees in Ethiopia and Uganda” and “Validating and scaling out
  Banana juice Processing Technology in Rwanda” are worth mentioning. Similarly an IPMP was
  prepared as deemed necessary. For example the IPMP prepared for the project “Upscaling ticks
  and tick borne diseases control in ECA” is worth mentioning. In addition, ASARECA has
  established a rigorous competitive grant system to select activities for funding.




                                             Page 6 of 9
  Over the course of implementation of the original grant, ASARECA made significant
  improvements in its management of ESS. As per the Bank’s recommendation ASARECA now has
  a full time environmental and social safeguards specialist on board to provide guidance, technical
  support and ensure rigorous follow-up of all safeguards in ASARECA’s interventions. As such,
  ASARECA has made significant improvements in its management of environmental and social
  safeguards, including the streamlining of a screening and categorization process to ensure
  adherence to the safeguards requirements for sub-project preparation and implementation by both
  ASARECA and implementing partners. In addition, increased capacity building efforts for
  implementing institutions and partners over the past one year have led to improvement in the level
  of ESS compliance by project implementers. Based on the experiences gained over the last five
  years of grant implementation, the ESMF has been revised and updated so as to offer more
  effective guidance to project implementers.

  For the purposes of implementation of the proposed activities, ASARECA will conduct training
  workshops on safeguards for relevant implementing agencies during the launching of project
  activities. Training of affected small holder farmers, the direct beneficiaries, will be done during
  the early stages of project implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  ASARECA's stakeholders include farmers, policy makers, national agricultural extension, research
  and academic institutions, the private sector, relevant government institutions of the 11 member
  countries which ASARECA serves, and COMESA, the Regional Economic Community.
  Stakeholders consulted during preparation of the ESMF under the parent MDTF and during its
  review and update include the National Agricultural Research Systems (NARs) and the
  environmental agencies of the ASARECA member countries. As such, the preparation of the
  ESMF drew on inputs from these stakeholder consultations.

  The ESMF has been updated for purposes of the AF. It will be re-disclosed in the region through
  ASARECA's website and the World Bank's intranet.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   23-Sep-2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                25-Sep-2008
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Uganda                                                        08-Sep-2008
  Comments: The National Agricultural Research Systems (NARs) of the member countries which
                ASARECA serves were consulted during preparation of the ESMF in 2008. The
                ESMF was disclosed on the ASARECA website which is accessible to all the
                member countries and other key stakeholders.
 Pest Management Plan
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                NA
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   NA
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                NA


                                            Page 7 of 9
"In country" Disclosure

  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Is a separate PMP required?                                       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
 in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
 Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
 Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 and constraints been carried out?
 Does the project design include satisfactory measures to          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 overcome these constraints?
 Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
 related to safeguard policies?




                                            Page 8 of 9
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Assaye Legesse
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 06-Dec-2013
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Tijan M. Sallah (SM)                         Date: 06-Dec-2013




                                             Page 9 of 9
