                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC1851

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Argentina                       Project ID:      P133129
                            Project Name:     Argentina Youth Employment Support Project (P133129)
                            Task Team         Rafael P. Rofman
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         15-Oct-2014                     Estimated        13-Jan-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSPDR                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Other social services (50%), Vocational training (25%),
                                              Other social services (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Improving labor markets (33%), Social Inclusion (33%), Education for the
                                              knowledge economy (17%), Education for all (17%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    735.00                   Total Bank Financing:        400.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                   335.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      400.00
                              Total                                                                      735.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the proposed project is to improve access and employability of
                           vulnerable youth population to labor markets, by supporting the expansion and strengthening of
                           Government employment programs and improving the policy making and implementation capacity
                           of MTESS.
                           C. Project Description
                         The lending instrument proposed is a specific sector investment loan for an estimated amount of US
                         $400 million. To achieve its objectives, the project would support the following activities through
                         three components: i) coverage expansion and operational strengthening of the Youth Employment
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Program (JMyMT), ii) improvement of orientation and training services offered to program
                         participants aimed at increasing their employability and likelihood for job placement and job
                         mobility; iii) strengthening and expanding the network of Municipal Employment Offices.

                         The project will include three components:

                         Component 1: Coverage Expansion and Operational Strengthening of the JMyMT: This component
                         would aim at increasing the program's coverage to young people by the end of the project, expanding
                         coverage and improving the MTESS capacity to implement it by: a) financing cash transfers/grants to
                         youth (between 18 and 24 years) enrolled in the program and participating in program activities
                         including, among others, labor orientation, completion of basic education, professional training, work
                         experience, job search; and b) financing technical assistance to the Ministry of Labor to enhance its
                         monitoring and evaluation systems for the JMyMT Program, including specific studies and activities
                         associated with the development of an information platform.

                         Activities of this component would also include optimizing the management of the employment and
                         vocational training policies and the labor intermediation processes through the improvement of tools
                         for obtaining and managing information at the local and national levels. During project preparation
                         agreement would be reached with the Ministry of Labor on the design and arrangements for carrying
                         out impact evaluations on several project interventions, including youth orientation/training and work
                         experience scheme. The estimated amount to be financed through this component is US$185 million.

                         Component 2: Improvement of orientation and training services offered to program participants. This
                         component would aim at improving the quality and relevance of orientation and training services
                         offered to program participants, by financing the provision and improvement of these services.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Activities to be funded would include the design and implementation of workshops and training
                         courses, development of competency standards, training of evaluators, improvement and certification
                         of training institutions, curriculum design, teacher training, and strengthening of Sector Councils
                         responsible for overseeing training programs.

                         The component would also finance the expansion and strengthening of a job competency-based
                         certification system. The certification implies the definition and validation of competency-based
                         standards, the standardization of certified competency-based training, and the issuing of competency-
                         based certificates. These activities will continue those that were supported by the Lifelong Learning
                         Project since 2007, expanding coverage to new sectors of the economy (defined considering their
                         size and potential generation of formal job opportunities). In particular, this component would
                         finance: the development of 50 labor competency based standards; the evaluation and certification of
                         10,000 youth in competency-based standards; the training of 200 evaluators; the strengthening of 150
                         training institutions by providing basic equipment; the quality certification of 75 training institutions
                         using IRAM (the national institution in Argentina responsible for standard certification) standards;
                         the design of 50 curriculums with their corresponding teaching materials; and the training of 1,500
                         teachers. Most of these activities would be financed through results-based mechanisms, using a
                         design that will be developed during project preparation. The component would also finance
                         technical coordination and implementation for the project. The estimated amount to be financed by
                         this component is US$ 145 million.
                         Component 3: Strengthening and expanding the network of Municipal Employment Offices (OEM):
                         This component would aim at strengthening the capacity and quality of the employment services
Public Disclosure Copy




                         offered by the Municipal Employment Offices to program participants by incorporating new
                         methodologies and management practices of OEMs already incorporated in the network and new
                         offices to be incorporated.

                         The activities supported by this component include the provision of training to OEM staff, technical
                         assistance to improve efficiency and monitor results, and IT resources, as necessary. Financial
                         support from MTESS to the offices would be designed as a results based scheme, where transfers
                         would be linked to a set of performance indicators, to generate efficiency incentives within the
                         system. The World Bank’s financing would also use a result-based financing mechanism, linking
                         disbursements to the MTESS to progress in a set of key performance indicators in service delivery, to
                         be defined during project preparation. The estimated amount to be financed by this component is US
                         $ 70 million.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project activities have national coverage. Municipal Employment Offices offering the Youth
                         with More and Better Jobs Program exist in 274 locations with a targeted expansion to 320.

                         The project will benefit indigenous communities and rural populations. Direct beneficiaries will be
                         youth between 18 and 24 years. 20 of the 24 provinces in Argentina have been identified to include
                         indigenous populations (IP). According to the 2010 census the IP between 18 and 24 years is 118,021
                         (59,207 males and 58,814 females). 69% of the overall indigenous population is in the age range of
                         20-24 years (50.4% are male and 49.6% female). IPPs have been developed under the Lifelong
                         Learning Project (LLL), AR Basic Project (ABP) and AF Basic Protection projects for the provinces
                         that include IPs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         According to a survey conducted in June 2012, the Ministry of Labor serves about 4,000 indigenous
                         people in the 12 provinces where the IPPs are being implemented. 53% are female, and 57% belong
                         to the age group ranging from 18 to 35 years and 37% between 35 and 55. The same survey
                         highlighted that while the goal of incorporating indigenous people was met (and surpassed) in the
                         provinces surveyed, a large number of beneficiaries – both indigenous and non-indigenous - could
                         not enter the system due to lack of employment offices and/or agencies in all municipalities. The
                         proposed project would take this issue into account and consider barriers that indigenous peoples
                         may experience.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Argentina has extensive experience in the management of Indigenous Peoples safeguards for World
                         Bank projects in the social sectors, as exemplified by the Lifelong Learning (LLL) and the Argentina
                         Basic Protection (ABP) projects, currently under execution and close related with this proposal. The
                         team in charge of implementing activities based on the Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) for the
                         above-mentioned projects has demonstrated strong capacity in this area, and was assigned the same
                         responsibility for the proposed Youth Employment Support Project. The implementation of the IPPs
                         under LLL and ABP is underway with satisfactory results and the social assessments at provincial
                         level are updated annually.

                         It is important to point out that, as a result of lessons learned from the project mentioned above this
                           Project would consider the inclusion of a specific budget to allow for the implementation of the IPPs,
                           aimed at further strengthening the country's capacity to execute activities under the triggered
                           safeguard.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The existing projects have guaranteed that indigenous people will benefit from the activities of the
                           project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Isabel Tomadin (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No              This policy should not be triggered given that
                           BP 4.01                                              due to the nature and scope of the proposed
                                                                                activities no impact on the environment is
                                                                                expected.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No              This policy should not be triggered since no
                                                                                impact is expected on natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No              This policy should not be triggered given that
                                                                                the project has no foreseen activities that will
                                                                                affect forests.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No              This policy should not be triggered given that
                                                                                no activities will include pest use or
                                                                                procurement of pesticides.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No              This policy should not be triggered since the
                           BP 4.11                                              project does not foresee any investment
                                                                                activities that require removal of soil.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        Yes             This policy is triggered given that this is a
                                                                                project with national coverage and Indigenous
                                                                                Peoples as defined by OP 4.10 are present in
                                                                                Argentina. Indigenous Peoples are among the
                                                                                most vulnerable groups in the labor market, and
                                                                                they could potentially benefit from project
                                                                                activities given the project's focus on the
                                                                                inclusion of vulnerable youth in the labor
                                                                                market.

                                                                                A National Indigenous Peoples Plan (NIPP) will
                                                                                be developed as part of the proposed Youth
                                                                                Inclusion Project. It will build on the existing
                                                                                IPPF and IPPs under the LLL, AR Basic Project
                                                                                and AF Basic Protection projects, as well as on
                                                                                lessons learned from the Projects'
                                                                                implementation and from the Bank experience.
                                                                                The NIPP will guide national level interventions
                                                                                and consultations with key national indigenous
                         peoples stakeholders, and will help the project
                         team to identify and address the specific barriers
                         that IPs face in entering the formal labor market
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in Argentina and propose actions on how the
                         intermediation services and the vocational and
                         soft skills training offered by the MTESS can
                         reach IPs and be offered in a way that is relevant
                         and culturally appropriate. The Ministry of
                         Labor will present the NIPP before the members
                         of the Indigenous Participation Council of INAI,
                         and before other Indigenous Peoples
                         communities in order to provide information on
                         the Project activities, promote the participation
                         of Indigenous communities in its
                         implementation, and to receive suggestions.
                         During Project implementation, the
                         consultations and collaboration between the
                         Ministry of Labor and INAI and the Indigenous
                         Participation Council would continue with the
                         aim of improving the efficiency and cultural
                         appropriateness of the specific activities of the
                         Project. For those Provinces and/or
                         Municipalities which have been, or in the future
                         are, identified as triggering OP 4.10, the NIPP
                         would be an integral part of the Agreements that
                         will be signed between the Province and/or
                         Municipalities, and the Ministry of Labor for
                         the implementation of the Project. Each
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Agreement needs to be signed before loan funds
                         are advanced to a Province and/or Municipality.

                         The project will also prepare a broader social
                         assessment to identify the vulnerable groups,
                         such as women and other rural populations,
                         which might require targeted interventions.
                         Given that the project objective is to integrate
                         vulnerable youth into the labor market and that
                         young women have considerably higher rates of
                         unemployment and underemployment in
                         Argentina, the team will work to identify what
                         are the specific barriers that women face in
                         entering the formal labor market and plan
                         specific actions to address these gaps. Also, the
                         project will introduce gender disaggregated
                         indicators.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            This policy should not be triggered given that
                                 4.12                                                                                            the project will not result in involuntary
                                                                                                                                 resettlement nor require land acquisition.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This policy should not be triggered given that
                                                                                                                                 the project will neither support the construction
                                                                                                                                 or rehabilitation of dams nor will it support
                                                                                                                                 other investments which rely on the services of
                                                                                                                                 existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            This policy should not be triggered given that
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            no project activities will affect international
                                                                                                                                 waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This policy should not be triggered since project
                                 7.60                                                                                            activities will not take place in disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 27-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The Social Assessment and the National Indigenous Peoples Plan (NIPP) will be prepared before
                                      appraisal Since, as stated above, for those Provinces and/or Municipalities which have been, or in
                                      the future are, identified as triggering OP 4.10, the NIPP would be an integral part of the
                                      Agreements that will be signed between the Province and/or Municipalities, and the Ministry of
                                      Labor for the implementation of the Project; each Agreement will need to be signed before loan
                                      funds are advanced to a Province and/or Municipality.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Rafael P. Rofman

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Maria Elena Garcia Mora (RSA)                                                                                        Date: 20-Nov-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Margaret Ellen Grosh (SM)                                                                                            Date: 26-Sep-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
