                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC5998

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Myanmar                         Project ID:      P147629
                            Project Name:      Agricultural Development Support Project (P147629)
                            Task Team          Paavo Eliste
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Sep-2014                     Estimated        05-Feb-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASTS                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Irrigation and drainage (30%), Agricultural extension and research (30%), Crops
                                               (40%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural services and infrastructure (60%), Other rural development (20%),
                                               Climate change (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    100.00                     Total Bank Financing:       100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 100.00
                              Total                                                                       100.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective is to increase crop yields and cropping intensity in the
                           target irrigated areas. This will be achieved through improved provision of irrigation and farm
                           advisory and technical services.
                           C. Project Description
                         Project Beneficiaries are expected to include farm households with direct access to irrigated land;
                         rural households who engage as workers on the irrigated land; and households who would participate
                         in labor intensive works of rehabilitation and maintenance of irrigation infrastructure.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Approach. The project will use phased approach which allows for flexible identification of the
                         number and size of target gravity irrigation perimeters. It is suggested that the project
                         implementation will start with smaller and technically simple irrigation sites while carrying out
                         studies for more complex sites. Local communities will be consulted to seek their inputs and
                         agreement to participate in project activities. The specific boundaries and features of the irrigation
                         schemes within these sites will be determined as an output of the technical feasibility studies which
                         include relevant environmental and social assessment to be prepared during the first year of the
                         project implementation.

                         Components. The proposed project has four components: (i) Irrigation and Drainage Management
                         (US$70 million); (ii) Farm Advisory and Technical Services (US$23 million); (iii) Project
                         Coordination and Management (US$7 million); and (iv) Emergency Contingency Response (US$0
                         million):

                         Component 1. Irrigation and Drainage Management and Land Improvement

                         This component seeks to enhance the provision of irrigation and drainage services and improve their
                         management in designated pilot areas. The project would support the following sub-components:

                         1.1 Strengthening Irrigation and Drainage Management Institutions. Capacity building of relevant
                         MOAI departments for improved service delivery; farmers and water user groups as their clients, and
                         the Agriculture Coordination Committees (ACCs) as their joint platform for planning and
                         monitoring. The sub-component would aim to establish water user groups as an entry point for
                         enhanced on-farm water management in the target project irrigation sites. Strengthening of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         capacity of ACC and relevant MOAI staff responsible for water allocation and distribution
                         scheduling on relevant township or district level for the establishment of joint planning procedures
                         for irrigation and drainage service delivery, asset management, O&M, and related strategic studies.

                         1.2 Rehabilitation and Upgrading of Irrigation, Drainage and Flood Management Infrastructure. The
                         project would finance modifications, rehabilitation or modernization of primary, secondary and
                         tertiary canals and drainage systems in the selected existing irrigation schemes, and where necessary
                         single purpose irrigation dams. The project may rehabilitate farm roads attached to the irrigation
                         schemes. It will pilot 2-3 small land improvement schemes in the targeted irrigation areas with the
                         focus on demonstration of climate-smart agriculture techniques.

                         Component 2: Farm Advisory and Technical Services

                         This component seeks to enhance MOAI farm advisory services at target districts which host selected
                         irrigation schemes to improve farmer crop choices and increase farm productivity. The project would
                         support the following sub-components and activities:

                         2.1 Seed Multiplication. The sub-component would support the production of foundation seed,
                         registered seed and multiplication of certified seed by farmers and seed multiplication groups in
                         project villages. Support will be provided for seed inspections to ensure quality of seed produced
                         under the project and for technical assistance to finalize seed policies, plant variety rights and other
                         related regulatory requirements.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2.2 Soil Management. The sub-component will support soil mapping in target irrigation schemes
                         which will be used to develop fertilizer use recommendations for each soil type in project sites to be
                         introduced to farmers through on-farm extension demonstrations to show their effectiveness.

                         2.3 Plant protection. The sub-component would support establishment of the specimen-based
                         problem identification collections of pests in project regions which will be used to develop
                         appropriate IPM techniques to be demonstrated to farmers through on-farm extension demonstrations
                         to farmers.

                         2.4 Extension of Modern Farming Practices. The sub-component will support the delivery of the
                         extension, farmer training and on-farm demonstrations activities of the technologies and developed
                         under activities 2.1-2.3.

                         2.5 Farm Mechanization. The sub-component would support the existing mechanization training
                         centers, including purchase and testing of a limited number of farm machinery and equipment which
                         are suitable for the demonstration of climate-smart agriculture techniques relevant to the small-holder
                         farming systems in Central Dry Zone.

                         Component 3: Project Coordination and Management

                         The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established, which will be responsible for the overall
                         coordination of the project implementation and fiduciary arrangements.

                         Component 4: Emergency Contingency Response

                         The objective of this zero component is to allow a rapid reallocation of funds from other components
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to provide rapid response support to disaster, emergency and/or catastrophic events as needed.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project locations. The target irrigation schemes are located in well-established agricultural
                         production areas in Naypyitaw, Bago-East, Mandalay, and Sagaing regions. It is estimated that the
                         project would target 7-8 irrigation schemes over its life. The project will target small and medium
                         sized schemes. Selection of sites is determined based on criteria, which include their economic and
                         financial viability, technical readiness, environmental and social impacts (e.g. no significant
                         environmental and social impacts, no conflict over land or water resources or vicinity to sensitive
                         ecological sites) and in line with the limited implementation capacity of MoAI. The project would
                         utilize only surface water resources eventually linked to the international waterway Ayeyarwady
                         River through which is being delivered through gravity fed irrigation systems, and there are no plans
                         to utilize groundwater resources. There are no known important cultural resources in the project
                         areas.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         A lack of legal requirements and limited institutional capacity for ensuring effective safeguard
                         preparation and implementation is one of the major concerns for the Bank’s engagement in
                         Myanmar. Addressing this constraint would require concerted efforts among several government
                           agencies to introduce and start implementing appropriate social and environmental protection
                           policies. A longer term initiatives to build such institutional capacity and provide adequate training is
                           needed through concerted efforts supported by donors.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           All implementing agencies are not familiar with Bank safeguard policies nor have experience and
                           capacity in implementing such policies. As such, the project activities must be easy to implement,
                           and should not have complex technical, social or environmental issues. The project would provide
                           specific support for safeguard capacity building at the central level of the MOAI. Additional
                           safeguard expertize is needed during the first year of project implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Pamornrat Tansanguanwong (EASTS)
                           Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (EASER)
                           Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)
                           Josefo Tuyor (EASDE)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project will finance the implementation of
                           BP 4.01                                               irrigation and drainage infrastructure, farm
                                                                                 advisory and technical services and institutional
                                                                                 strengthening, among others. In particular, it
                                                                                 will finance rehabilitation, upgrading and
                                                                                 maintenance of main conveyance, flow control
                                                                                 and sediment management systems and de-
                                                                                 siltation of existing irrigation and drainage
                                                                                 infrastructure; rehabilitation of on-farm water
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 management infrastructure and land leveling in
                                                                                 selected systems and possible expansion of on-
                                                                                 farm irrigation and drainage services to new
                                                                                 areas within existing irrigation command
                                                                                 systems; and, irrigation site planning and
                                                                                 preparation, including pre-feasibility studies for
                                                                                 building a pipeline of potential investment
                                                                                 projects and full technical feasibility studies for
                                                                                 selected sites. The envisaged investments are
                                                                                 typical to similar agriculture development
                                                                                 projects and are not expected to have adverse
                                                                                 and unprecedented environmental and social
                                                                                 impacts. Implementation of irrigation and
                                                                                 drainage infrastructure and land improvements
                                                                                 investments on farmer fields under Component
                                                                                 1 are mainly rehabilitation by their nature and
                                                                                 not expected to have significant negative
                                                                                 environment and social impacts. During the
                                                                                 project preparation, the Bank will: (i) review the
                                                                                 rules and procedures of allocation of land user
                         rights in target irrigation schemes; (ii) assess the
                         social impact of any investments on
                         beneficiaries, and (iii) develop rules for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         participatory decision making process in
                         compliance with the Bank requirements and
                         align with the approaches of other donors who
                         finance similar investments (JICA, IFAD).

                         The irrigation sites will be selected against
                         economic, technical, social and environmental
                         viability criteria agreed with MOAI. It is
                         expected that the project would target 7-8
                         existing irrigation sites in four project regions.

                         The proposed project has been proposed as
                         category B because all the physical work will
                         take place within footprint of the existing
                         irrigated parameters of well established
                         agriculture lands. The impacts of the proposed
                         project on the environment are expected to be
                         overall positive as the project, by design, puts
                         strong emphasis on the development of
                         sustainable and climate resilient agricultural
                         production systems. Negative impacts are
                         mainly related to small scale construction
                         activities which are limited to the rehabilitation
                         and improvement of existing irrigated
                         agriculture infrastructure (eg construction waste
Public Disclosure Copy




                         disposal, etc).

                         To address the environment and social impacts
                         and enhance positive impacts, the following will
                         be undertaken:

                         1. During project preparation, the project will
                         develop an Environment and Social
                         Management Framework (ESMF) that will
                         guide the screening and assessment of
                         environment and social impacts of various
                         activities related to Component 1 particularly
                         the civil works and the preparation of pre-
                         feasibility and feasibility studies of priority
                         investments under Component 1. The ESMF
                         will also provide the details on the type, level
                         and depth of environmental and social impact
                         assessments (ESIAs/EMPs) required for each of
                         the investments and the conduct of cumulative
                         impact assessments, where relevant, based upon
                         the outcomes of the screening. Public
                         consultation will be held in line with triggered
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Bank policies. The ESMF approach is justified
                         because the site-specific feasibility studies,
                         which would provide information about specific
                         social and environmental impacts, will be
                         completed after the project effectiveness. In
                         addition, the ESMF and associated safeguard
                         documents would provide guidance for the
                         preparation of the Resettlement Action Plans
                         and Indigenous Peoples Plans during project
                         implementation.

                         2. Social assessment will be undertaken during
                         project preparation. The social assessment will
                         cover all relevant social impacts, such as land
                         tenure, livelihoods, relationship between
                         irrigation schemes and respective populations,
                         etc, not only among ethnic minorities but also
                         broad poor and vulnerable social categories. It
                         will cover also gender issues related to the
                         project investments and access to project
                         activities.

                         3. During implementation, the Terms of
                         References (TORs) for the various studies,
                         including the pre-feasibility and feasibility
Public Disclosure Copy




                         studies of priority investments, including
                         advisory services, among others, will
                         incorporate environmental and social impact
                         assessments and considerations to ensure that
                         safeguard issues and measures are
                         mainstreamed into these studies and advisory
                         services.

                         4. During implementation, the pre-feasibility
                         and feasibility studies of the infrastructure
                         investments will include environmental and
                         social impact assessments consistent with the
                         ESMF.

                         5. During implementation, the safeguard
                         capacity of institutions involved in the project
                         will also be supported through sustained
                         trainings and learning by doing type of
                         activities.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   There is insufficient information to make a
                                                                 determination of whether this policy is triggered
                                                                 or not by the project. The impact of the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 on natural habitats will be determined during
                                                                 preparation.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project will not finance activities that will
                                                                 affect forest, forest health and forest-dependent
                                                                 communities.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   The project will include promotion of integrated
                                                                 pest management and production systems. No
                                                                 procurement of chemical pesticides is
                                                                 envisaged. The project will procure fertilizers as
                                                                 part of extension demonstrations of technical
                                                                 packages. However, the improved irrigation
                                                                 facilities and diversification of crop systems
                                                                 may induce some pesticides use leading to
                                                                 increase usage. A Pest Management Plan
                                                                 focusing on integrated pest management will be
                                                                 developed during preparation and disseminated,
                                                                 promoted and adopted during implementation.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Preliminary screening indicates that there are no
                         BP 4.11                                 known physical important cultural resources in
                                                                 the irrigated perimeters which could be affected
                                                                 by the project. However, given that the specific
                                                                 locations for the irrigation systems are not yet
                                                                 determined, the policy is marked “TBD” and the
                                                                 determination whether to trigger the policy or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 not will be done during project preparation.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   There are ethnic minorities living in the
                                                                 proposed project regions who may fall within
                                                                 the definition of Indigenous Peoples as per
                                                                 OP4.10. A Social Assessment will be conducted
                                                                 during preparation which will assess potential
                                                                 impacts on ethnic minorities on access to land
                                                                 and other natural resources and on their
                                                                 livelihood. Free, prior and informed
                                                                 consultations will also be conducted with
                                                                 affected ethnic groups. If their broad community
                                                                 support to the project is not ascertained, the
                                                                 project will not be implemented in such areas.
                                                                 The Indigenous People Development
                                                                 Framework (IPDF) will be prepared based on
                                                                 the results and in line with OP 4.10, which will
                                                                 lay out processes and procedures to develop
                                                                 site- specific Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPPs),
                                                                 and conduct ethnic screening and Social
                                                                Assessments during implementation including
                                                                free, prior and informed consultations with
                                                                affected ethnic minorities leading to their broad
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                community support for the investments that will
                                                                be identified during implementation.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   The project will not cause major land
                         4.12                                   acquisition or resettlement in any of the project
                                                                regions. Civil works are planned only for canal
                                                                (main and secondary) dredging of irrigation and
                                                                drainage systems, and on-farm work on their
                                                                original bases. The proposed civil works will be
                                                                undertaken in the crop idle seasons so as to
                                                                avoid impact of temporary land occupation on
                                                                crops as much as possible. However, there
                                                                might be some minor readjustment, on-field
                                                                extension of tertiary channels or changes of land
                                                                use for some irrigation facility rehabilitation
                                                                connecting with upstream facilities in order to
                                                                improve water supply and drainage in existing
                                                                fields and bring irrigation water to peripheral
                                                                fields within existing irrigation perimeters and
                                                                construction of farm access roads. The project
                                                                may also support land levelling works in 2-3
                                                                pilot sites which would need to be in line with
                                                                the OP 4.12.A Land Acquisition and
                                                                Resettlement Policy Framework (LARF) will be
                                                                prepared to address potential impact of land
                                                                acquisition and provide detailed steps to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                prepare, if found to be necessary, site specific
                                                                RAPs during implementation. Some portion of
                                                                farmer fields may be acquired for on-field
                                                                infrastructure development as voluntary
                                                                donation. LARF will provide clear principles
                                                                and requirements with regard to voluntary
                                                                donation including the requirement that only
                                                                insignificant size of land can be acquired under
                                                                voluntary donations which are allowed only if
                                                                people who donate assets benefit from the
                                                                project.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        Yes   Although the Project will not finance
                                                                construction of new dams, the irrigation systems
                                                                financed by the Project would draw water
                                                                directly from specialized irrigation reservoirs
                                                                formed by a number of existing dams, and they
                                                                could not function if the dams failed. A due
                                                                diligence of these dams on their safety and
                                                                integrity will be conducted during preparation
                                                                                                                                 and a Dam Safety and Integrity Report will be
                                                                                                                                 prepared. Corrective measures will be
                                                                                                                                 developed to address safety risk of these dams.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International                                         Yes                           The policy is triggered as the proposed project
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            investments are located in areas that are part of
                                                                                                                                 the Ayeyarwady River Basin. The Ayeyarwady
                                                                                                                                 River is an international waterway, fed by two
                                                                                                                                 tributaries originating within China, and flowing
                                                                                                                                 into Bengal Bay. However, the project targets
                                                                                                                                 exclusively rehabilitation and improvements of
                                                                                                                                 existing irrigation and drainage systems, and
                                                                                                                                 strengthening the operation of existing small to
                                                                                                                                 medium size irrigation dams. The rehabilitation
                                                                                                                                 works will not involve any adverse impacts on
                                                                                                                                 the quality and quantity of waters in the
                                                                                                                                 Ayeyarwady River. Given the rehabilitation
                                                                                                                                 nature of the activities that would not exceed or
                                                                                                                                 alter the purpose of the original schemes, the
                                                                                                                                 proposed project falls within the exception to
                                                                                                                                 the riparians notification requirement. A Memo
                                                                                                                                 to RVP requesting agreement on the exception
                                                                                                                                 to this notification requirement will be prepared
                                                                                                                                 by the team by project appraisal.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not located in disputed areas.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Public Disclosure Copy




                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-May-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Tentative schedule of Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Pest
                                      Management Plan and Dam Safety Due Diligence Report for project preparation:
                                      Draft ESMF, PMP and Dam Safety Due Diligence Report: May 31, 2014
                                      Integration of comments from WB: June 30, 2014
                                      Final ESMF, PMP and Dam Safety Due Diligence Report and other reports: July 31, 2014
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Paavo Eliste

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Josefo Tuyor (RSA)                                                                                                   Date: 02-Apr-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Julia M. Fraser (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 02-Apr-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
