                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6334
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Oct-2013, 30-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nepal                             Project ID:    P122406
                            Project Name:      Kabeli-A Hydro Electric Project (P122406)
                            Task Team          Jie Tang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          16-Oct-2013                       Estimated   23-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDE                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other Renewable Energy (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         108.08                 Total Bank Financing:       46.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                      22.96
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             40.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                6.00
                              International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                                 38.12
                              Local Sources of Borrowing Country                                                       1.00
                              Total                                                                                  108.08
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to increase hydropower generation capacity to supply NEA grid
                           through public private investment.


                                                                      Page 1 of 16
                          3. Project Description
                         The proposed project is a small peaking run-of-river hydropower project that will be built in
                         Panchthar District in the Eastern Development Region of Nepal (the Kabeli River is the border of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Panchthar and Taplejung districts), a relatively sparsely populated area of the country. The project
                         area is located in a region that is inhabited largely by Limbus, Rais, Tamangs, Bahun/Chhetris and
                         small numbers of other groups.

                         The proposed project has three components: (a) the KAHEP Component, with IDA, IFC and CCCP
                         funding in credit terms; (b) the MOE Component, with IDA funding in grant terms; and (c) the IBN
                         Component, with IDA funding in grant terms.

                         The KAHEP Component (US$102.08 million) will support construction of the KAHEP, including a
                         diversion dam, a settling basin, a headrace tunnel, a semi-underground powerhouse, and a tailrace
                         tunnel. This component will be implemented by the project company KEL.

                         The MOE Component (US$2.0 million) will support the MOE to: (a) supervise the implementation
                         of KAHEP to ensure compliance with the PDA, Environment Management Plan (EMP) and Social
                         Action Plan (SAP) and sustainability of the Project; (b) technical, environmental and social
                         safeguards capacity building on integrated river basin management and cumulative impacts
                         management for sustainable hydropower development, including development and adoption of
                         guidelines for CIA and resettlement; and (c) cover incremental operating cost for the project
                         implementation.

                         The IBN Component (US$4.0 million) will provide technical assistance and support to the
                         Investment Board of Nepal (IBN) to improve their ability to carry out their responsibilities of
                         facilitating the development of large hydropower projects across the country in line with applicable
                         international performance, technical, environmental and social standards equivalent to relevant
                         World Bank’s Safeguards Policies. Specifically, the component will support IBN to: (a) conduct
Public Disclosure Copy




                         additional due diligence to assess readiness of large-sized (four projects, totaling 3050 MW)
                         hydropower projects proposed by private investors, and thereafter, carry out negotiations with the
                         private developers of these projects for signing PDAs; (b) supervise the construction of the above-
                         mentioned projects to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of the PDAs and
                         sustainability of such projects; (c) build up its procurement, financial management, environmental
                         and social safeguards and technical capacities; and (d) cover incremental operating cost for the
                         project implementation.

                         The power generated under the KAHEP component will be evacuated by the Kabeli Corridor 132 kV
                         Transmission Line, which is under implementation by the Nepal Electricity Authority with financing
                         from IDA and which will also provide evacuation capacity for the power generated by small projects
                         in the Kabeli corridor that are being developed by independent power producers (IPPs).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Kabeli-A Hydroelectric Project (KAHEP) is located in Panchthar District at the border of
                         Panchthar and Taplejung Districts of Nepal. Kabeli Khola (small river) is the natural border of the
                         two districts. Kabeli is a tributary of the Tamor River. The Kabeli joins the Tamor about 5.6 km
                         downstream of the proposed diversion/dam site. The headworks will be constructed at Dhuseni
                         approximately 2.5 km upstream of Kabeli Bridge along Mechi Highway. The diverted water will be


                                                                      Page 2 of 16
                         fed through an approximately 4.3-kilometer-long headrace tunnel and brought to the semi-
                         underground powerhouse which will be constructed near the Tamor River in the Pinase area of
                         Amarpur VDC. The power house will be located on the left bank of Tamor River.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project area is located in the Mid-Mountain Physiographic Zone. Most of the project structures
                         and facilities are located at the valley section (on alluvial flood plains or on alluvial tars). Small-scale
                         land slips are common in the hilly terrain of Nepal, particularly in the steep fragile slopes. However,
                         no recent active and significant landslide features have been reported or noted close to the project
                         sites. The project area vicinity is characterized by two distinct climatic zones (sub-tropical and
                         warm-to-cool temperate climate). The monsoon rain from June to September is the main rainy season
                         when about 80 percent rainfall occurs, and the monsoon also controls the summer season
                         temperatures and wind pattern.

                         The majority of the land use in the project surrounding area is rural agricultural land followed by
                         forest vegetation. Grass/ bushes, cliff/sand and water bodies are other land uses. Houses are generally
                         scattered and located at distance from the project site. Relatively flat land and gentle slopes are used
                         for settlements and cultivation.

                         While there are patches of community, state and private forests and in and around the project area,
                         the project area lies outside any protected area (national parks, wildlife reserves, conservation areas,
                         strict nature reserves, hunting reserves and buffer zones). The nearest conservation area is the
                         Kanchanjunga Conservation Area (KCA) which is about 25 km to the north of the project site, and
                         Tinjure Milke Jaljale (TMJ) Forest, which is proposed for protected forest, is about 10 km aerial
                         distance from the project KCA and TMJ are unlikely to be affected by the project. In total 1.57 ha of
                         community and leasehold forests will be directly affected at nine different places (the biggest single
                         forest plot that is likely to be occupied is 0.50 ha) The dominant tree species occurring near the
                         project sites are sal (Shorea robusta) in the lower valley areas and pine (Pinus roxborghii or Pinus
                         wallichiana) in the upper slopes. There is no IUCN critically endangered species found in the
                         affected area, although Dioscorea deltoid (Ban tarul, Deltier yam) and Orchids (Sungava, Orchids)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         found in the region are IUCN threatened and endangered species, respectively. Further, Shorea
                         robusta (Sakhuwa, sal tree), Bombax ceiba (Simal, Silk cotton tree), and different lichen (Jhyau)
                         species are nationally protected for their economic value. All of the listed species are commonly
                         available in the project region One large simal tree in Pinase is protected by the local Majhi people
                         for worship of their ancestors and local rituals. The forests in and around the project sites are
                         generally open and in degraded conditions. The forest areas are not a suitable habitat for medium and
                         large animals: only a few mammal species have been reported occasionally visiting these forests.

                         Kabeli River is known to have 31 species of fish out of which five species are long-range migratory
                         species, four are medium distance migratory species and the rest are resident species. Out of 31
                         species, only 12 species were actually collected during the 2011 and 2013 fish sampling surveys. The
                         Kabre (Pseudecheneis sp), a resident fish, is one of the most valued fish species by the local
                         population. All the mentioned fish species are also available in the rivers and streams in the region,
                         including in the Tamor River and its other tributaries. The snow trouts (Schizothorax sp,) are the
                         commercially important mid-range migrant and comparatively large size fish found in the Kabeli.
                         Five of the 31 fish species are in the IUCN Red list. There is no IUCN critically endangered fish
                         species. Out of the 12 fish species collected during fish sampling, only three species were among the
                         migratory and IUCN Red list species: these include Tor putitora (long distance migrant IUCN
                         Endangered Category), Schizothorax richardsoni,(medium distance migrant IUCN Vulnerable
                         Category), and Neolissochilus hexagonolepis (medium distance migrant IUCN Near Threatened

                                                                        Page 3 of 16
                           Category).

                           As the project area is located in a remote rural setting with no modern industries, the quality of air
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and water in the project area are considered generally good. The indoor air quality, because of the
                           use of fuel-wood for cooking, is considered poor.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           L. Panneer Selvam (SASDI)
                           Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
                           Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)
                           Pablo Cardinale (CESI2)

                            6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                   Yes

                            Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/      Yes
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        Yes

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes
                            4.12
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            Yes

                            Projects on International        Yes
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Project specific environmental assessment studies and social assessment were undertaken during
                              2010 through 2011. Under GoN’s environmental requirements, the KAHEP is subjected to an
                              Initial Environmental Examination. However, because the KAHEP is seeking joint financing from
                              both IDA and IFC, KEL performed full Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (EIA and
                              SA) to assure compliance with the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Safeguard Policies
                              and IFC Performance Standards on Environmental and Social Sustainability. Additional studies
                              were conducted in 2011 and 2013 to obtain local and international experts’ opinion. The EIA, SA


                                                                         Page 4 of 16
                         and SAP were updated in February 2012, April 2013 and July 2013 to incorporate information
                         from the various studies, field surveys and consultations completed to date. The sponsors also
                         engaged a panel of experts (POE) to review technical (dam safety and civil works, underground
Public Disclosure Copy




                         works and sediments) aspects and environmental and social safeguards, including the cumulative
                         effects of the project.

                         The anticipated environmental impacts of the project are related to the damming and diversion of
                         river water; construction of the tunnel; muck and spoil disposal; quarrying of sand and gravel;
                         operation of heavy machines (aggregate crushing plant, concrete batching plant, drilling, blasting,
                         heavy vehicles etc); and labor camps. The main environmental impacts identified are:

                         (i)         consequences of reduced water flows in the 5.6 km section of the river below the
                         diversion dam (the disturbance to fish and aquatic species due to the obstruction created by the
                         dam and due to reduced flow of water in the approximately 5.6 km stretch from the diversion dam
                         to the confluence with Tamor River) and aquatic habitat fragmentation/barrier effect created by the
                         dam. The reduced flow will also adversely affect the ritual practices of cremations. The impact of
                         reduced river flows will occur for nearly seven months every year during low-flow period
                         (November to May). These impacts will be long-term nature;
                         (ii)     aquatic habitat fragmentation/barrier effect created by the dam and daily flow fluctuation
                         in the Tamor River downstream of the powerhouse as a result of peak-generation.
                         (iii)    a number of disturbances arising from various construction activities, facilities, and the
                         influx of people. The impacts, for example, could include: soil erosions and land slips, increased
                         land instabilities, obstruction of movement of people and animals, loss of top soil, water pollution
                         and water and air quality impacts, depletion or degradation of local spring water sources, cracks in
                         the houses and supra structures, encroachment on forests, change in river morphology and
                         drainage patterns, pollution and waste from labor camps, occupational health and safety issues etc.
                         The EIA concludes that the identified impacts can be mitigated through specific measures
                         suggested in the report
                         (iv)     Impacts on terrestrial ecology - Direct impacts on terrestrial biodiversity are expected to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         be minimal. The area to be flooded, the construction and camp sites, quarry site, and other
                         infrastructure will affect mostly modified habitat, composed of pastures, agricultural lands,
                         grasslands, and degraded forests. Only 1.57 ha of forest areas at nine different places with a total
                         of 200 trees and 153 pole sizes is estimated to be affecetd. However, indirect impacts on terrestrial
                         biodiversity could potentially occur as a result of an increased population (workers and camp
                         followers) and increased access to the area, for instance, the increased demand for fuel for cooking
                         and food could increase illegal timbering, poaching and hunting.;

                         In addition, the Kabeli-A hydropower project is the first of a series of cascading hydropower
                         projects planned for the Kabeli River, thus a key project on the assessment and management of
                         potential basin-wide cumulative effects.

                         A social assessment (SA) was conducted during 2010 and 2011 to inform the project preparation.
                         The SA provided a broad socioeconomic baseline in the project areas, surveyed and analyzed
                         project adverse impacts as well as the impacted population, particularly indigenous groups,
                         reviewed relevant GoN and World Bank policies related to the project, examined project potentials
                         to extend benefits to local communities and carried out extensive consultations with local
                         communities. Due to the gap period in the project preparation in 2012 and early 2013, further
                         consultations were carried out in the project area to check and confirm on the findings and
                         conclusions of the SA, particularly expectations and broad support from local communities,

                                                                   Page 5 of 16
                           including the indigenous and disadvantaged groups. The SA is updated with the consultation
                           feedback.
                           The SA has shown that various cultural and ethnic groups live in the project area, and consistent
Public Disclosure Copy




                           with the established practice in Nepal, three population groups have been identified as the most
                           vulnerable groups in the project area. They are the indigenous groups (adivasi janajati in Nepali),
                           Dalits (the untouchable caste, most oppressed and deprived) and women headed households. The
                           indigenous groups constitute 53% of the local population. Limbus, Rai and Tamang are the major
                           ethnic groups and reside together with other groups in a mixed fashion. Although subsistence
                           agriculture is the primary occupation of all groups in the project area,the major income source is
                           non-farm activities, such as remittances. The SA also indicates that, in spite of the ethnic
                           differences, local population share a common pattern in terms of livelihood patterns and economic
                           activities.

                           Adverse project impacts also include permanent land acquisition, temporary land leasing for
                           various project activities scattered in small pieces in the immediate project areas, loss of trees and
                           crops. The project is expected to acquire 22.9 ha land and lease 24.2 ha during construction. The
                           land that will be acquired is scattered in small pieces at various locations. No physical relocation
                           is envisaged. There will be impacts associated with reduced river flow, particularly during the dry
                           season in the 5.2 km stretch downstream of the dam before Kabeli River joins Tamor River. These
                           include impact on riverine fishing, cultural and religious practices such as washing, bathing and
                           cremation practices by the Kabeli River. An influx of construction workers and service providers
                           is expected in the project area during the construction period. This will likely expose local
                           communities to public health hazards, such as HIV and sexually transmitted diseases (STD) as
                           well as to dust and noise pollution.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The most significant long term environmental impacts of the KAHEP are expected to result from
                           the permanent modifications of Kabeli river natural flow regime, and as a result, geomorphologic
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and ecologic modifications thereof. Construction and operation of the project has a potential of
                           significantly degrading Kabeli river aquatic natural habitat by: (i) creating a barrier to migratory
                           fish and entrapment of resident and migratory species with the construction of the dam and
                           headworks; (ii) reducing available spawning, foraging, hiding, and resting fish and invertebrates
                           habitat in the dewatered reaches of the river; (iii) modifying a lotic to a lentic environment by
                           creating a small reservoir upstream from the dam; and (iv) producing daily flow fluctuations at the
                           Tamor downstream from the tailrace during the peak generation. Flow reduction in the dewatered
                           stretch of Kabeli River, about 5.6 km between the dam site and the confluence of Kabeli River
                           with the Tamor River, will be significant during the low flow season from November to May. The
                           dam will also be a barrier for fish migration. There will be reduction of flow in the Tamor River as
                           well, between the confluence with Kabeli and the power house, after which the water is returned to
                           the Tamor. The impact of reduced flow on the Tamor is likely to be minimal as the Tamor is much
                           larger than the Kabeli (the flow contributed by Kabeli at the confluence during the low flow
                           season is around 22 %, and around 10% during the high flow season).

                           The project will use the following measures to minimize the impacts: provision of fish ladder in
                           the dam, release of at least 10% of the minimum monthly flow (i.e. 0.86 m3/s ) at all times
                           through the fish ladder, fish hatchery, provision of bathing/dipping channels near cultural sites,
                           monitoring of flows and impacts during operation and use adaptive/additional mitigation
                           measures, if necessary.


                                                                      Page 6 of 16
                         The Environmental Impact Assessment (September 2011 updated 2013) recommends continuous
                         release of at least 10% of the minimum monthly flow (i.e. 0.86 m3/s ) from the dam at all the time
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to maintain the minimum flow required by selected aquatic species. In the stretch of the Kabeli
                         River below the diversion dam and before the confluence with the Tamor River, the Kabeli River
                         water is required for: (i) cultural use, and (ii) for sustaining aquatic life (fishes), but the Kabeli
                         River water is not used for irrigation, drinking, water mills etc. In addition to the minimum release
                         through the dam, three small perennial local streams join the Kabeli River between the proposed
                         dam and the confluence with Tamor River and thus contribute to flows in this section of the river.
                         There will also be contribution from groundwater flows.

                         It is estimated that the minimum flow at Kabeli near Kabeli Bazar combining the minimum release
                         and the contributions from groundwater the local perennial rivulets would be 1.3m3/s in the
                         month of April (the minimum flow released from the dam is 0.86 m3/s, plus minimum
                         groundwater contribution up to Kabeli Bazar is estimated to be 0.3 m3/s, and plus the minimum
                         contribution by sub-tributaries is 0.18 m3/s). Also there are even smaller rivulets joining the
                         Kabeli River downstream of the diversion dam but they are almost dry during the low flow period
                         (November – May, particularly in the months of February, March and April). From June through
                         October, the river flows will be greater than the designed flow of the project, and hence it is
                         expected that there will be sufficient water in this section of the river.

                         Rapid Cumulative Impacts Assessment (RCIA). KEL, through an independent consultant, carried
                         out a preliminary RCIA, which has been updated in July 2013 which covered expanded
                         geographical area including whole Tamor- Kabeli watershed. The KAHEP is the first hydropower
                         project to be developed in whole Kabeli-Tamor watershed. The RCIA focused on impacts over
                         key valued environmental and social components (VECs) such as: reduction of water quantity and
                         quality, landslides/ erosion and sedimentation, aquatic habitat degradation and fragmentation,
                         adverse impacts on spiritual and religious sites/practices, and landscape conversion. Under a
                         multiple hydropower plant cascade scenario it can be reasonably predicted that the natural river
Public Disclosure Copy




                         flow regimes will be modified, as the river system will be converted from free-flowing rivers to a
                         highly regulated ones. Water quality is likely to be affected and there will be reduced flows or
                         dewatered sections. Water temperature, DO, and concentration of pollutants and suspended solids
                         are likely to change. Multiple hydropower developments, paired with the increased human
                         activities from enhanced access (e.g., deforestation, slash and burn, haphazard dumping of spoil
                         from road construction directly into the rivers, indiscriminate garbage disposal) will likely reduce
                         forest cover and increase the rate of land-use change and overall erosion, and sedimentation.
                         Fragmentation of aquatic habitat is expected from the barrier effect of dams and weirs, and of the
                         reduced flows in the dewatered reaches. This fragmentation will interfere with upstream and
                         downstream fish migration as well as lateral in-stream movements in-and-out of the riverbanks.
                         The most important effect due to this habitat fragmentation is the closing of the ecological aquatic
                         corridors. Development of cascading hydropower plants in the Tamor and Kabeli basins is also
                         likely to have the potential to adversely affect water availability and quality needed for religious
                         ceremonies. Cremation sites require clean water in enough quantity (chest-high depths) for people
                         to perform their traditional ceremonies and rituals. The visual impacts and landscape
                         fragmentation as a result of unplanned and multiple roads and electric transmission and
                         distribution lines, though still uncertain, could potentially be very significant. Nepal is a country
                         that markets its natural pristine beauty as one of its main touristic features.

                         Since the KAHEP is the first hydropower project to be constructed and operated in the Tamor-

                                                                    Page 7 of 16
                         Kabeli basin, it has the opportunity to establish a good practice in the design and implementation
                         of appropriate mitigation measures and to incorporate continuous management of the potential
                         cumulative effects in the EMP. KAHEP will include in its operational EMP the measures to curb
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the cumulative impacts at the basin level, such as: fish ladder to assure that upstream-downstream
                         fish migration , structures / check dams along cremation sites to create chest-depth pools, fish
                         diversion structures to minimize fish entrapment in the headrace tunnel, release of a downstream
                         environmental flow regime, robust monitoring program during the construction and operation
                         phases to allow for improved understanding of the potential effects of the proposed minimum
                         downstream release on riparian connectivity and migration challenges of the key fish species,
                         adaptive management to allow for adjustments of the downstream environmental flow regime
                         releases as a response to the monitoring program results etc. In addition, in the area of terrestrial
                         influence KAHEP will apply soil conservation in the catchment areas, awareness programs at
                         catchment level for ecosystem conservation, afforestation and bio-engineering works for degraded
                         areas to enhance basin vegetative cover , and promotion of rural electrification as per the
                         hydropower policy (2001) in the project influenced VDCs to reduce reliance on fuel wood for
                         energy. However, if the future projects upstream and downstream from the KAHEP do not
                         implement similar and coordinated measures, KAHEP’s efforts alone will not be sufficient to
                         maintain the ecological and socio-economic integrity of the Tamor-Kabeli watershed. Therefore,
                         all hydropower developments should provide downstream flow regimes and include fish ladders
                         and entrapment prevention measures in their design; native fish hatcheries should be supported by
                         all developers in the basin, etc . It is envisaged that all developers with stakes in the Tamor-Kabeli
                         basin shall work jointly for the overall development of the Tamor-Kabeli basin: a joint Catchment
                         Area Treatment (CAT) plan should be developed, Infrastructure should be shared, joint operation
                         and maintenance activities should be developed (e.g., agreeing on common operation and
                         maintenance manuals and guidelines etc.
                         The IDA has allocated a total of US$2 million to help the DoED to carry out the following
                         capacity building activities during implementation: International Workshop on “Integrated River
                         Basin Management for Sustainable Hydropower Development in Nepal, Additional Basin-wide
                         Studies to Manage Cumulative Impacts in Kabeli-Tamor Watershed, and capacity building
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities.

                         With the designed project interventions, it is expected that the project will have a positive impact
                         on the socioeconomic development in the local areas. It will improve the community
                         infrastructure in the project VDCs, such as road, electricity supply, water supply, education and
                         public
                         health facilities, as well as economic, occupational and agricultural extension services to local
                         communities.

                         The IBN component is further aimed at enhancing environmental and social outcomes for its
                         pipeline of large scale hydropower projects across Nepal. The IBN is currently negotiating Project
                         Development Agreements (PDA) with private developers four large hydropower projects with
                         support from an international law firm and individual consultants funded by DFID and from a
                         Bank-funded international engineering firm on technical due diligence, including environmental
                         and social aspects, of the four large scale hydropower projects. This component will not provide
                         any direct financing to construct any hydropower projects. Rather, the technical assistance
                         provided to IBN under this component will enhance their capacity to uphold international
                         standards on technical, social and environmental management and also fund technical studies in
                         line with Bank safeguard policies for the four hydropower projects currently in its pipeline.



                                                                    Page 8 of 16
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           EIA chapter 5 describes the alternative analysis performed for KAHEP’s siting and project design,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the reasoning for its selection over other hydropower projects, over “no-project” option, and over
                           the overall power generation alternatives in Nepal, including over the power import. Additional
                           power generation capacity is urgently needed in Nepal to address the ongoing power crises.
                           Technically other sources for power generation, including solar, biomass, solid waste and wind are
                           not feasible at the present time in Nepal context for the large scale power generation to substitute
                           the proposed project. Given this constraint, in the “no project” scenario, technically feasible
                           alternative sources to the KAHEP for the grid-connected power generation are diesel power
                           generation and incremental electricity import from India.

                          Section 5.3 of the EIA specifically deals with “no project” alternative and discusses implications
                          of meeting equivalent power requirements by diesel power generation or from fossil fuel, biomas
                          and solid wastes, solar and wind sources or by importing power from India. Besides, selection of
                          the Kabeli-A project from the list of potential hydropower projects in Nepal is also discussed.

                           KAHEP is one of the top seven ranking hydropower projects of 10 to 300 MW out of the total of
                           138 hydropower potential schemes identified in Nepal in 1997. The ranking of those hydropower
                           projects was done on the basis of technical, economic, social, and environmental criteria.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environment. Kabeli Energy Limited completed the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
                           Study of Kabeli-A Hydroelectric Project in September 2011 and updated in 2013. The EIA also
                           includes an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and recommends specific mitigation
                           measures for construction and operation periods.

                          Construction period mitigation measures: compensatory afforestation (25 trees to be planted for
Public Disclosure Copy




                          every tree felled); lease compensation for the forest land; compensation to the community and
                          leasehold forest user groups equivalent to five years’ production potential (wood volume, fuel-
                          wood and fodder); assistance to forestry enhancement programs (particularly for forests close to
                          the construction sites); only required tree/vegetation to be cleared and only after proper
                          demarcation and tree marking; provision of technical and financial assistance to the affected
                          community forests and leasehold forest user groups; provision of kerosene to the workforce for
                          cooking; provision for camp lodging with LPG cooking facility; prohibition on the sale and
                          purchase of the NTFP and fish in the camps; ban on construction workers entering the forests;
                          limiting the noisy construction activities between 6 pm to 6 am; ban on trade of the meat or other
                          products of wild animals in the construction camps and by/to the workforce; collecting and re-
                          using top soil; providing alternative access for people and livestock in lieu of obstructed access;
                          providing suitable slope retaining structures and flood protection structures; using controlled
                          blasting; benching all excavation of more than 3 m height; protecting excavated surface against
                          water erosion by suitable drainage and collection; protecting cut slopes (retaining walls and grass
                          plantation); water sprinkling to reduce dust; provision of personal protection equipment (air
                          masks, helmets, goggles, boots etc); ventilation in the tunnel; noise control measures (blasting in
                          day time, no horns close to village, etc); properly planned and designed muck disposal operation at
                          designated muck disposal sites; strip quarrying (as opposed to a big borrow pit, and quarrying to
                          be carried out above flowing water level, and only during the dry season) in the flood plain;
                          wastewater to be collected in settling tanks/ponds; collection and safe disposal of used lubricants/


                                                                     Page 9 of 16
                         grease/toxic chemicals; separate collection of wastewater from mechanical yard; provision of
                         toilets in the camps and active construction sites; a system for collection and storage of solid waste
                         from camps and construction sites; and compensation for houses/structures damaged by vibration/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         blasting.

                         Operation period mitigation measures: continuous release of at least 0.86 m3/s (10% of the
                         minimum monthly flow) of water through the dam; fish ladder in the dam; fish hatchery, gradual
                         opening and closing of plant, support for communities for nurturing plantations for five years;
                         assistance to forestry and wildlife enhancement and conservation programs in and around project
                         areas; assistance for local communities in the Kabeli catchment for improving on-site sanitation
                         and agricultural practices; developing the muck disposal sites for public use (in consultation with
                         the community); providing river bank protection measures as needed; and arranging water supply
                         from alternate sources if existing community water sources/springs within a 200m strip along the
                         tunnel alignment) become affected.

                         KEL engaged an independent team of fish experts to review the environmental flow
                         recommendations and, as needed, to revise or augment these recommendations. The team
                         interpreted the findings of different assessment methods to Nepalese conditions. The Modified
                         Tenant Model indicates that at the proposed 10% flow, the ecological condition of the river stretch
                         in the dewatered zone will be severely degraded for 5 months of the year and fish will be
                         concentrated mostly in pool sections of the river. However, this situation will improve further
                         downstream as a result of the contribution of downstream tributaries and groundwater inflows.
                         The findings of the Habitat Simulation method show that the proposed 10% minimum flow and
                         depth and velocity created by such release will fulfill the habitat requirement of most of the fish
                         found in the Kabeli River, the exceptions being Barilius sp and Labeo sp. Finally, the findings of
                         the CRAB model for the Brown trout have been compared with the snow trout since this is an
                         important midrange migratory fish with high food value. The data show that the required
                         discharge, depth and velocity can be maintained in most of the river section after release of the
                         10% minimum flow, and the minimum requirement for the survival of fish can be created after
Public Disclosure Copy




                         such release. Considering the findings of these three models, fish diversity, composition and size
                         of the captured fish, the independent review found the proposed 10% minimum release to be
                         appropriate to maintain the downstream aquatic flora and fauna. The independent assessment
                         supported the mitigation measures recommended in the EIA, and proposed the following
                         additional measures: construction of fish passages at the dam to assure that river connectivity is
                         maintained; in addition to the minimum downstream flow release, consider formative and flushing
                         discrete downstream releases to meet specific seasonal habitat (e.g. migration cues) or social (e.g
                         burial ceremonies) needs, carry out a habitat management program (minimize removal of boulders
                         from the river bed, construction of six pools at specified locations); undertake plantation work to
                         the extent possible in the areas upstream of the reservoir; prohibit fishing in the stretch of reduced
                         water flow in the dry 7 months and patrol to enforce prohibition; carry out an aquatic habitat/fish
                         conservation awareness program; trash rack to minimize fish entrainment; and enhanced
                         monitoring. If the monitoring results indicate severe impacts on fish, additional mitigation
                         measures such as open water stocking may be implemented. The initial monitoring program is
                         proposed for two years with subsequent adjustments to be made based on the findings of the initial
                         monitoring. In addition to avoid impacts related to drastic flow fluctuation below the tailrace in the
                         Tamor River during peak generation, gradual start up and closing of hydropower plant to avoid
                         abrupt flow increase or decrease due to tailwater discharge at the Tamor will be considered during
                         the dry season.



                                                                   Page 10 of 16
                         KEL, the owner and developer of KAHEP, is a subsidiary of the Butwal Power Company (BPC),
                         which has implemented four hydropower projects in Nepal with satisfactory environmental and
                         social management. For the design and preparation of KAHEP, KEL drew on the resources of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         another BPC subsidiary, Hydro-Consult Engineering (HCE) , for the environmental and social
                         aspects of the projects. HCE maintains a strong team of environmental and social professionals.
                         HCE’s Environment Unit has reasonable experience and capacity for preparing EIAs, IEEs and
                         EMPs of run-of-the river hydropower projects as required under the laws and regulations of Nepal.
                         KEL has established Kabeli-A Environment and Community Development Unit (KAECDU) to
                         undertake social and environmental monitoring and management of KAHEP. KEL mobilized full
                         team of KAECDU at site in 2011. However, KAECDU was down sized as there has been delay in
                         KAHEP implementation. At present KEL maintain three professionals in the KAECDU namely
                         Anthropologists, Livelihood officer and Environmental Officer in addition to the three Public
                         Relation Assistants (PRAs). KEL plans to fill the remaining vacancies in the KAECDU when the
                         project construction work starts. A Public Information Centre (PIC) has been established since
                         August 2011 and is still functional. In addition, HCE, as and when needed, will continue
                         providing support in the environmental and social matters. If these arrangements still have some
                         gaps, required expertise will be hired and will be trained on the issues and management
                         requirements during the implementation stage. EIA has identified training and orientations to
                         make aware and educate the project management team, engineers, supervisors, contractors and the
                         workforce on the environmental issues and management in the project. These trainings and
                         orientations will start during pre-construction stage and will be a continuous process.

                         Social development interventions. KEL has developed these interventions in line with relevant
                         GoN and the World Bank Group policies and performance standards on consultation, land
                         acquisition and involuntary resettlement and indigenous peoples. These interventions and actions
                         respond to different policy requirements and they are packaged into one project social action plan
                         (SAP) for the ease of implementation. Therefore the SAP is a project master social action plan
                         that aims to cover all social dimensions of the project and it includes the following,
                         •        A social safeguard policy framework. This framework was developed in line with relevant
Public Disclosure Copy




                         domestic and World Bank policies on involuntary resettlement, indigenous peoples and physical
                         cultural resources. The framework lays out the principles to guide planning and implementation of
                         mitigation and development measures under the project.
                         •        Resettlement Compensation and Livelihood Assistance Plan (RCLAP). On the basis of
                         extensive community consultations, the RCLAP was designed to mitigate the direct project
                         impacts and to support local development through a comprehensive package of interventions. This
                         package includes, (i) cash compensation payment at replacement cost for land acquired and leased,
                         (ii) an agricultural extension program, (iii) vocational training, (iv) preferential employment of
                         local people by contractors, (v) health awareness programs for construction workers and local
                         population, (vi) establishment of clinics for construction workers and the local population, (vii)
                         assistance to local communities in building new and repairing existing drinking water and
                         sanitation schemes, and (viii) measures to mitigate the impacts of reduced river flows downstream
                         of the diversion dam, including higher releases of water as required for cremations and ritual
                         bathing on religious holidays.
                         •        Indigenous Peoples and Vulnerable Community Development Plan (IPVCDP). Three
                         groups have been defined and identified as the most vulnerable group in the project area:
                         indigenous groups, Dalits and women headed households. The IPVCDP was developed in
                         keeping with the relevant policies of the GoN, including ILO 169 and UNDRIP as well as with
                         the requirements of the World Bank Group’s Indigenous Peoples operational policy and
                         performance standards, in particular, the principle of free, prior and informed consultation. The

                                                                  Page 11 of 16
                         SA shows that, because of the common pattern of livelihood and economic activities, the
                         economic impacts due to land loss would be the same across all ethnic and cultural groups in local
                         communities, and therefore one common set of package of economic assistance will be applicable
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to all. However, the SA also recommends particular attention and efforts to indigenous and other
                         vulnerable groups to ensure their meaningful participation and maximum benefits from the project.
                         Therefore as designed under the project, the indigenous and vulnerable communities stand to
                         benefit from the generic compensation and development measures in the SAP. Additionally, the
                         IPVCDP has specifically designed measures for indigenous and other vulnerable groups,
                         including (i) specific interventions that target adivasi/janajati households; (ii) women-focused
                         programs, (iii) social mobilization and capacity-building for vulnerable groups, and (iv) a small
                         loan assistance program for vulnerable woman-headed and Dalit households.
                         •        Benefits-sharing. In consultation with local communities in the project area and guided by
                         the principle of promoting local development, KEL has agreed to benefits-sharing mechanisms to
                         be supported under the proposed project. The project will fund local infrastructure works,
                         including new and improved health facilities; drinking water schemes, health services such as
                         clinics, occupation skill training; upgrading of education facilities, and agricultural extension as
                         well as electricity connection to the power grid.
                         •        Communications. KEL has established a robust system for handling communications with
                         project communities and the broad public at the local as well as national levels. A Project
                         Information Center is operating at site, in the Amarpur VDC, and where copies of safeguards and
                         other project-related documents are available in English, Nepali, Limbu, Tamang and Rai. A
                         Public Relations Officer has been posted at site and oversees a team of PR assistants who were
                         recruited from local communities. KEL held a national workshop on the project in August 2011.
                         •        Grievance redress mechanism. A grievance redress mechanism has been established under
                         the project. All grievances, whether oral or written, will be recorded at the Project Information
                         Centre at site. The grievance redress mechanism consists of three tiers: (i) a Grievance Redress
                         Cell on site; (ii) a Local Grievance Redress Committee; and (iii) a Project Grievance Committee.
                         The grievance redress committees include representatives from local communities, district
                         government, the project and contractors (as appropriate). The grievance redress setup,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         composition and operation mechanisms are described in the SAP.
                         •        Disclosure. KEL has disclosed the EIA/EMP and SA and related social management plans
                         through its public website (http://www.kel.com.np), and these documents have also been disclosed
                         through the Bank’s InfoShop and IFC’s external website. The executive summary of the
                         safeguards documents has been translated into local languages of major indigenous groups in the
                         project area, including Limbu, Tamang and Rai. The Environmental and Social Review Summary
                         (ESRS) has also been disclosed through IFC’s external website. Extensive project information is
                         available at the PIC and IFC’s website.
                         •        Regular monitoring of SAP implementation will be conducted by KEL as well as by an
                         independent external monitor who will be designated to carry out six-monthly reviews of the SAP
                         implementation. The specific monitoring activities and monitoring framework are detailed in the
                         SAP. A third-party monitoring mechanism is also included is in the Governance and
                         Accountability Action Plan that has been agreed for the project. An ex post third party audit of the
                         implementation of the RCLAP and IPVCDP will be undertaken by the Company.

                         The total SAP cost is estimated at 43 million Nepali Rupees.

                         IBN Component: This component will not provide direct financing to any of the hydropower
                         projects under consideration by IBN. Nonetheless, the goal of this component is, precisely, to
                         provide technical assistance such that social, environmental and technical outcomes of the four

                                                                  Page 12 of 16
                           large-scale hydropower projects (about 3,050 MW), which are currently supported with Bank-
                           funded technical due diligence, under the purview of IBN are in line with Bank Group standards
                           and policies.. Through execution of this TA component, the Bank will support IBN to strengthen
Public Disclosure Copy




                           their capacity (including by hiring environmental and social consultants as in-house capacity,
                           among other activities) in carrying out their responsibilities related to assessment, due diligence,
                           PDA negotiation with project developers, and supervision of the large hydropower projects to
                           ensure that they are conducted in compliance with applicable safeguard policies. Specifically, all
                           terms of reference for consultant services and possible studies supported by this component will
                           require prior Bank approval, subject to adherence to the applicable international performance,
                           technical, environmental and social standards equivalent to the World Bank Safeguard Policies;
                           and (ii) the Bank will ensure that its technical assistance in support of IBN’s activities to assess,
                           appraise and supervise hydropower projects furthermore aligns with safeguard policy
                           requirements.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           During the preparation of the EIA and the Social Assessment, KEL has carried out extensive
                           consultations at the planning and preparation stages. To ensure FPICon (or ICP) with PAP, the
                           SA and development of the SAP followed a highly participatory planning process. Local
                           stakeholders, affected population, and various cultural and ethnic groups in the project area,
                           including indigenous and vulnerable groups, were identified and engaged in a culturally sensitive
                           and appropriate fashion throughout the planning process. Public consultations have been held at
                           the community, local and national levels. Various tools were used including interviews,
                           questionnaire surveys, focus group discussions, community meetings, public hearings. Project
                           information has been disseminated among local stakeholders. These consultations provided rich
                           feedback for the design of the SAP program. The first round of consultations was carried out
                           during the EIA scoping exercise from April 22- May 1, 2010. Fourteen focus group discussions
                           with community forest groups, women, Dalits, and indigenous peoples groups were held in
                           October-November 2010 in different locations in the project area. Separate focus group
Public Disclosure Copy




                           discussions were organized with indigenous groups among local communities. Their views,
                           concerns and recommendations were fully considered in the project design.

                           Local people were informed about the project and their feedback was solicited. Potential
                           environmental mitigation options and environmental enhancement measures were also discussed
                           with the local people. District-level stakeholders such as the District Development Committee
                           and District Forest Office were also consulted. The findings and recommendations of the draft EIA
                           and SIA were disseminated and discussed, and further feedback solicited from the stakeholders.
                           Public consultation/ hearing was organized on 24 July 2011 at the project site to share the findings
                           of the assessment, explain how the concerns have been incorporated, to obtain further feedbacks
                           from the project beneficiaries and stakeholder. The EIA and SA findings were also presented in
                           two district level consultations organized on 25 July 2011 at Phungling Bazar, district headquarter
                           of Taplejung and on 26 July 2011 at Phidim, district headquarter of Panchthar, which was attended
                           by the government officers, political parties, INGOs, NGOs and media personnel. A national level
                           consultation at Kathmandu was held on 1 August 2011. Comments and suggestions from different
                           stakeholders, including vulnerable groups, were incorporated into the EIA, SA and SAP. Findings
                           and recommendations of the EIA, SA and SAP were disseminated and discussed locally, and
                           affected communities and other stakeholders provided their further feedback, which was also
                           incorporated.



                                                                      Page 13 of 16
                           KEL has disclosed the EIA and SAP through its public website, http://www.kel.com.np. The
                           executive summaries of the EIA and SAP have been translated into Nepali, Limbu, Bantawa Rai,
                           Khaling Rai and Tamang and disclosed on the KEL website, and project information is also
Public Disclosure Copy




                           available at the Project Information Center in Amarpur VDC, Panchthar District. KEL plans to
                           inform and further consult local stakeholders (affected people, Community Forest Users Groups,
                           etc.) on a regular basis during the implementation of the project.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Oct-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      11-Oct-2013
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nepal                                                            09-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Oct-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nepal                                                            03-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nepal                                                            03-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats


                                                                   Page 14 of 16
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]




                                                                    Page 15 of 16
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Jie Tang
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                        Date: 30-Oct-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Julia Bucknall (SM)                             Date: 30-Oct-2013




                                                                      Page 16 of 16
