INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCI 104
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jan-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Turkey                     Project ID:   P152799
Project Name:    Health Sector Reform Support Project (P152799)
Task Team        Claudia Rokx
Leader(s):
Estimated        30-Mar-2015                Estimated     22-Oct-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GHNDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Health (100%)
Theme(s):        Health system performance (80%), Injuries and non-communicable diseases
(20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     102.00             Total Bank Financing:   102.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           102.00
0          Total                                                           102.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed project would continue to support the MOH Health Transformation Program's
expansion of preventive medicine, improvement of hospital management, and enhanced stewardship
role of the Ministry of Health. In line with these goals, the project development objective is to
contribute to improving primary and secondary prevention of NCDs, increasing the efficiency of
health facility management, and enhancing the stewardship role of MOH.
C. Project Description


﻿The Ministry of Health's 2013-2017 Strategic Plan lays out its vision for an ideal health system: "it
must be accessible, of high-quality, efficient and sustainable. Individuals must have access to
healthcare services in a timely and equitable manner". The plan is structured around four strategic
goals and 32 objectives aimed at achieving this vision. In addition, both the MOH and Ministry of
Development (MOD) prioritize actions to prevent, treat and facilitate social rehabilitation for
substance addiction in their recent national strategy and action plans.
o
The Bank strategic engagement would focus on supporting MOH's Four Strategic Health Sector
Goals and the Government's "Healthy Living" Action Plan as follows:
i.     Awareness creation about healthy living and prevention of chronic disease risk factors,
obesity, and substance addiction in support of Strategic Goal 1: "to protect the individual and the
community from health risks and foster healthy life-styles". Early detection of chronic disease and
substance addiction through improving primary care and effective management of chronic disease for
those already affected, including the prevention of severity and co-morbidities through improvement
in referral and higher level of care in support of Strategic Goal 2: "to provide accessible, appropriate,
effective and efficient health services to individuals and the community;
ii.    Strategic Goal 2 also aims to improve healthcare services in terms of administration,
structure and function, and improve the capacity, quality and distribution of the infrastructure of
healthcare institutions. The new project will ensure development of managerial models for health
facilities, and also respond directly to the strategic focus of Turkey's Tenth Development Plan which
calls for health investments through Public Private Partnerships through building capacity for better
planning and implementation.
iii.   Building the stewardship function of MOH, especially focusing on efficiency, sustainability,
quality and equity improvements in support of Strategic Goal 4: "to continue to develop the health
system as a means to contributing to the economic and social development of Turkey and to global
health".
o
Addressing these is part of the strategic development objective of the proposed project.
Main components:
1: Public Health and Primary Care
This component aims to (i) raise population awareness of risk factors related to NCDs and substance
addiction and promote healthy life styles; (ii) expand early detection and timely referral for effective
treatment; and (iii) further strengthen primary health care to consolidate the results achieved with the
HTP.
This component would finance consulting services (such as for national campaigns), medical and
other equipment (such as upgrading laboratory equipment, IT and distance learning equipment),
technical assistance and training. The total estimated cost would be US$24 million.
The main activities include:
i.     Increase national awareness and behavior change with regards to risk factors of chronic
disease and addiction: unhealthy dietary habits and excessive salt consumption; physical inactivity;
(active/passive) smoking, alcohol, and substance addiction:


﻿o      Development of public outreach materials, methodologies and targeting to raise population
awareness regarding risk factors of NCDs based on new findings in the recent NCD study (WHO,
2014);
o      Promotion of physical activity by piloting such activities in Healthy Living Centers. This
O
could require rehabilitation of Community Health Centers , where needed;
o    Develop and implement a model for prevention of substance addiction.
ii.    Ensure effective screening for early detection of cancer through improving access to quality
primary care services and monitoring efforts at all levels:
o      Active targeting of populations at risk for screening at the family physician and/or screening
centers through campaigns;
o      Introduce a national cancer registry software by improving physical and technical
infrastructure, and training health workers in its use;
iii.   Continue support to strengthen the Family Physician Training Program
o      Expand the infrastructure and hardware of the current distance learning system to nationwide
coverage;
o      Adapt training modules for family physicians to a distance learning approach (currently
training is predominantly face-to-face);
o      Conduct a thorough workload analysis and standardize work-procedures to allow more
effective service delivery and quality of care by Family Physicians;
The Public Health Institution (Phel) would be the main implementer of this component. Coordination
will be established with the Local Governments and other partners to ensure complementarity in the
awareness campaigns as well as efforts on prevention of substance addiction.
2: Support to the Development of Management Models for Health Facilities
This component would support two major initiatives: (i) the reform of health facility management
through technical assistance and implementation support; and (ii) support to the Health Investments
program through capacity building of the MOH's General Directorate of Health Investments (GDHI)
and Public Hospitals Institution (PHol) in contract and facility management. MOH will develop a
model to manage the overall administration of all health facilities (including operations and
o       administration of health services). Developing clear and comprehensive coordination mechanisms
between the GDHI and the PHol is deemed necessary.
The main implementers of this component would be the GDHI and PHol. This component would
finance consulting services (such as for contract model development), equipment (IT equipment),
and training. The total estimated cost is US$36 million.
The main activities to be covered include:
i.     Reform of the health facility management systems:
o      Developing models and standards for efficient health facility management (clinical
engineering, hospital pharmaceuticals management, stock management, medical device management,
among others);
o      Improving the capacity of the PHol in health facility management;
ii.    Introducing architectural and technical standards for health facilities
o      Developing architectural and technical standards for health facilities of various profiles
(hospitals, oral and dental health centers, family health centers, etc.).


﻿o      Supporting the implementation of developed standards for health facilities
iii.   Technical support to the PPP program implementation unit under MOH:
o      Strengthening the capacity of the GDHI in managing PPP contracts and administrating PPP
projects;
O
U       o     Developing in-house capacity in legal, financial, operational, and structural aspects of
contract management.
3: Improving the Effectiveness of overall Health Sector Administration
This component facilitates the first two components and will build on the earlier World Bank support
provided through the adaptable program loans (APLs) to support the overall stewardship/governance
function of the MOH, with a specific focus on effectiveness of the health sector administration.
The component would finance goods and technical services (including surveys and evaluations),
consultancies, and training in an estimated amount of US$37 million.
i.    Improving the monitoring and evaluation capabilities of MOH in order to strengthen the
Health Management Information System (HMIS) so as to attain reliable and consolidated data and
develop decision support systems at all levels;
ii.    Harmonizing health sector data in line with international standards;
iii.   Developing a model for sharing of Turkey's experiences in health sector (including country
specific analysis, training, and disseminating HTP products);
iv.    Building capacity in Health Technology Assessment (HTA);
v.    Increasing effectiveness and alignment of training programs for all MOH staff (including the
new training modules addressing NCDs).
0
To monitor and evaluate the performance of project interventions a rigorous impact evaluation is also
planned. MOH is in favor of such evaluation. The design and the scope of the study will be defined
once the final implementation plan is prepared. The estimated cost of such study is around 5 million.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Esra Arikan (GENDR)
Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies         Triggered? Explanation (Optional)


﻿Environmental Assessment     No
OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No
a
Forests OP/BP 4.36           No
a
Pest Management OP 4.09      No
Physical Cultural Resources  No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No          The project will not finance any infrastructure
BP 4.12                                   investments and no involuntary land acquisition is
foreseen. Accordingly, it is not necessary to trigger
OP 4.12.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No
Projects on International    No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jan-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
At this time, no safeguard-related studies are necessary. During project implementation, Terms of
Reference for consulting services will be reviewed to ensure that services provided are in
accordance with the Bank's safeguards policies.
At present only small internal rehabilitation is expected and the project is Category C on this basis.
However, if it becomes clear during further project preparation that more substantial rehabilitation
(possibly including extension) of buildings, then the project will be upgraded to Category B and
an Environmental Management Plan or Environmental Management Framework will be prepared.
If the project is upgraded to Category B, OP 4.01 will be triggered and a first order restructuring
of the project will be carried out.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Claudia Rokx
Approved By:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿Regional Safeguards   Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                    Date: 26-Jan-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/     Name: Daniel Dulitzky (PMGR)                 Date: 27-Jan-2015
Manager:


