INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 108
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Dec-2014
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        India                     Project ID:  P149182
Project Name: IN: CITIZEN ACCESS TO RESPONSIVE SERVICES - "SARV SEVA"
PROJECT (P149182)
Task Team       Ana Bellver Vazquez-Doder
Leader:
Estimated       08-Dec-2014               Estimated    05-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GGODR                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Sub-national government administration (70%), Public administration-
Information and communications (30%)
Theme(s):       Other public sector governance (40%), e-Government (30%), Gender (30%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     50.00            Total Bank Financing:   35.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                  15.00
P           International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     35.00
Total                                                                     50.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The development objective of the project is to improve access to public services by all citizens of
Madhya Pradesh, and in particular by historically excluded groups.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 6


﻿The proposed operation will be financed by an Investment Project Financing (IPF) loan of US$35
million to the Gol and will use a results-based financing modality to provide incentives for results.
Lessons learned from previous experiences with this instrument in the South Asia region, and in
India in particular, will be incorporated into the project design. The trajectory for this operation is
0
five years.
The Project will support the government's program through two components:
Component 1: Results-based financing (US$ 25 million). This component will disburse against
agreed eligible expenditure programs (EEPs) upon achievement of Disbursement Linked Indicators
(DLIs) along the following three subcomponents:
*      Subcomponent 1.a) Access to Services and Citizen Outreach (US$ 5 million): The objective
of this subcomponent is to facilitate access to public services through an expansion of the LSK
networks at the sub-block level, improvements in the facilitation services provided at the kiosks, and
conducting citizen awareness and outreach campaigns.
*      Subcomponent 1.b) Simplification of Government Services (US$ 15 million). This
subcomponent aims to foster the integration of government services and streamlining of internal
procedures.
*      Subcomponent 1.c) Performance Management (US$ 5 million). This subcomponent aims to
strengthen monitoring and evaluation systems, incorporating citizen's feedback and promoting the
use of service delivery data for decision making.
Component 2: Technical Assistance (US$ 10 million). This component will provide specialized
technical assistance to support implementation of the government program and achievement of
project results. In particular, this component will provide funding for the following activities:
*      Subcomponent 2a) Supporting Government process reengineering. This subcomponent will
provide support for the simplification and reengineering of government processes, and advisory
services to PSMD and the High Power Committee.
*     Subcomponent 2b) Enhancing ICT infrastructure and strengthening ICT capacity. This
O
U        subcomponent will provide funding for the acquisition of ICT equipment (hardware and software)
and strengthening ICT capacity within the GoMP by providing advisory and technical support in
specialized ICT areas.
Subcomponent 2c) Strengthening project management. This subcomponent will strengthen SAPS
capacity to manage the project by hiring a Project Management Consulting firm with expertise on
M&E, communication, technical coordination, project planning, budgeting and execution. It will also
provide funding for hiring the third party auditor for the verification of DLIs.
M&E and Learning. This operation will have a strong focus on Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning.
First, the operation will strengthen existing RTPS monitoring systems and engage with Line
Ministries' about monitoring systems. Second, it will support the establishment of a dedicated cell of
data analysis for service delivery at the School of Good Governance and Policy Analysis (SGPA)
and promote the use of such information for decision-making. Third, in collaboration with SGPA, the
Bank will design efficient M&E tools to be used during project implementation (such as mystery
audits and user feedback loops) and agree on a learning-by-doing process with the government to be
able to improve the design of the interventions during the lifetime of the project.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
A key social issue identified under the project is the limited to differential access to public services
Page 2 of 6


﻿by the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled tribes, Women and other marginalized and religious groups in
the state. As the overall focus of the project is improved citizen access to public services this issue is
assessed in detail and necessary strategies and indicators have been agreed as part of the overall
project design. The entire project is being designed based on the guiding principles of inclusiveness,
O
U         transparency and accountability.
The project does not trigger the World Bank's operational Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP
4.12). The existing buildings and structures shall be utilized for the Lok Sewa Kendras. Hence, no
land acquisition and resettlement is expected under the project.
The World Bank's Operational policy on Indigenous peoples (OP 4.10) has been triggered by the
project. A large proportion of MP's population comprises of Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Scheduled
Tribes (STs). These groups account for respectively 15.6% and 21.1% of the state's population
(Census of India, 2011). While the share of SCs in MP's population mirrors their share in the total
population of India (16.6%), the share of tribals is significantly larger than their share in India's
population (8.6%). In fact, more than 14% of tribals in India live in MP alone, making the state
significant for any advances towards the cause of tribal development in the country. The STs have a
pre-dominant presence in 5 districts and a significant presence in another 12 districts. More than 89
Community Development Blocks of the state have a tribal presence that is more than 50 percent. The
state is also home to three Particularly Vulnerable tribal groups (PVTGs).
Though it is changing fast, most of these predominantly tribal districts are still marked by poor
human development indicators, adverse development characteristics, poor infrastructure, low income
profile, difficult topography and remoteness. With respect to the delivery of public service, like in
most rural areas of India, there is little awareness about rights and entitlements, less assertion and
low demand which sometimes leads to sub-optimal provisioning of services.
A tribal development plan (TDP) is being prepared by GoMP as part of the project's effort to
facilitate access to services among Scheduled Tribes and foster social inclusion. The TDP is the
culmination of an intensive review of existing literature, analysis of available data, first hand
assessments, stakeholder's consultations and interviews, discussions with elected representatives,
community members, departments and services that are within the ambit of the Act as well as an
analysis of the implementation of Madhya Pradesh Public Services Guarantee Act since 2010.
Under the access to Information Policy this Tribal Development Plan shall be discussed with and
disclosed to public in both English and tribal dialects (Korku, Bhili and Gondi). To inform the Tribal
Development Plan preparation, district level consultations were organized in three districts, two of
which are predominantly tribal- Jhabua and Mandla and one with a mixed population- Panna.
Participants in these consultations included members of tribal community, elected leaders, civil
society and government officials. The TDP is thus informed by all the suggestions and
recommendations received during its preparation
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Ruma Tavorath (GENDR)
Sangeeta Kumari (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/    No           Project activities for improving service delivery
Page 3 of 6


﻿BP 4.01                                    are of the kind that will not have any
environmental impacts on the ground. Even
service counters are not expected to be
constructed, but rented. There could be possibility
of improving environmental consciousnessand
awareness, which can be integrated with the other
related public service messages to be provided.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No
Pest Management OP 4.09       No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  Yes         The project beneficiaries include the Scheduled
Tribe, Scheduled Castes and women in the state.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No         The existing buildings and structures shall be
4.12                                       utilized for the Lok Sewa Kendras. Hence, no
land acquisition and resettlement is expected
under the project.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No
Projects on International     No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is expected to positively impact the historically excluded groups.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
One of the outcomes of this project is improved accountability and enhanced trust in public
institutions, particularly among historically excluded groups including Scheduled Tribes.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Various tools and methods shall be explored as part of the communication and outreach strategy
under the project to expand the coverage of the program in tribal and remote areas.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Tribal Development Pan has been prepared by the project describing the key issues of
Page 4 of 6


﻿exclusion and appropriate actions to address the same under the scope of the project. The state
very well recognizes the issues associated with the schedule tribes and is making several
interventions in this regard. The current project team is sensitive to this issue and intends to put the
required expertise as part of the State support agency to ensure the implementation, monitoring
and reporting on TDP.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
O
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Discussions were held with representatives of those departments which provide important services
to tribal communities under PSGA. The aim was to understand from their perspective the access,
scope, constraints and concessions offered to STs by the Act and LSKs. To inform the Tribal
Development Plan, district level consultations were organized in three districts, two of which are
predominantly tribal- Jhabua and Mandla and one with a mixed population- Panna. Participants in
these consultations included members of tribal community, elected leaders, civil society and
government officials.
The draft Tribal Development Plan shall be disclosed before appraisal digitally for feedback and
final plan shall be redisclosed before negotiations. The hard copies of TDPs shall also be placed in
locations easily accessible to public in Hindi, English and tribal dialects (Korku, Bhili and Gondi).
B. Disclosure Requirements
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                03-Dec-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                             05-Dec-2014
"In country" Disclosure
India                                                      08-Dec-2014
Comments: The TDP will be disclosed through the website of the government of Madhya
Pradesh. Hard copies of the Plan will also be placed in places such as District
libraries, District Collectors and BDOs offices etc accessible to the tribal population
in Hindi, English and tribal dialects like Korku, Bhili and Gondi.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Page 5 of 6


﻿Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:    Name: Ana Bellver Vazquez-Doder
Approved By
Practice Manager/    Name: Alexandre Arrobbio (PMGR)            Date: 07-Dec-2014
Manager:
Page 6 of 6


