                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA6971
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Uganda                             Project ID:    P133590
                            Project Name:      Kampala Institutional & Infrastructure Development Project 2 (P133590)
                            Task Team          Martin Onyach-Olaa
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          20-Jan-2014                        Estimated   20-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTU1                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (90%), Sub-national government
                                              administration (10%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (70%), Municipal governance and
                                              institution building (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     183.75           Total Bank Financing:                 175.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         8.75
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              175.00
                              Total                                                                                    183.75
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is enhanced infrastructure and institutional capacity of
                           KCCA to improve urban mobility in Kampala.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         Project Components - The project will have two components: (i) support to City Wide Road
                         Infrastructure and associated investments, and (ii) Institutional and Systems Development Support.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1 – City Wide Road Infrastructure and associated investments (US$ 173.75m).
                         The objective of this component is to “improve quality of roads infrastructure and associated
                         investments in Kampala City for improved city mobility”.
                         Component 1 will be implemented in two or three phases, starting with Phase 1 for which
                         engineering designs were completed under the KIIDP1, but require design review, RAP update and
                         EISA. So far and by the time of project appraisal, the screening and selection of phase 1 sub-projects
                         had not yet been completed (as had been anticipated at inception), and as a result, ESIAs and RAPs
                         have not been prepared for phase 1/ batch 1 sub-projects. Consequently, the ESMF and RPF
                         requirements shall be followed and ESIAs and RAPs undertaken before implementation of any sub-
                         project. In addition, ESIA and RAP implications shall form part of the screening and selection
                         criteria for sub-projects to be implemented.
                         -         Phase 1 – This will include the following interventions for which the design and the bidding
                         documents are ready: (i) roads upgrading to dual carriageway standard (4 roads with a total of 8.05
                         kms), (ii) road reconstruction (1 km), (iii) seven junctions improvement, and (iv) drainage
                         improvements of Nalukolongo main drainage channel (8 kms).
                         -         Phase 2/3 – This will include the design, construction and supervision of works for
                         signalization of 20 selected junctions; construction of a traffic control center at City Hall, KCCA
                         linking all signalized intersections; upgrading to a dual carriageway of 16 km of roads;
                         reconstruction of 53 km of existing roads; and upgrading about 70 km of existing gravel roads. A
                         tentative list of roads to be upgraded to a dual carriageway, reconstructed and upgraded from gravel
                         to paved (bituminous) standard is provided in Annex 2 of the PAD.

                         The proposed batch 1 sub-projects, for which engineering designs were completed under KIIDP 1
                         will be reviewed, and selected based on the criterion highlighted below and further explained in
                         Annex 2 of the PAD. The selection of batch 2 and future sub-projects (batch 3, etc) will also follow
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the same criterion:

                         •      Economic viability (positive NPV and EIRR)
                         •      Technical viability
                         •      Connectivity and ability to distribute traffic within the city
                         •      Equity in terms of sub-project distributions amongst the five Divisions of Kampala City
                         •      Inclusivity in terms of impact and use by stakeholders (city residents)
                         •      Exclusion of investments in solid waste due to on-going IFC support to KCCA for
                         investments in solid waste through a PPP arrangement .
                         •      Readiness of ESIA and RAP

                         Component 2 - Institutional and Systems Development Support (US$ 10 m)

                         The Institutional and System Development Support component is intended to strengthen the capacity
                         of KCCA as an autonomous corporate body to deliver on its statutory mandates. The intended results
                         to be achieved by this component are (i) improved KCCA capacity to implement sub-projects on
                         time and within budget, (ii) at least 15 percent annual increase in own source revenue (OSR) from
                         FY2012/13 base year, (iii) adequate budget and timely maintenance of existing infrastructure so as to
                         prolong asset life time, and (iv) introduction of ICT through the use of SMS mobile phone platform
                         for payments of bills and clients feedback.


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         The objective of the Component is to “enhance Institutional capacity of KCCA for infrastructure
                         development and maintenance”. This will be achieved by strengthening the capacity of KCCA for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         design, supervision, implementation and operation and maintenance (O&M) of existing and new
                         infrastructure. The infrastructure to be financed need to be consistent with the physical development
                         plans for the city and KCCA capacity need to be strengthened to mobilize increased OSR to finance
                         the O&M of these investments.

                         The Component will therefore focus mainly on the Directorates of Engineering and Technical
                         Services; Physical Planning; and Revenue. These Directorates are necessary for the implementation
                         of Component 1 and their outputs are directly linked to the achievement of the project objective. The
                         activities to be supported under each of the Directorates are provided in Annex 2.

                         Support to Directorate of Engineering and Technical Services (US$4.0m) – the implementation of
                         Component 1 will be mainstreamed into this Directorate. The project will address the current skills
                         gaps in project management and build the institution capacity of the Directorate for effective project
                         delivery. The city currently has no comprehensive assets register and neither does it have an asset
                         management policy and plan. There is need to adequately establish the number, size/capacity and
                         quality of all city assets so as to sustainably operate and maintain them so as to maximize their value.
                         Adequate management of assets like road reserves would also minimize the resettlement cost
                         associated with infrastructure development. The KCCA traffic and transport planning unit is to plan,
                         design and operate the capital city transport system. The unit shall be within the Directorate of
                         Engineering and Technical Services of KCCA and will include (i) Traffic Management and Control
                         team, (ii) Road Safety & Development Control Support team, and (iii) Transport Planning & Strategy
                         team. It is anticipated that in the next five years, with the planned infrastructure investments and
                         transport policy review, the unit will be fully staffed and resourced to improve transport system
                         within the city.

                         Support to Physical Planning Directorate (US$2.8m) - Under KIIDP 1 the GIS department in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Planning Directorate was upgraded with hardware; however the basic Arc View software
                         requires upgrading to increase capability in order to address the current KCCA data needs.
                         Development of urban land use database from Plot, Village and Parish levels and linking it to urban
                         services and revenue Department is therefore, an urgent need. The ArcGIS address model can
                         provide the requisite database for KCAA not only for development control but also to inform
                         infrastructure investments on the ground and support the institution to increase local revenue
                         mobilization. In addition, the GIS is also expected to support the planned comprehensive city address
                         system and cadaster information to update the valuation roles for property taxation. In order to make
                         the Physical Planning Directorate provide the necessary support and services to the Directorate of
                         Engineering and Technical Services and Revenue Directorate in terms of comprehensive city address
                         system and cadaster information for OSR enhancement, the above activities need to be implemented,
                         building on what was done under KIIDP 1. Currently, the GIS Department in the Physical Planning
                         Directorate is capable of working on basic GIS assignments but cannot work on complex GIS
                         assignments given the limited access to requisite software. Consultancy services for development of
                         the Arc GIS Address Data Model will be procured to support the update of the GIS system, in order
                         for the GIS department to be much more useful to KCCA and the general public.

                         Support to Revenue Directorate (US$3.2m) - Investment in infrastructure and its sustainable
                         maintenance requires financial resources. While resources for investment in infrastructure (roads,
                         drainage, junctions etc.) will be funded under Component 1, sustainable maintenance of this

                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         infrastructure should and can be financed using KCCA internally generated revenues. This
                         component will support Revenue Directorate to rationalize and streamline the current revenue
                         management systems (revenue data base, assessment, billing, collection, enforcement, dispute
Public Disclosure Copy




                         resolutions, and tax payers’ education). The current top five key sources of OSR for KCCA are
                         trading licenses, property rates, taxi fees, outdoor advertising and street parking. Property rates
                         present the biggest potential source of internal revenue for financing maintenance oriented services
                         like road maintenance, garbage collection and street lighting. The emphasis and focus for enhancing
                         revenue collections in the short term will be in improving the revenue management system of the top
                         five KCCA revenue sources. It is projected that these measures will result into a 15% annual OSR
                         increase. The project will also support KCCA to join the other service providers to start using the
                         SMS mobile phone technology for payment of bills and providing customer feedback regarding the
                         quality of services being provided by KCCA.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is to be implemented in Kampala Capital City Authority, comprising of five
                         administrative divisions. All the 5 divisions will be covered by the project. The civil works activities
                         under Component 1 are relevant to safeguards analysis. The civil works include up-grade and
                         expansion of roads from earth/murram to bitumen status, traffic management (Motorized and NMT)
                         and associated primary and secondary drainage improvements. While the phase 1 the roads to be
                         worked on under phase 1 with engineering designs have been proposed in a known long list,
                         however, by the time of project appraisal, the screening and selection of phase 1 sub-projects had not
                         yet been completed; and roads/sub-projects to be worked on during phases 2/3 have also not yet been
                         selected. Selection of roads to be upgraded will be based on their economic viability and
                         complementarity to the BRT so as to improve mobility within the city including the criteria defined
                         under Component 1 description above. The project will also support implementation of the traffic
                         improvement plans developed for the CBD in order to reduce congestion and improve road safety in
                         the city. The proposed plans range from changes in traffic circulation and introduction of one-way
                         streets to major junction improvements and road widening schemes to remove traffic bottlenecks.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The scope of civil works dictates the bulk of potential social and environmental impacts typical to
                         upgrading, rehabilitation, and maintenance works of existing roads. The salient aspects include safety
                         of workers and the general public/road users during road construction, acquisition of stone
                         aggregates and murram, possible land-take and displacement of land-uses with associated urban
                         development challenges, disposal of soil spoil material, management equipment storage area,
                         avoidance of PCRs, and associated HIV/AIDS and gender aspects. Under Component 2 - urban
                         management, the project is envisaged to support physical planning of some parts of the city. This
                         process will be expected to take into consideration the environmental and social aspects associated
                         with the various land uses.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Herbert Oule (AFTN3)
                         Constance Nekessa-Ouma (AFTCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             OP/BP 4.01 is triggered because the project will
                          BP 4.01                                             have potential adverse environmental impacts
                                                                              associated civil works (road works, drainage
                                                                              works, road widening, road safety measures,



                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                                                                         urban planning, land use).

                                                                         The ESMF of KIIDP 1 will be reviewed, updated
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         and adopted for KIIDP 2 to guide implementation
                                                                         of environmental and social aspects of the project.
                                                                         Guidelines for mainstreaming environmental
                                                                         aspects into the Urban Management/physical
                                                                         planning component of the project will also be
                                                                         incorporated into the ESMF. After identification
                                                                         of the project sites/roads and associated drainage
                                                                         channels, respective ESMPs will be prepared. The
                                                                         updated ESMF will be consulted upon and
                                                                         disclosed before appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           TThe project may affect some wetland areas,
                                                                         especially the drainage sub component. The
                                                                         construction impacts in wetland areas shall be
                                                                         identified in ESIAs of specific sub-projects, but
                                                                         generic guidance has been provided under ESMF.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            The project is not expected to affect the
                                                                         management of forests and neither will it support
                                                                         forest nor logging operations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project will not involve use of pesticides.

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The project through the civil works and urban
                         BP 4.11                                         planning activities may affect PCRs. A
                                                                         framework for development of the PCRs
                                                                         management plan will be provided in the ESMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         A PCRs assessment will be undertaken by KCCA
                                                                         and (if necessary) a PCRs management plan
                                                                         developed/included under the ESMPs and POM.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                         area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The project will undertake civil works involving
                         4.12                                            upgrading and widening of urban roads, an
                                                                         associated drainage channels and junctions as we
                                                                         well as improving traffic signalling. These
                                                                         anticipated civil works will lead to displacement
                                                                         of people, livelihood and land uses. A
                                                                         resettlement policy framework (RPF) has been
                                                                         developed in a consultative approach to guide the
                                                                         implementation of the land take issues during the
                                                                         implementation. The RPF takes into account the
                                                                         lessons and challenges of urban land acquisition
                                                                         based on KIIDP 1 implementation. The RPF has
                                                                         been disclosed ahead of appraisal both in-country
                                                                         (on Dec. 27, 2013) and infoshop (on Jan. 07,



                                                                 Page 5 of 10
                                                                               2014). After the screening and selection of both
                                                                               phases 1 and 2/3 sub-projects (of component 1),
                                                                               the RPF will guide the preparation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) during project
                                                                               implementation, which will be consulted upon
                                                                               and disclosed both in-country and at infoshop,
                                                                               before start of civil works.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No              The project will not support or depend on dams.

                            Projects on International        No                N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project has been assigned Environmental Assessment Category B since it involves
                              development of existing roads and drainages, with readily predictable environmental and social
                              impacts. The potential safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project include:
                              change in hydrology and drainage patterns and increase in sediment load of swamps and
                              waterways as a result of widening the road embankment across wetlands and general drainage
                              improvements, safety of workers and the public in the city during construction works, soil and
                              water contamination due to spillage and leakage of oils and other toxic materials, noise and
                              vibration nuisance from road equipment, dust and air pollution from road works, acquisition of
Public Disclosure Copy




                              construction materials such as stone aggregates, murram, and possible displacement of land-uses
                              and livelihoods of people and possible relocations of a some people who may be found along the
                              road reserves. Although there are no foreseeable/potential large scale land takes given the linear
                              nature of the project, high population pressures relating to the urban development and challenges
                              regarding resettlement and compensation require significant attention. However, this will not
                              result in substantial irreversible social impacts.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              NA
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              None
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework
                              (RPF) have been prepared to provide a process/guidance for assessing the potential environmental
                              and social impacts as well as land take requirements and compensation of KIIDP 2. The ESMF has
                              established a clear mechanism for environmental screening, conduct of Environmental and Social
                              Impact Assessment where necessary, development of Environmental and Social Management


                                                                       Page 6 of 10
                         Plans (ESMPs), guidance for managing, monitoring and reporting the implementation of
                         environmental and social impacts of the KIIDP 2 project components and associated sub-projects.
                         The ESMF has also provided and Chance Finds Procedure to be used in managing any PCRs that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         may be encountered during project implementation. In addition the RPF lays clear guidance of the
                         process during implementation (and prior to any civil works) for determining the necessity and
                         preparation of RAPs for sub-projects and the procedures for their preparation, including
                         consultations with potentially affected individuals and households in the areas of project operation.
                         Both the ESMF and RPF have established a Grievance Redress Mechanism which shall be used to
                         handle complaints that may arise during project implementation. After finalization of the screening
                         and selection of sites of roads, junctions and associated drainage channels, including their
                         engineering designs, respective ESIAs and/or ESMPs and RAPs will be prepared, also in a
                         consultative manner, disclosed both in-country and at infoshop before start of any civil works.

                         The implementing agency for this project is Kampala Capital City Authority. Environmental
                         management is undertaken by the Department of Public Health and Environment. KCCA has
                         experience of undertaking World Bank supported projects, having participated in the ongoing
                         KIIDP-1. However, implementation of KIIDP-1 started with the outgone Kampala City Council
                         (KCC) and succeeded by KCCA. KCCA has many new staff and may require training in
                         safeguards policies and requirements. Out of 70 staff establishment, 08 are substantially appointed
                         whereas 15 are in acting capacity. KCCA capacity for environmental management will be
                         strengthened by recruiting an Environmental Specialist to be funded under the project. This person
                         should be on board before project effectiveness. In addition KCCA will recruit additional staff to
                         strengthen the capacity of the Directorate of Public Health and Environment using its own
                         resources over time. In terms of environmental compliance monitoring and certification, the
                         National Environment Management Authority will review and issue approvals for the ESIAs
                         undertaken, and also undertake monitoring implementation of the environmental aspects. In
                         addition, other agencies shall be involved/consulted as and when need arises, such as National
                         Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC) / Electricity Distribution company-UMEME in case
                         water/power lines are affected and need to be relocated or secured for public safety reasons.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Under Component 1, the civil works are expected to involve widening of roads and drainage
                         channels. This may lead to displacement of people and land uses. Therefore, a resettlement policy
                         framework (RPF) has been developed. Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) shall be prepared during
                         project implementation, consulted upon and disclosed both in-country and at infoshop,
                         implemented (compensation) before start of civil works. As soon as the list of sub-projects is
                         approved by KCCA, a consultative and participatory process for preparing a RAP will start and
                         will involve the steps outlined in the KIIDP 2 RPF. KCCA will be responsible for preparation of
                         ToRs for KIIDP II RAP study. The process for the preparation of the RAP will include a (i)
                         consultative and participatory approach, (ii) disclosure and notification including a cut-off date as
                         part of determining PAPs eligibility, (iii) documentation and verification of land and assets to be
                         compensated, (iv) public consultation/participation, and (v) grievances handling mechanism. The
                         details for the preparation of the RAP process are provided in the KIIDP 2 RPF which has be
                         disclosed both in-country and the infoshop.

                         KCCA is a new institution different from the agency that implemented KIIDP 1. Implementation
                         of Social issues including safeguard s is a responsibility of the Directorate of Community Services
                         and Gender. Although this is one of the units that have almost fully established structure and with
                         substantial appointments, most of them have limited understanding of involuntary resettlement.
                         On average, most staff in KCCA are new and will require training in safeguard policies and

                                                                   Page 7 of 10
                           requirement. KCCA commits to delegate and recruit additional staff to beef up this unit. In
                           additional KCCA has supported 5 (five) of its current staff in Management of Land acquisition,
                           resettlement and rehabilitation through intensive training co-facilitated by the World Bank.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           An audit of the RAP implementation of KIIDP 1 established the following challenges: (i)
                           completing the RAP payments in time, (ii) Documentation and records management, (iii) weak
                           and unskilled capacity in managing the implementation; (iv) weaknesses in enforcing cut-off date
                           and securing right of way; and (v) weaknesses in handling grievances of project affected persons
                           (PAPs). KCCA commits to address the shortcomings from the RAP audit report as follows: i)
                           KCCA will finalize the remaining payment of RAP costs of UGX 1.46 billion (US$560,000) for
                           26 properties by end of February, 2014; recruiting a RAP Specialist and train a delegated number
                           of its staff to strengthen up RAP implementation and management; as well as address all the key
                           findings of the RAP audits to ensure effective implementation of KIIDP 2.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           TThe preparation of the ESMF and RAP involved consultations with key stakeholders such as
                           National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), National Water and Sewerage
                           Corporation (NWSC), Electricity Distribution Company – UMEME, Ministry of Water and
                           Environment, Ministry of Works and Transport, Ministry of Lands Housing and Urban
                           Development, 5 Divisions that form Kampala Capital City Authority, Kampala Taxi Operators
                           Association, and Kampala City Traders Association. The central government agencies and the 5
                           divisions officials both political and technical were consulted at their respective offices whereas
                           the rest of the stakeholders were jointly met in a consultative meeting that was convened by
                           KCCA at their headquarters.

                           The safeguard documents, namely the ESMF and RPF have been disclosed both in-country and at
                           the WB’s infoshop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                  06-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                               07-Jan-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uganda                                                       27-Dec-2013
                           Comments: Both the ESMF and RPF were disclosed in-country through KCCA website
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                  06-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                               07-Jan-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uganda                                                       27-Dec-2013
                           Comments: Both the ESMF and RPF were disclosed in-country through KCCA website
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the



                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or  EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                             Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of critical natural habitats?
                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                                                                                                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS


                                                                        Page 9 of 10
                         Task Team Leader: Name: Martin Onyach-Olaa
                         Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)    Date: 24-Jan-2014
                         Advisor:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Rosemary Mukami Kariuki (SM)   Date: 27-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            Page 10 of 10
