INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 147
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Dec-2014
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        India                       Project ID:  P151544
Project Name: MSME Growth Innovation and Inclusive Finance Project (P151544)
Task Team       Niraj Verma,Mihasonirina Andrianaivo,Rosanna Chan
Leader(s):
Estimated       30-Dec-2014                 Estimated    24-Feb-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFMDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      SME Finance (100%)
Theme(s):       Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (80%), Other Financial Sector
Development (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     550.00             Total Bank Financing:   500.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                     50.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       500.00
Total                                                                       550.00
Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to improve access to finance of MSMEs in manufacturing and
service sectors from early to growth stage, including through innovative financial products.
3. Project Description
The project aims to contribute to a broader overarching development objective of fostering inclusive
Page 1 of 7


﻿economic growth, including through coverage of low income states and first generation and other
early stage entrepreneurs, and increasing jobs. The PDO is proposed to be achieved through
implementation of three project components and a parallel technical assistance (TA):
O
Component 1: Spurring early stage finance: Component 1 will support pioneering early stage debt
financing (including angel and venture debt) where angel investment has already been provided. This
specifically addresses one of the key recommendations, amongst others, identified in the Mitra
Committee (2012) to develop and scale up debt offerings in order to build a pipeline of startups that
will contribute to a vibrant entrepreneurial ecosystem in India.
Component 2: Supporting service sector financing models: Component 2 will provide funding for
direct financing by SIDBI and refinancing to Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) to introduce
new models of financing and financial products that improve the collateral requirements using asset-
light models of financing and are hence tailored to the needs of the services sector (for example non
fund based products; financing against movable assets).
This component could also support the scale up of financing models to service sector firms through
improved credit appraisal criteria. This could leverage industry associations for specific sector
knowledge and to reduce information asymmetries and credit risk. Cluster centric financing models
based on tested and tried models of cluster financing and development (including through financing
links fostered with industry associations) could be explored, building on SIDBI's past experience
with industry associations. In addition, a particular focus on franchisee financing would be explored
as the franchising industry in India is expected to quadruple between 2012 and 2017 contributing to
almost 4 percent of India's GDP in 2017 from a current estimated 1.4 percent of GDP. The industry
is also expected to create job opportunities for an additional 11 to 14 million people by 2017,
contributing to the overall India's objective of 10-15 million jobs per year for the next decade. If
achieved the industry will account for almost 10 percent of the total estimated workforce. Further,
scaling up and developing further the existing models of service sector financing that SIDBI has been
piloting, will also be supported
a
Component 3: Supporting finance to manufacturing MSMEs: Component 3 will support access to
finance of MSMEs in the manufacturing sector, in line with SIDBI new focus on manufacturing.
Through (mainly) indirect financing through SIDBI and other financial intermediaries the component
a        will complement bank lending to the sector. By increasing the flow of competitive credit to
manufacturing MSMEs, the project will contribute to improved competitiveness of the MSMEs and
job creation, in line with the importance accorded to the sector by the Gol.
Models of cluster financing/vendor financing and development could be among the financing models
supported under this component. In addition, synergies with banks/institutions that have a
predominant presence in identified clusters would be developed. Particular attention will be to
expand manufacturing activity in financially underserved areas, including low income states, and in
doing so links will be fostered with other sub-national ongoing work.
This component could also facilitate Loan Extension Services to MSMEs. In that light, the lending
activities under this component would be supplemented with Loan Extension Services (LES), where
each loan appraisal could go through a quick opportunity assessment for overall improvement of the
unit. These services would tap a wide range of improvements including energy efficiency, cleaner
production, lean management, and so forth, which would contribute to increase MSMEs competitive
advantage.
Page 2 of 7


﻿Parallel technical assistance to PFIs: Efforts will be made to include coordinated financing of
technical assistance funds to support capacity building particularly in areas of research and
development on early stage financing models and PFI (including SIDBI) capacity building in credit
O
U         appraisal and new product development. This component will be funded through parallel but
coordinated development partner funding from partners - discussions have been initiated with
partners such as GiZ (German agency for technical cooperation that was part of the Bank led
previous SME financing project with SID BI and currently has an existing TA engagement with
SIDBI) and IFC. Support will also be provided for implementation support to SIDBI.
For each component, consultations with banks, industry associations, financing institutions and other
stakeholders will be conducted to ensure stakeholder inputs to the project and applicability, as well as
to leverage partnerships to maximize scale up.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project will cover MSME industries across India. Specific locations of these industries will be
known once firms are identified by SIDBI as part of project implementation. The project will not
support any MSME operations that would result in: (i) land acquisition and displacement of people
(loss of assets, loss of livelihoods); (ii) adverse impacts on indigenous people (IP) collectively
present and/or attached to the MSME area of operation; and (iii) forced labor or child labor. Hence,
land acquisition and physical and economic displacement as well as impacts on IP is not anticipated.
Environmentally sensitive locations are not expected to be encountered and the majority of the
MSMEs supported under the project are expected to be located in designated industrial zones/areas
or in areas where commercial enterprises operate from. Further, a majority of MSMEs under the
project are expected to be service sector firms. In any case the sensitivities will be determined as part
of project implementation on a case to case basis as part of PFI's on lending appraisal process.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Sangeeta Kumari (GSURR)
Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (GENDR)
Varun Singh (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment Yes          The project is expected to extend the loans to MSME
OP/BP 4.01                            manufacturing sector through SIDBI as the financial
intermediary. The project is expected to cover range of
industries which may include polluting industries with
environmental impacts. While all the industries
considered for sub-loans shall have to comply with
environmental regulations, there is a need to address
environmental risks from FI perspective. In this regard,
the project will follow Environmental and Social Risk
Management Framework (ESMF) to as an instrument to
minimize the risks.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No           SIDBI will ensure that exclusion of lending for polluting
4.04                                  MSME units located near Natural Habitats, critically
polluted areas, and any other sensitive ecological areas.
Page 3 of 7


﻿Forests OP/BP 4.36        No           The project will not lead to any impacts affecting
forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09   No           The project will not finance any activities which would
Q)                                               require pest management.
Physical Cultural Resources No         The potential MSMEs proposed to be financed under the
OP/BP 4.11                             project will be located either in designated industrial
areas and/or sites duly consented under different
regulations including pollution control. The project will
not adversely affect any Physical Cultural Resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP  No           The project will be supporting service and
4.10                                   manufacturing enterprises that typically would operate
from designated industrial estates/zones across the
country or be located in areas where commercial
enterprises operate from. The project will not be
working with individual(s) or communities but formal
sector MSMEs which are the primary beneficiary and
stakeholder of this project. The nature, size and specific
locations of individual MSME sub-projects exclude the
possibility of locating them randomly and as such IPs
are not found in the sub-project areas. Hence, the project
is not anticipated to have impacts on indigenous people,
their lands, culture, livelihood or way of life.
Involuntary Resettlement  No           The Project will cover MSME industries across India.
OP/BP 4.12                             Specific locations of these industries will be known
once firms are identified by SIDBI as part of project
implementation. However, majority of the SMEs
supported under the project are expected to be located in
designated industrial zones or in areas where
commercial enterprises operate from.
No compulsory land acquisition, displacement of people
or communities from private or public lands or any
negative impacts on livelihoods will be permissible
under the project. Hence, land acquisition and physical
and economic displacement is not anticipated.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas  No
OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Page 4 of 7


﻿The proposed lending activities under the project would almost be in the brown field units, with
few exceptions of green-field projects. In this context, the environmental issues include: (a) the
current status of target sectors vis-d-vis environmental performance from the regulatory and
reputational risks point of view; (b) the environmental impacts of proposed investments in the
form of production scaling up or technology up gradation; and (c) environmental impacts in case
of greenfield projects - although the new units under MSME sector can only be established in
prior-recognized industrial estates or non-agricultural lands in industrial / commercial areas or
naturally developed clusters except for a few service sector projects which could be on commercial
properties. These issues, if not ascertained by SIDBI during loan appraisal, could potentially lead
to credit, environmental, regulatory, as well as reputational risks. Importance of such issues would
vary from credit risk perspective depending on type and nature of MSME sectors vis-d-vis
pollution potential. However, potential large scale and/or significant environmental impacts are
not expected.
No safeguard issues associated with compulsory acquisition/transfer of land, economic
displacement of people or impacts on IPs (scheduled tribes) are anticipated. Project strategies will
result in improved opportunities, awareness, networking and financing for women entrepreneurs in
the start up, manufacturing and service sectors MSMEs. Implementation of ESMF capacity
building interventions will improve awareness of social legislations applicable to the MSME
sector, especially those related to workers health, safety and hygiene, and child labor.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Potential indirect and/or long term impacts are not expected due to the proposed on lending
activities under the project.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The project is expected to support sub-loans to MSMEs through the Financial Intermediary. As
part of the project design, relevant care has been factored to screen the sub-loans to minimize risks
O
and/or adverse impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
As part of project preparation, SIDBI has reviewed the applicability of its Environmental and
Social Risk Management Framework (ESMF) which was developed for the now completed SME
Finance and Development Project (SMEFDP) financed by the Bank. Leveraging the past
experience, SIDBI confirmed the safeguards management for the current project through a risk
based approach by updating the ESMF. The key components of the updated ESMF include: (a)
identification and preparation of positive list of MSME sectors with reference to their respective
pollution potential and environmental regulatory requirements in to three risk categories - low,
medium, and high; (b) defining the environmental due diligence as well as management
requirements for each risk category; (c) integration of these requirements in to SIDBI's credit risk
management; and (d) implementation, monitoring and supervision support including institutional
capacity aspects.
Further, the updated ESMF also internalized: (a) waste minimization, pollution prevention, and
cleaner production approaches; (b) environmental assessment provisions; (c) occupational health
and safety aspects. The limitations noted as part of updating the ESMF include: (a) many of the
environmental management retrofits may not be feasible as the project will be mostly covering
Page 5 of 7


﻿brown field units with less than one percent of greenfield units in the project portfolio; (b) while
the loan processing will include Loan Extension Services as part of the TA to promote cleaner
production and energy efficiency, it would not be practically plausible to confirm to WBG
emission guidelines; and (c) limitations of WBG's EHS guidelines, especially in the context of
O
lower order of production levels which are much less than the threshold levels defined under EHS
guidelines.
SIDBI in the past, as part of implementation of SMEFD Project has adequately streamlined the
business processes to integrate safeguards management in to credit risk management mechanisms.
As a result, the relevant measures are built in to the regular lending procedures including loan
application processing, risk assessment, appraisal and loan sanction process, loan disbursement
and portfolio management. The overall implementation and coordination will be managed by a
SIDBI officer supported by an E&S specialist (ESS). To facilitate project implementation a
detailed Operations Manual (OM) is being prepared. The OM includes details on the
implementation arrangements, including the principles of the appraisal processes that will be
followed, fiduciary and safeguards arrangements (which are also defined in the ESMF), etc.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
MSMEs in the manufacturing and services sector will be the primary beneficiaries and
stakeholders of the Project. In addition, SIDBI and the PFIs will be beneficiaries of the
accompanying technical assistance to support their capacity and growth into the financing
activities that the project supports. For each component, consultations with banks, industry
associations, financing institutions and other stakeholders has been conducted to ensure
stakeholder inputs to the project and applicability, as well as to leverage partnerships to maximize
scale up.
Draft ESMF has been disclosed on SIDBI's website and to its field regional offices for discussion
and feedback. SIDBI has taken feedback on the ESMF from its field offices and stakeholders in
finalizing the ESMF. Awareness building activities on ESMF would be conducted in regional
offices and SME clusters.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                12-Dec-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                             29-Dec-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
India                                                      15-Dec-2014
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Page 6 of 7


﻿C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]   NA[    ]
report?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA[  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Niraj Verma,Mihasonirina Andrianaivo,Rosanna Chan
Approved By
Regional Safeguards   Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)           Date: 31-Dec-2014
Advisor:
Practice Manager/     Name: Thyra A. Riley (PMGR)              Date: 31-Dec-2014
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


