                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC6278

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Georgia                          Project ID:      P147348
                            Project Name:       Transmission Grid Strengthening Project (P147348)
                            Task Team           Joseph Melitauri
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           18-Feb-2014                      Estimated        22-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSEG                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General energy sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Export development and competitiveness (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        75.00               Total Bank Financing:              60.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      15.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         60.00
                              Total                                                                         75.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to increase export of electricity from the newly constructed
                           hydropower generation stations in the Ajara region and to improve electricity supply to the city of
                           Batumi by strengthening the south-western transmission grid.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project is aiming at three main areas; strengthening of the national transmission grid, enhancing
                           electricity market, and assessing environmental impact of the sector strategy. The project consists of
                         four components:

                         Component 1. Akhaltsikhe-Batumi High Voltage Transmission Line Construction (US $45 million).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will finance supply and installation of a double circuit 220 kV transmission line
                         from Akhaltsikhe back-to-back 500/400/220 kV back-to-back substation to Batumi 220 kV
                         substation. It will connect the four HPPs:175 MW Shuakhevi HPP to be commissioned in April
                         2016, 65 MW Khertvisi HPP, 150 MW Koromkheti HPP and 10 MW Skhalta HPP in Ajara region
                         with the national grid. These four run-of-river HPPs, totaling 400 MW, are components of the
                         Adjaritsqali cascade development project. The estimated length of the transmission line is 143 km, it
                         is composed of two sections; section one a 43 km transmission line from Batumi substation to
                         Suakhevi HPP power house, and section two from Suakhevi HPP power house to Akhaltsikhe
                         substation.

                         Component 2. Wholesale Metering and Trading Systems (US $6 million). This component will
                         finance supply and installation of the wholesale meters, balancing and trading software for metering
                         and trading of active and reactive power by System Commercial Operator and Georgian State
                         Electrosystem.

                         Component 3. Strategic Environmental Impact Assessment and Sector Studies (US $2 million). This
                         component will finance consulting services of the consultants to the Ministry of Energy to prepare
                         Electricity Sector Strategic Environmental Impact Assessment and other sector related studies such
                         as power electricity sector expansion plan, analysis of the hydro power development financing forms,
                         and other energy sector strategy related studies.

                         Component 4. Supervision Services and Project Implementation Support (US $7 million). This
                         component will finance consulting services to supervise supply and installation contract for the
                         Akhaltsikhe Batumi transmission line, preparation of new transmission system expansion plan,
                         prospective transmission line feasibility studies, preparation of conceptual and detailed designs for
                         the prospective transmission lines and substations, and services of consultants to support
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation of the project. About $2.5 million will be set aside for project implementation
                         support and incremental operating costs.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Most part of the Akhaltsikhe-Batumi transmission line corridor passes through the Autonomous
                         Republic of Adjara, and the rest of it is located in Adigeni and Akhaltsikhe provinces of Samtskhe-
                         Javakheti region of Georgia. Part of the corridor gets pretty close to the Georgia's State border with
                         Turkey. The transmission line will connect the town of Akhaltsikhe - located on the plateau of semi-
                         arid hills with continental climate, to Batumi - a sea port and beach resort on the Back Sea coast. The
                         line will get over the Goderdzi mountain pass located 2025 meters over the sea level. The corridor
                         will pass through highly diverse types of terrain, ranging from alpine meadows to subtropical forests
                         and the coastal zone. These areas include populated and cultivated parcels of land, pastures, as well
                         as parts remote and minimally transformed forests.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The GSE will be the project implementing entity. The GSE is a State-owned Joint Stock Company
                         established in 2002. It operates the Georgian electricity transmission system and exercises technical
                         control over the entire national power system. The GSE implements number of projects supported by
                         bilateral and multilateral donors, including ADB, EBRD, and KfW. The GSC has one person
                           assigned to handle all environmental and social matters of the GSE’s routine activities and donor-
                           supported projects. The position is called International Projects Coordinator for Environmental and
                           Social Issues and this staff unit is placed within the International Projects and Reporting Department.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Although the position is filled by a well experienced specialist with relevant educational and
                           employment background, she is stretched thin over multiple tasks, including travel all over the
                           country and internationally. Implementation of a Category A project with the Bank financing will
                           require enhancement of the GSE’s capacity to manage environmental and social safeguards. This
                           may be achieved by adding a staff unit to the core structure of the GSE, or hiring a term consultant
                           either based in the central office or in the Autonomous Republic of Adjara. However, regardless the
                           Bank-financed project needs, it is highly advisable that the GSE creates a specialized unit for
                           handling environmental and social performance of the company and has an adequate size team of
                           professionals of each of these fields.

                           The proposed high voltage transmission line to be constructed with the Bank financing will evacuate
                           power generated in four Hydro Power Plants (HPPs) currently under construction as part of the
                           Adjaristskali Cascade Project financially supported by IFC, EBRD, and ADB. Construction of HPPs
                           is an activity associated with the Bank-financed TGS project. Implementing entity for the
                           Adjaristskali Cascade Project is Adjaristskali Georgia LLC (AGL) - a special purpose vehicle owned
                           by Clean Energy Invest of Norway, Tata Power of India and IFC infraventures. IFC is in the position
                           to require and ensure that AGL maintains adequate institutional capacity to conform with the
                           performance standards of IFC, that are applicable to the Adjaristskali Cascade Project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)
                           Jorge E. Villegas (ECSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The TGS Project will support construction of a
                           BP 4.01                                              new power transmission line in a difficult
                                                                                terrain, including forested areas and river
                                                                                crossings, rural settlements, and cultivated land
                                                                                plots. Certain sections of the transmission line
                                                                                alignment may overlap with bird migratory
                                                                                routes. The Project triggers OP/BP 4.01 and
                                                                                according to this Policy, is classified as an
                                                                                Environmental Category A, requiring a full
                                                                                scale environmental assessment. The Borrower
                                                                                has already commissioned an Environmental
                                                                                and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for the
                                                                                Project, to be financed from the Borrower’s own
                                                                                proceeds. ToR of this task was shared with the
                                                                                Bank for comments to ensure that the ESIA
                                                                                report is in line with the requirements of the
                                                                                Bank’s safeguard policy and meets quality
                                                                                expectations. This ToR was disclosed to the
                                                                                Project stakeholders and a discussion was held
                                                             on the scope of the upcoming ESIA on
                                                             September 17-19, 2013.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             The construction of Akhaltsikhe-Batumi electric
                                                             transmission line (ETL) is subject to the
                                                             environmental impact assessment, State
                                                             ecological expertize, and environmental
                                                             permitting as per the national legislation. The
                                                             Borrower is expected to fully meet all
                                                             requirements of the Georgian law.

                                                             Adjaristskali Cascade Project is an ongoing
                                                             activity for the construction of four HPPs in the
                                                             Autonomous Republic of Adjara, implemented
                                                             with financial participation of IFC, EBRD, and
                                                             IFC, which is associated with the construction
                                                             of ETL. Namely, ETL will evacuate power
                                                             generated in the four HPPs under construction.
                                                             Task Team preparing the TGS Project is
                                                             reviewing the ESIA reports developed for
                                                             Adjaristskali Cascade Project by Mott
                                                             MacDonald, and will produce its opinion on the
                                                             coverage of environmental and social matters of
                                                             Adjaristskali Cascade Project by these
                                                             documents before appraisal of the TGS Project.
                                                             In accordance with IFC Access to Information
                                                             Policy, early drafts of the ESIA of Adjaristskali
                                                             Cascade Project were disclosed at IFC's website
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             on May 24, 2013. Updated ESIA documents
                                                             were re-disclosed on October 3, 2013 along
                                                             with an Environmental and Social Summary
                                                             prepared by IFC.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   ESIA report will provide information on
                                                             whether the construction of ETL will indeed
                                                             interfere with bird migration in any way, and to
                                                             what extent. It will also explain what is the
                                                             overlap between the corridors of an existing
                                                             power line and the proposed high voltage line to
                                                             be constructed with the project support.
                                                             Depending on if and how the new corridor will
                                                             deviate from the existing one, the potential
                                                             impact of the new line on the natural habitats
                                                             will be estimated and the final decision will be
                                                             taken on triggering OP 4.04.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   Significant part of the transmission line corridor
                                                             passes through forested areas. Placement of
                                                             towers and arrangement of service roads will
                                                                 require tree cutting. Natural forests,
                                                                 predominantly located on mountain slopes, will
                                                                 therefore be affected. There may be a need for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 permanent clearing of high growing vegetation
                                                                 under the power transmission cables, to avoid
                                                                 contact.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD   During construction and operation of the
                                                                 transmission line herbicides could be used for
                                                                 clearing and controlling vegetation. The team
                                                                 will confirm with the GSE that no herbicide are
                                                                 used during construction of operation of the
                                                                 transmission line.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   ESIA report will provide information on the
                         BP 4.11                                 existence of historic/cultural assets along the
                                                                 power transmission line corridor. Decision on
                                                                 triggering OP 4.11 will be taken depending on
                                                                 the data collected through the ESIA.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The transmission line corridor from Batumi to
                         4.12                                    Akhaltsikhe will go through few populated
                                                                 villages, pasture lands and other plots of land
                                                                 used by the local population for their livelihood
                                                                 generation purposes. While the GSE will try to
                                                                 avoid the resettlement to the extent possible, the
                                                                 project triggers the Involuntary Resettlement
                                                                 Policy OP/BP 4.12. The policy triggering is
                                                                 mandating the GSE to prepare the Resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Policy Framework where the resettlement case
                                                                 identification (census), compensation,
                                                                 livelihood restoration and other social impact
                                                                 mitigation measures and general principles shall
                                                                 be defined. The RPF will become public at the
                                                                 public disclosure meeting where the project
                                                                 affected persons will be informed about the
                                                                 project’s responsibilities vis-à-vis their
                                                                 resettlement and/or livelihoods loss mitigation
                                                                 principles. The RPF preparation, its disclosure
                                                                 and public consultation mandate rests with GSE.

                                                                 The sectional draft RAP (for the selected section
                                                                 of the transmission line to be constructed for the
                                                                 first year of implementation) has to be
                                                                 submitted for approval to WB before appraisal
                                                                 together with the RPF.

                                                                 The WB will coordinate with IFC as required to
                                                                                                                                 ensure the adequate implementation of the Land
                                                                                                                                 Acquisition and Resettlement Plan developed
                                                                                                                                 for the associated hydropower project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         Yes                           The Bank-financed construction of ETL does
                                                                                                                                 not trigger OP 4.37, however, construction of
                                                                                                                                 HPPs associated with ETL entails placement of
                                                                                                                                 two large dams with the height of 22m and 39m.
                                                                                                                                 OP 4.37 is triggered and the Bank team will
                                                                                                                                 examine whether arrangements in place for
                                                                                                                                 ensuring safety of dams at their design,
                                                                                                                                 construction, and operation stages are
                                                                                                                                 satisfactory to the Bank.
                                 Projects on International                                         TBD                           The Bank-financed construction of ETL does
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            not trigger OP 7.50. Rivers that will be used for
                                                                                                                                 water intake by the four HPPs associated with
                                                                                                                                 the ETL, drain to the Back Sea in the territory of
                                                                                                                                 Georgia. Water abstracted by HPPs will flow
                                                                                                                                 back to these rivers before they discharge to the
                                                                                                                                 see. Because water transportation will happen
                                                                                                                                 through enclosed tunnels, and because the
                                                                                                                                 project area falls into the subtropical climate
                                                                                                                                 zone with very high level of humidity, no
                                                                                                                                 measurable water loss due to evaporation from
                                                                                                                                 reservoirs and transportation passages is
                                                                                                                                 expected. Nonetheless, the TGS Project team
                                                                                                                                 will consult with the legal department on the
                                                                                                                                 need to trigger OP/BP 7.50.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Draft final ESIA report on the construction of ETL, including an environmental and social
                                      management matrix, will be shared with the Bank, disclosed in-country and through the Bank's
                                      InfoShop, and discussed with the national stakeholders as well as the locally affected people
                                      before the TGS Project appraisal. Disclosure of the draft final ESIA report and submission of its
                                      executive summary to the Board will be arranged four months before the Board date scheduled for
                                      this Project. Finalized report will then be re-disclosed, with records on the public consultation on
                                      the draft ESIA report attached.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Joseph Melitauri

                                 Approved By:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)     Date: 13-Jan-2014
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (SM)   Date: 15-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
