                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC1045

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Dec-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ethiopia                         Project ID:      P151819
                            Project Name:      Ethiopia: Transport Systems Improvement Project (TRANSIP) (P151819)
                            Task Team          Josphat O. Sasia,Haileyesus Adamtei
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          25-Feb-2016                      Estimated        26-May-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTI01                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Urban Transport (60%), Wastewater Collection and Transportation (10%),
                                               Public administration- Transportation (30%)
                            Theme(s):          City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (50%), Urban planning and
                                               housing policy (35%), Urban Economic Development (15%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    300.00                     Total Bank Financing:        300.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  300.00
                              Total                                                                        300.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           15.      The proposed PDOs are to: (a) improve transport efficiency on the urban arterial system and
                           selected road corridors in Addis Ababa; (b) improve pedestrian safety and mobility; and (c) improve
                           institutional capacity in the urban transport sub-sector.

                           16.     Objectives (a) and (b) would be achieved by financing a major expansion of the traffic signal
                         system and provision of a traffic control center, comprehensive improvements of selected road
                         corridors including walkways, the construction of foot-bridges, and other measures that will improve
                         traffic movements.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         17.     Objective (c) would be achieved by helping to establish and build the capacity of public
                         transport institutions including the new Traffic Management Agency (TMA); the Public Transport
                         and Freight Authority (PTFA); and strengthening the capacity of AACRA, Anbessa, TPMO, Land
                         Management and Development Bureau and Road Transport Bureau to effectively coordinate, manage
                         and regulate public transport and traffic flow in the city of Addis Ababa.
                         C. Project Description
                         4.       Given the foregoing it is evident that the urban development and transport challenges facing
                         Addis Ababa require a holistic and strategic approach. This approach would involve a mixture of
                         institutional change and strengthening the capacities of the existing entities, new ways of perceiving
                         and addressing well known challenges, reassessment of expenditure priorities, mainstreaming
                         communications and Information Communications and Technology (ICT) functions as an integral
                         part of the institutional arrangements for transport and priority investments.

                         5.       The proposed project will support Ethiopia’s economic development strategy and address the
                         mounting transport pressures and related transport infrastructure and services on the city of Addis
                         Ababa and surrounding areas. The project will help to: (a) increase the capacity of selected urban
                         road network by addressing traffic congestion and improve the facilities for pedestrians; (b) reducing
                         traffic accidents along the key road arteries; (c) promote the development of Addis Ababa’s economy
                         focusing on satisfying the transportation demands within the city; (d) connect efficiently with the
                         other urban transport systems currently under construction (Light rail and BRT); (d) provide a model
                         to improve the public transport services in urban areas; and (e) build the operational capacity and
                         efficiency of urban transport agencies and land use management in the city.

                         6.      Accordingly, the preliminary components of the project are:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         7.       Component A: Support to the Traffic Management Authority (TMA) to Improve the Traffic
                         Signal System, Road and Pedestrian Safety, Parking Management, Traffic Enforcement and
                         Institutional Strengthening. This component will involve:

                         (a)      Expanding the existing traffic signal system, establishing central control of this system, and
                         associated civil works improvements at intersections to improve traffic flow and enhance pedestrian
                         safety;
                         (b)      Constructing a building to accommodate the traffic control center;
                         (c)      Designing comprehensive traffic management improvements along selected transportation
                         corridors to improve traffic flow and pedestrian safety;
                         (d)      Development of a city-wide parking strategy and implementation of a targeted paid on-street
                         and off-street parking program to better manage current poor parking conditions;
                         (e)      Development of a comprehensive plan for improving pedestrian walkways, parking, motor
                         vehicle circulation and public transport access in the Merkato market area;
                         (f)      Undertaking traffic management studies to improve traffic conditions as conditions evolve;
                         (g)      Enhancing traffic enforcement and traffic safety through provision of appropriate equipment
                         and traffic enforcement training;
                         (h)      Building the capacity of the new Traffic Management Agency to carry out its assigned
                         responsibilities, especially in designing and implementing appropriate traffic management measures
                         and training; and
                         (i)     Carrying out traffic studies and provision of technical assistance and advisory services.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         8.      Component B: Support to Addis Ababa City Roads Authority (AACRA) to Improve Traffic
                         Conditions, Pedestrian and Road Safety and Institutional Strengthening. This component will
                         involve:

                         (a)     Implementing comprehensive improvements to selected road corridors to enhance traffic
                         conditions and pedestrian amenities and safety. This will be done through a range of measures
                         including, inter-alia, pavement improvements, drainage improvements, traffic management
                         measures, sidewalk provision or upgrading, street lighting, provision of bus stops and bus bays, and
                         parking management measures within the Right of Way (RoW);
                         (b)     Implementing pedestrian overpasses at selected locations to enhance pedestrian safety and
                         community connectivity. These overpasses will be provided along high speed roadways where at-
                         grade pedestrian crossings are not appropriate; and
                         (c)     Institutional strengthening through a range of measures including advisory assistance on the
                         following: (i) implementing improved asset management and pavement management systems, (ii)
                         developing an improved maintenance strategy and increased maintenance funding, (iii) restructuring
                         of AACRA and capacity building, (iv) developing an improved road design manual and creating a
                         road maintenance manual, (v) improving contract management and introducing quality assurance
                         system; and (vi) capacity building and associated training.

                         9.     Component C: Support to the new Public and Freight Transport Authority (PFTA) to
                         Improve Public Transport and Institutional Strengthening. This component will consist of:

                         (a)      Support for public transport planning and management as well as advisory assistance in
                         establishing the new PFTA;
                         (b)      Assistance in planning and establishing an integrated public transport system including
                         implementing regulatory reforms to rationalize the provision of public transport services, strengthen
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the management of public transport operations and support in streamlining the operations of the
                         minibus-taxi sector;
                         (c)      Assistance in modernizing Anbessa bus operations through support in improving
                         management, business and operational information systems to increase the operation efficiency and
                         management, including designing and implementing an ITS and fare collection and bus network
                         systems;
                         (d)      Support in rehabilitating and improving operational conditions of the Anbessa’s vehicle
                         maintenance workshops and depots; and
                         (e)      Building the capacity of PFTA in public transport planning, management, regulation, and
                         service contract management through advisory assistance and training.

                         10.   Component D: Support to Addis Ababa Land Management and Development Bureau
                         (AALMDB) to Develop Land Use and Transport Plans, and Institutional Strengthening. This
                         component will involve:

                         (a)      Carrying out studies on Transit-Oriented Developments (TOD) and preparing detailed plans
                         for selected strategic TOD(s) as well as formulating the operation and management strategies and
                         implementation plan for these TOD(s);
                         (b)      Provision of advisory and technical assistance in enhancing the capacity in Metro area
                         master planning, including preparing selected Local Development Plans;
                           (c)    Building the capacity of AALMDB in carrying out its functions, including enhancing actual
                           implementation and enforcement through provision advisory services, goods and training.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           11.     Component E: Support to Addis Ababa Road Transport Bureau and Programs Management
                           Office. This components will include:

                           (a)      Building the capacity of AARTB to oversee the implementation of urban transport reforms
                           through training and provision of goods, services and technical assistance;
                           (b)      Strengthening the capacity of AARTB staff to carry out its responsibilities, including
                           monitoring and evaluation of the Project, and steering the preparation of future development
                           initiatives;
                           (c)      Building the capacity of and supporting AARTB staff to manage the transport master
                           planning cycle, including development of a transport model; and
                           (d)      Building the capacity of the TPMO to: (i) manage the development of skills for the transport
                           sector through engaging with the local universities in developing the corresponding curriculum; and
                           (ii) provision of technical assistance in building project management capability.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Mainly in Addis Ababa

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Borrower capacity will be assessed. The proposed implementing agencies have not implemented
                           a Bank-financed operation before.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Asferachew Abate Abebe (GEN01)
                           Chukwudi H. Okafor (GSU07)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         TBD            The proposed project activities will focus mainly on
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      building the capacity and enhancing the operational,
                                                                           business and management systems of the transport
                                                                           entities; improving pedestrian infrastructure, such as
                                                                           walkways and provision of footbridges; installing
                                                                           traffic signaling and communication intelligent
                                                                           systems; and where necessary, repairing and
                                                                           rehabilitation of selected road corridors that are
                                                                           heavily used by pedestrians. Most of the anticipated
                                                                           civil works activities will be within the Right of
                                                                           Way.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04      No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36               No
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                     No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Physical Cultural Resources                                 TBD
                                 OP/BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.10
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                TBD
                                 BP 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No

                                 Projects on International      No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 20-Apr-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard relate studies to be determined.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Josphat O. Sasia,Haileyesus Adamtei
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                                                                                                Date: 18-Mar-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Richard Martin Humphreys (PMGR)                                                                                        Date: 21-Mar-2016
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
