                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA1010
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bangladesh                          Project ID:    P146464
                            Project Name:      Multipurpose Disaster Shelter Phase II (P146464)
                            Task Team          Anna C. O'Donnell
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          22-Sep-2014                         Estimated   18-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSURR                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%), Primary education (22%),
                                              Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (13%), Gen eral water, sanitation
                                              and flood protection sector (30%), Other social services (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Natural disaster management (67%), Other public sector governance (10%),
                                              Rural policies and institutions (15%), Other social develop ment (8%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     371.79           Total Bank Financing:                   370.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            1.79
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 370.00
                              Total                                                                                       371.79
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of this project is to reduce the vulnerability of the coastal population to
                           natural disasters across selected coastal districts of Bangladesh.



                                                                        Page 1 of 11
                          3. Project Description
                         Component A: Reconstruction and Improvement of Multipurpose Shelters (US$355 million).
                         Lessons learned and continuous upgrading of the designs has led to a typology of shelters today that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         feature resilience to high wind speeds, safe haven for animals and livestock, water supply systems,
                         separate sanitation facilities, and safe haven from storm surges. In addition, the shelters serve as
                         community centers or primary schools during the year, providing wider community benefit to the
                         coastal population. This component will finance the construction of around 550 new shelters (US
                         $221 million), the rehabilitation of around 450 existing shelters (US$ 40.5 million), the improvement
                         around 550 kilometers of rural roads to improve access and communication networks to shelters (US
                         $71.5 million), the preparation of environmental and social management plans (US$8 million), and
                         design and construction supervision (US$14 million).

                         Component B: Project Management, Monitoring and Technical Assistance and Training (US$15
                         million). This component will support the Government in implementing the project, and in
                         coordinating all project related activities, monitoring, technical assistance and training. It will
                         include: (B1) establishment of a Project Management Unit (PMU) within the Local Government
                         Engineering Department (US$9 million); (B2) monitoring and evaluation; and (B3) technical
                         assistance and training in such areas as disaster management and preparedness, construction, contract
                         management, financial management, preparation of environmental and social assessments, and
                         preparation of EMPs and RAPS. It will also provide resources for strengthening the School
                         Committees and CPP (US$4 million) . The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities would
                         provide continuous feedback to the Government, the Bank, and implementing agencies on the
                         project’s performance and impact of its various components, so that corrective actions could be
                         undertaken in a timely manner. They will also supervise implementation of the overall EMF and
                         SMF, careful review and monitoring of sub-project specific social and environmental management
                         plans and impact assessments, and supervision of their implementation.

                         Component C: Emergency Contingent Response Component (US$0 million). In case of a major
Public Disclosure Copy




                         natural disaster, the Government may request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to this component
                         (which presently carries a zero allocation) to support response and reconstruction. Disbursements
                         under an Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) will be contingent upon the
                         fulfillment of the following conditions: (i) the Government of Bangladesh has determined that an
                         eligible crisis or emergency has occurred and the Bank has agreed and notified the Government; (ii)
                         the Ministry of Finance has prepared and adopted the Contingent Emergency Response (CER)
                         Implementation Plan that is agreed with the Bank; (iii) Local Government Engineering Department
                         has prepared, adopted, and disclosed safeguards instruments required as per Bank guidelines for all
                         activities from the CER Implementation Plan for eligible financing under the CERC.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed MDSP will concentrate on improving the coverage of cyclone shelters to nine coastal
                         districts facing high risks from cyclones, and where comprehensive early warning systems are
                         currently present. The aim of the project will be to meet at least 80 percent of the required shelters
                         for nine coastal districts. The project interventions for construction and improvement of shelters will
                         be located in four Sidr-affected coastal districts including Bhola, Barisal, Pirojpur and Patuakhali and
                         five other coastal districts including Chittagong, Cox’s Bazaar, Feni, Laksmipur and Noakhali.

                         Cyclone shelters are constructed for multipurpose use, largely as primary schools. These


                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                         multipurpose shelters are generally established on the lands of existing education centers, community
                         centers, and offices. Under a previous Bank-financed project, connecting roads to the shelters have
                         been developed using the existing designated roads in agreement with the community. In
Public Disclosure Copy




                         circumstances where additional land for the expansion of roads was needed, the project reached
                         agreements with the land owners along those roads. It is expected that this arrangement would
                         continue under MDSP. As MDSP targets the expansion of facilities in critically vulnerable areas,
                         private lands may also be used in unavoidable circumstances, in particular for construction of new
                         shelters and improvement of the existing ones and for access road construction.

                         Shelters will fulfill multipurpose uses, most notably as educational facilities for primary education.
                         This investment will enable an improved environment for classroom learning for students, and is
                         expected to improve school management through the provision of structurally sound buildings,
                         improved furniture, water supply, sanitation facilities for both boys and girls, electricity, etc.. The
                         improved buildings of the schools/community centres will be used as shelters only in events of
                         cyclone and flooding. The existing use of the premises will continue without any interruption from
                         any corner, public or private.

                         The location of new disaster shelters, sites for improvement of existing shelters and alignment of
                         shelter connecting roads will be identified through all inclusive consultative process. Population,
                         location, vulnerability of communities to disasters and availability of shelters around the location will
                         provide the bases for demand and availability of land for civil works construction will provide site
                         readiness. Final site selection will review and confirm agreement of the communities and availability
                         of lands for construction. In case of voluntary donation of land, direct purchase or exchange of lands
                         for sites (building and/or road), the land owners must voluntarily agree on such acts and LGED will
                         execute the land taking with documentary evidences. With the experience from the ongoing ECRRP,
                         LGED will select to avoid land acquisition for the project in the current phase. In circumstances that
                         lands through donation, direct purchase or exchange are not available but the intervention is critically
                         required in future; LGED will go for involuntary acquisition of lands, as the last resort, complying
                         with the requirements of the Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. Voluntary donation, direct
Public Disclosure Copy




                         purchase or exchange of lands will be executed in a manner that the acts are voluntary and unbiased
                         will of the owners without any threat or coercion
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Nadia Sharmin (GSURR)
                         Md. Akhtaruzzaman (GSURR)
                         Iqbal Ahmed (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes             The new shelter/school building with access road
                         BP 4.01                                               will be constructed at the same premises of the
                                                                               existing schools. The specific locations will be
                                                                               identified during implementation stage The
                                                                               environmental impacts of the project are expected
                                                                               to be mostly construction related and limited
                                                                               within the project boundaries. These impacts can
                                                                               be mitigated through implementation of
                                                                               appropriate environmental code of practice and



                                                                       Page 3 of 11
                                                                        environmental management plan.

                                                                        In view of subprojects nature, the project is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        classified as a Category ‘B’ and the safeguard
                                                                        policy OP/BP 4.01 has been triggered to ensure
                                                                        that the sub project design and implementation
                                                                        will be focused on reducing adverse impacts and
                                                                        enhancing positive impacts. Since the exact
                                                                        location of the project will not be known before
                                                                        implementation, a framework approach for both
                                                                        environment and social will be adopted for proper
                                                                        environment/social management.

                                                                        Environment and Social Management Framework
                                                                        (ESMF) will lay out the policy requirement,
                                                                        likely impacts, environmental code of practice
                                                                        and how these will be addressed under the
                                                                        project. Once the sites of the shelters are known,
                                                                        site specific Environmental Impact Screening and
                                                                        Social Assessment will be conducted, and, if
                                                                        applicable, a Resettlement Action Plan, will be
                                                                        prepared and submitted at the time of detailed
                                                                        designs of the shelters. These will be
                                                                        independently reviewed by Environment and
                                                                        Social Specialists, to be retained by the PMU.
                                                                        Lessons from previous project will be utilized for
                                                                        the improved design of shelters by incorporating
                                                                        environmental and social aspect
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No           The project does not involve any conversion or
                                                                        degradation of critical natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No           The new shelter cum school building with access
                                                                        road under the project will be constructed at the
                                                                        open premises of the existing schools. There is no
                                                                        possibility for affecting forest consist of either
                                                                        closed forest formations or open forest
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No           The activities of the project will not involve any
                                                                        pesticide application and no environmental and
                                                                        health risks are associated
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No           The new shelter cum school building with access
                         BP 4.11                                        road under the project will be constructed at the
                                                                        open premises of the existing schools, There is no
                                                                        possibility of any adverse impacts on
                                                                        archaeological, paleontological, historical,
                                                                        architectural, religious, aesthetic, or other cultural
                                                                        resources resulting from project activities.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No           The project will be implemented in nine coastal



                                                                Page 4 of 11
                                                                        districts. According to the social assessment done
                                                                        by LGED, a tiny little portion of the country’s
                                                                        tribal communities, having some of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        characteristics like indigenous language and
                                                                        culture, are living in these districts. These tribal
                                                                        peoples do not possess any ancestral territory and
                                                                        customary political institutions/governance
                                                                        system (as laid down in the OP 4.10). They are
                                                                        living within the mainstream population and do
                                                                        not rely distinctly on natural resources. They also
                                                                        speak national Bangla language and are treated
                                                                        equally under the national administrative and
                                                                        political systems.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           The project aims to maximize access to disaster
                         4.12                                           shelters for the coastal population and reduce
                                                                        their vulnerability to cyclones and extreme
                                                                        weather events. This objective will be achieved
                                                                        by improving existing multi-purpose shelters,
                                                                        constructing new disaster shelters, and improving
                                                                        roads and connectivity in the area. The
                                                                        construction and improvement works will be
                                                                        carried out within existing lands of local
                                                                        educational and social institutions. However,
                                                                        lands under some of these existing infrastructures
                                                                        are likely to be under authorized and unauthorized
                                                                        private uses (residential, commercial and others).
                                                                        Infrastructure improvement may also need
                                                                        additional lands in critical situations to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        obtained from private ownerships or occupancies.
                                                                        Although minimum, additional private land and/
                                                                        or displacement of private people from public
                                                                        lands are likely in cases of development of shelter
                                                                        connecting rural roads. Application of Bank
                                                                        policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) will
                                                                        be understood only when sites for construction or
                                                                        improvement of shelters will be identified and
                                                                        design. The SMF will therefore include
                                                                        resettlement policy framework (RPF), consistent
                                                                        with the OP 4.12, to address social safeguard
                                                                        issues arising at project design and
                                                                        implementation stage. The social inclusion
                                                                        framework with the SMF will guide inclusive
                                                                        design and implementation. The SMF will guide
                                                                        LGED in carrying out social assessment of each
                                                                        construction site (shelters and connecting roads),
                                                                        and prepare social management plan (SMP),
                                                                        resettlement action plan (RAP) for annual



                                                                Page 5 of 11
                                                                                 construction packages in compliance with the OP
                                                                                 4.12 and where applicable with the OP 4.10. The
                                                                                 elements of RPF will guide LGED in preparing
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 RAPs or Abbreviated RAPs as necessary. The
                                                                                 SMP will be prepared for sites/packages where
                                                                                 additional lands will not be acquired and
                                                                                 displacement of peoples will not be involuntary
                                                                                 covering GRM, consultation, M&E, and the like.
                                                                                 The SMF should provide an entitlement
                                                                                 framework outlining eligibility and entitlement
                                                                                 based on tenancy, extent of losses and
                                                                                 vulnerability, and intuitional and legal framework
                                                                                 for management of voluntary land donation,
                                                                                 direct purchase and exchange of lands for
                                                                                 construction new shelter buildings and shelter
                                                                                 connecting roads.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               The project does not finance any new dams.

                            Projects on International           No               The project activities does not disturb any river,
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 canal, lake, or similar body of water that forms a
                                                                                 boundary between, or any river or body of surface
                                                                                 water that flows through, two or more states or
                                                                                 any bay, gulf, strait, or channel bounded by two
                                                                                 or more states.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The subprojects will not fall any disputed area.
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project interventions under the MDSP involving social and environmental issues and impacts
                              include (i) construction and improvement of multipurpose disaster shelters and (ii) improvement
                              of shelter connecting roads. The specific locations will be identified during implementation stage.
                              The environmental impacts of the project are expected to be mostly construction related and
                              limited within the project boundaries. The project is classified as a Category B project, since no
                              significant and/or irreversible adverse environmental issues are expected from the construction of
                              shelter buildings. The policy on environment assessment (OP/BP 4.01) has been triggered for the
                              proposed operation to ensure that the project design and implementation will be environmentally
                              sound and sustainable.
                              The investment on the physical component of the project will yield net positive impacts. Project
                              benefits for multipurpose disaster shelters include (i) ensuring safe sheltering of the project
                              beneficiaries at the event of any disasters including cyclone, (ii) provide congenial learning
                              environment and sufficient space in the classrooms at multipurpose shelters, (iii) overall improved
                              schooling facilities and environment to be ensured at multipurpose disaster shelters conducive to
                              children’s learning, and (iv) affected people also will be able to bring their cattle to keep at safe


                                                                         Page 6 of 11
                           shelters at the event of any disasters. There is provision of Access Road and Associated Structures
                           to the Disaster Shelters so that the shelters can be accessed safely. Separate floor for sheltering
                           livestock will save quite a number of cattle and other livestock. The site will be developed and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           enhanced through a Land Use Plan and Tree Plantation. The ancillary provisions in the shelters
                           stemmed out from environmental considerations. These provisions include solar panel benefits for
                           clean energy for the users. One of the most important needs during and after cyclones is the
                           availability of drinking water. To deter this, tube-wells on raised platform pumping safe water will
                           be installed in the shelters. There will be provisions of rain water harvesting facilities in the
                           shelters. First-Aid Boxes will be placed for each Shelter to take care of immediate requirements
                           and there will be Separate Room for Pregnant Women during occupancy in the shelters. Provision
                           of Store Rooms will solve storing of materials otherwise kept here and there creating
                           environmental problems.

                           The negative environmental impacts will be triggered mostly from the construction related
                           activities. In general the impacts due to shelter construction activities may include: drainage
                           congestion, noise pollution, air pollution, water pollution, organic and construction waste pollution
                           etc. Temporary drainage congestion often results from obstruction to natural flow of drainage
                           water due to the storage of materials or improper dumping. Noise and air pollution could results
                           from a wide range of construction activities, including foundation pilling, movement of vehicles,
                           operation of construction equipment and generators. Water pollution may result from discharge of
                           waste (from labor shed or site) and spills and leaks of oils/ chemical into water bodies (e.g., drain,
                           pond, khal, river). In addition, the Environmental Health and Safety (EHS) issues like
                           occupational safety of workers, movement of students at construction area should take on account
                           during construction. However, these impacts are mostly temporary and limited within subproject
                           boundary.

                           Past experience from similar project ECRRP, does not envisage any land acquisition or population
                           displacement. Lands owned by the sponsoring local educational and social institutions will be used
                           for construction of new shelter and horizontal extension of existing ones. In cases of unavailability
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of institutional lands, participatory approaches of voluntary donation, direct purchase or exchange
                           by the sponsoring institutions will be followed for obtaining lands. Although it is highly unlikely
                           that private lands and/or public land from private users will be required; considering any chance of
                           extreme circumstances in future when LGED may require to acquire private lands and/or public
                           land from private uses, World Bank’s Operational Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP
                           4.12) has been triggered to effectively manage involuntary resettlement.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Experience from the similar activities of Emergency Cyclone Rehabilitation and Restoration
                           Project (ECRRP) shows that the negative environmental impacts will be triggered mostly from the
                           construction related activities. These impacts are mostly temporary and limited within project
                           boundary.

                           According to the ESMF, both environmental and social screening will be performed of any
                           potential indirect or long-term adverse impacts and taking necessary mitigation measures to ensure
                           minimal impacts. The new cyclone shelter and road construction will require environmental
                           assessment in planning stage.

                           The new cyclone shelters and access roads may require land acquisition and hence will require site


                                                                      Page 7 of 11
                           specific Social Impact Assessments and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) in accordance with the
                           ESMF.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.
                           All sub-projects will be subject to an environmental screening at an appropriate level of
                           assessment based on the agreed ESMF. The screening process will distinguish sub-projects
                           requiring an environmental review or more detailed environmental assessments. The later is
                           expected for the new construction (e.g. new disaster shelters or realignment of embankments) and
                           full environment assessment will be carried out with sound environmental professional (and
                           cleared by the Bank). These sub-projects will continue to undergo an analysis of alternatives
                           specially the location and design as required under standard EA practice. Certain criteria to select
                           the sites for the cyclone shelters with due processes and design including environmental
                           parameters are to be followed to prioritize the selection by:
                           •        Series of Consultation Meetings to be organized between Local Government Bodies (UP/
                           WC), elites and local stakeholders of the area to select the location of shelters.
                           •        Necessary surveys on the parameters such as physical location, socio-economic condition,
                           communication, environmental aspects etc. with public consultations to solicit wisdom and
                           experience and reflect the aspirations of people.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Since the exact location of the project will not be known before implementation, a framework
                           approach for both environment and social will be adopted for proper environment/social
                           management.

                          The implementing agency Local Government Engineering Department (LGED) developed an
                          Environment Social Management Framework (ESMF) based on overall environment/social
                          assessment, the findings of environmental/social studies of ECRRP, field level consultation,
                          country’s overall policy framework, national legislation, World Bank safeguard policies, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                          institutional capabilities related to the safeguard aspects. The ESMF will be the guiding document
                          for subproject-specific: (i) environmental/social screening; (ii) impacts assessment; (iii)
                          consultation and disclosure; (IV) preparation of environmental/social management plan (EMP/
                          SMP) and resettlement action plan (RAP) including budget (v) sample BoQ and special
                          environmental clauses (SECs) for constructions/civil works etc. In addition, the relevant
                          Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines of the World Bank Group/International Finance
                          Corporation (IFC) will be applicable to the project.

                          LGED has also designed a Grievance Response Mechanism (GRM) to answer to queries, receive
                          suggestions and address complaints and grievances about any irregularities in application of the
                          guidelines adopted in this framework for inclusive project design, and assessment and mitigation
                          of social and eenvironmental impacts.

                          The PMU will have a Senior Environment Specialist and a Senior Social Specialist. In addition
                          LGED will procure the design and supervision consultant (DSC) firm and monitoring and
                          evaluation (M&E) firm. Each of them will have their own environment specialist and social
                          development specialist separately. The environment specialist of DSC consultant will prepare the
                          environment screening/assessment report along with EMPs. If additional environmental
                          assessment is necessary, LGED will take necessary steps for carrying out the assessment (e.g.,
                          through hiring a Consultant). The Social Development Specialists of DSC will prepare the social

                                                                     Page 8 of 11
                           screening/assessment report along with SMPs and RAPs. The LGED will also be responsible for
                           getting necessary environmental clearance from the Department of Environment (DoE).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           An independent M&E consultant will be responsible to review, supervise and monitor activities
                           for environmental and social safeguards compliance of all subprojects.

                           The LGED has developed its institutional capacity on environmental management through the
                           same nature of project ECRRP and another IDA funded project Rural Transport Improvement
                           Project (RTIP-I and II). The project supported the capacity building and environmental guidelines
                           for the LGED projects. An Environmental Unit headed by the Additional Chief Engineer
                           (Maintenance) has been established in LGED. Through RTIP II, LGED is currently working on
                           strengthening of the Environmental Unit and also the training of the LGED officials and staff on
                           environmental management.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders in the project are those are vulnerable to frequent cyclone in the coastal
                           areas. The ESMF was prepared in consultation with the local communities, NGOs and government
                           officials/agencies. The subproject specific EA (environmental screening and/or assessment) and
                           SIA (social impact assessment) and EMP, Social Management Plan (SMP) and Resettlement
                           Action Plan (RAP), where required, will be prepared in consultation with affected communities
                           and the draft will again be consulted with communities and NGOs. EIAs/EMPs and SMPs/RAPs
                           are and will also be published in the website for public information and comments.

                           The draft ESMF along with the Bengali translation will be disclosed on the implementing agencies
                           website by August 15, 2014 for public comment. A national consultation workshop will be held
                           before appraisal of the project. The final ESMF will incorporate the comments from consultation
                           workshop, public and World Bank and will be re-disclosed on the implementing agency’s website.
                           Upon request from LGED, the documents will be disclosed at World Bank’s Infoshop before
Public Disclosure Copy




                           appraisal.

                           Consultation with communities has been made mandatory for environmental screening/assessment
                           of each subproject. The subproject specific environmental screening/assessment will also be
                           disclosed before the contract mobilization.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   04-Sep-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bangladesh                                                       28-Aug-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   04-Sep-2014


                                                                    Page 9 of 11
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Bangladesh                                                       28-Aug-2014
                              Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Anna C. O'Donnell
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                          Date: 22-Sep-2014
                            Advisor:



                                                                       Page 10 of 11
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst (PMGR)   Date: 23-Sep-2014
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            Page 11 of 11
