                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC2949

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Armenia                          Project ID:      P131812
                            Project Name:       AM Long-Term Finance Project (P131812)
                            Task Team           Ilias Skamnelos
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           14-Nov-2013                      Estimated        25-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSPF                            Lending          Financial Intermediary Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        SME Finance (34%), Banking (33%), General industry and trade sector (33%)
                            Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        20.00             Total Bank Financing:         20.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         20.00
                              Total                                                                         20.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           9. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance access to medium and long-term finance
                           for exporters and FX earning enterprises (e.g. tourism, logistics).

                           10. An additional objective is to help build the institutional capacity of PAB to deliver on the PDO.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed lending instrument is a Financial Intermediary Loan (FIL), using IBRD funds, with
                         PanArmenian Bank (PAB) as the Borrower and implementing agency. The credit line will be
                         guaranteed by the Armenian government. The project will include three key components: (i) a
                         component for on-lending to Private Financial Intermediaries (PFIs) that will make sub-loans to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         final beneficiaries, expected to be the largest share of the project; (ii) a component for direct lending
                         by PAB on niche market areas that avoid distorting the private sector; (iii) a component focusing on
                         the implementation of an institutional capacity strengthening plan to assist PAB's evolution and
                         growth. The loan will be extended in foreign currency, the currency to be agreed during project
                         preparation. The discussions have taken place in the context of USD, given that trade is currently
                         carried mostly in that denomination. The definition of FX earners will be agreed upon during project
                         preparation.

                         Under the on-lending component, the Line of Credit (LoC) could use a flexible model with “open
                         doors? for interested banks that are able to satisfy the eligibility criteria prescribed in the World
                         Bank’s Operational Policies for LoC projects. The on-lending component will be the largest share of
                         the project, given that a sufficient size will be necessary to attract a desirable number of PFIs. The
                         exact percentage devoted to the on-lending component will be determined during project preparation.
                         Interested banks will need to be appraised by the World Bank to confirm that they meet the standard
                         eligibility criteria (Annex 2 and 3) and any additional one to be defined during project preparation.
                         Banks that meet the eligibility criteria will be asked to sign the Subsidiary Finance Agreement (SFA)
                         with PAB and get the PFI status allowing access to the LoC funding on an “as-needed? basis. The
                         PFI status will not impose any cost, or oblige the bank to actually use the LoC funding. New banks
                         interested in becoming PFIS, may ask to do so at any point during the LoC project implementation.

                         Once a PFI needs funding, it will make a request to PAB to refinance the sub-loan to be extended to
                         its client (final borrower) for the related sub-project. The subsidiary-loans to PFIs will be made back-
                         to-back to PFI sub-loans to the final borrowers, with the same amount, maturity and grace period.
                         Preliminary eligibility criteria for final borrowers, sub-projects and sub-loan terms are described in
                         Annex 4, to be agreed upon during project preparation. Current discussions focus on Investment Sub-
                         loans with maturity of up to 10 years, maximum grace of 18 months, and maximum amount of USD
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 million, including incremental working capital ranged from 30 to 50 percent of the total sub-loan.
                         The principles behind the interest charges are described in Annex 4. Banks have also expressed
                         interest in working capital finance sub-loans, to be further discussed during project preparation. Once
                         the withdrawals start, the PFI will be charged interest for the amounts withdrawn. The PFI
                         Subsidiary Loan amount will be equivalent to the aggregate amount of principals of all sub-loans
                         made by the respective PFI. The PFIs will be required to repay interest and principal of PFI
                         subsidiary-loans semiannually, and to make payments regardless of whether or not they have
                         received payments from their final borrowers. The repayments will be collected in a Revolving Fund
                         (RF) and will be used to provide funding for new sub-loans.

                         PAB will evaluate each PFI application to ensure that the final borrower and the sub-project request
                         meet the agreed eligibility criteria and that the PFI’s sub-loan appraisal and approval conforms to the
                         Operations Manual (OM) and the principles of sound banking. PAB functions will also include
                         authorization of withdrawal applications, disbursement of subsidiary loans, project accounting
                         including financial reporting, auditing of project accounts, general procurement and project reporting.

                         Regarding the direct lending component, PAB will provide loans to the final borrowers through
                         project finance on the basis of future cash flows and preferably in syndication with a commercial
                         bank. PAB will also follow the Operations Manual and observe the eligibility and other criteria
                         applicable to the sub-projects, with the difference that the PAB sub-loan amount would be in the
                           range of USD 1-2 million. This is expected to be discussed and confirmed during project preparation.

                           An amount may be necessary to cover project management, administration and critical investments
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the first year of project implementation. While PAB will charge a spread for subsidiary financing
                           to PFIs, the start of the Project may be slow. On the other hand, the PAB operating cost will be very
                           high in the initial stages, due to the learning process. The slower start implies that PAB will not be
                           able to fully cover its expenses with the agreed spread, or else that the spread would have to be rather
                           high. Therefore, an amount expected to cover the PAB cost of project management and
                           administration in the first year, as well as investments in the IT systems and application software and
                           other necessary items, could be covered as part of the project.

                           The institutional capacity building component will strengthen PAB’s ability to deliver in its
                           developmental agenda. It should include building of the necessary institutional capacity for: i) on-
                           lending, including meeting all applicable World Bank requirements related to project management
                           and administration, and observance of Bank’s safeguards and fiduciary requirements; ii) credit risk
                           appraisal and management; iii) financial risk management (liquidity, interest rate risk, currency risk
                           and market risk); iv) operational risk management; v) treasury function and asset/liabilities
                           management; vi) internal audit and controls function. Initial technical assistance is expected to be
                           provided by a Project Preparation grant that the team and PAB have applied for (under the ECA
                           Region Capacity Development MDTF).
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will be implemented by PAB and PFIs. The sub-projects (exporters and FX earning
                           enterprises) locations are not defined at this stage and are expected to be all over Armenia.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           PAB is a young development institution that has not worked with the World Bank or other IFIs in the
                           past. The World Bank team and PAB have applied for a Project Preparation grant (under the ECA
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Region Capacity Development MDTF) that will help to develop institutional capacity of PAB,
                           including its ability to apply adequate safeguard policies. Also, the proposed LTEF project carries a
                           component focusing on further enhancement of PAB’s institutional capacity and the ability of this
                           institution to handle environmental and social aspects of its performance will be part of the technical
                           assistance to be delivered through this component. A number of potential PFIs are familiar with
                           World Bank safeguards and procedures through the past Access to Finance for Small and Medium
                           Enterprises project (Report No: 47271 – AM).
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The LTEF project is classified as environmental
                           BP 4.01                                               Category FI, because disbursement of the
                                                                                 project proceeds will be made through the on-
                                                                                 lending PAB. Also, most investments under the
                                                                                 project will not be identified until project
                                                                                 implementation. Environmental and social
                                                                                                                                 aspects associated with sub-projects will be
                                                                                                                                 examined and addressed at the stages of sub-
                                                                                                                                 projects’ selection and implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Methodology and procedures for environmental
                                                                                                                                 and social screening, selection, and monitoring
                                                                                                                                 of sub-projects will be outlined in the
                                                                                                                                 Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                                                                 Framework ESMF), to become a part of the
                                                                                                                                 Operations Manual of PAB. Sub-loan
                                                                                                                                 environmental screening and classification will
                                                                                                                                 be an integral part of eligibility assessment of
                                                                                                                                 sub-loan applications. ESMF will be developed
                                                                                                                                 by PAB and approved by the World Bank.
                                                                                                                                 Adherence to the ESMF will be mandatory for
                                                                                                                                 PAB as well as for the participating PFIs. Due
                                                                                                                                 to the nature of the project, it is expected that
                                                                                                                                 many applications for the working capital or the
                                                                                                                                 investment loans will imply machinery
                                                                                                                                 purchase/replacement or small scale
                                                                                                                                 construction works. These activities are unlikely
                                                                                                                                 to cause large scale significant and/or
                                                                                                                                 irreversible environmental and social impacts.
                                                                                                                                 Clients will be requested to design and apply
                                                                                                                                 mitigation measures commensurate to the
                                                                                                                                 identified risks of their activities. No Category
                                                                                                                                 A sub-projects will be supported under the LTF
                                                                                                                                 project.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            Land acquisition is not eligible under the
                                 4.12                                                                                            proposed project so OP 4.12 is not triggered.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 25-Oct-2013



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             PAB will prepare an Operations Manual that will include the Environmental and Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Management Framework (ESMF) outlining environmental review procedures and implementation
                             arrangements under this project. The OM, including ESMF, will be shared with the WB and, after
                             consent, the ESMF will be disclosed in PAB's web site in English and Armenian languages.
                             Stakeholder feedback will be sought in the process of the ESMF's development. Adherence to the
                             ESMF will be made mandatory for the participating PFIs through the inclusion of this requirement
                             in the sub-loan agreements between PAB and PFIs, and PFIs will also be asked to disclose the
                             ESMF in their websites.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Ilias Skamnelos

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                              Date: 09-Oct-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Aurora Ferrari (SM)                              Date: 09-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
