                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA7069
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           World                             Project ID:    P128437
                            Project Name:      Ocean Partnerships for Sustainable Fisheries&Biodiversity Conservation
                                               (P128437)
                            Task Team          Tim Bostock
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       03-Jan-2013                          Estimated   19-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AES                                   Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                               Multi-focal area
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (25%), Other industry (25%),
                                              Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forest ry (25%), Agro-industry,
                                              marketing, and trade (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Biodiversity (25%), Environmental policies and institutions (25%), Other Private
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              Sector Development (25%), Other economic management (15%), Other rule of
                                              law (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      50.00           Total Bank Financing:                30.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  0.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                        10.00
                              IDA Grant from CRW                                                                       30.00
                              Bilateral Agencies (unidentified)                                                        10.00
                              Total                                                                                    50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:



                                                                      Page 1 of 10
                         Is this a            No
                         Repeater
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project?

                         2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                         The project’s development objective is to catalyze investment into selected transformational public-
                         private partnerships that mainstream the sustainable management of highly migratory stocks
                         spanning areas within and beyond national jurisdictions.
                         3. Project Description
                         The PPP investments will be through a series pilot project business plans that are to be defined by the
                         project and which represent key outputs from the four project regions. Business plans are expected to
                         comprise a package of proposals that (depending on context) combine transition finance (‘soft’
                         investments into e.g. capacity building, further analytics, consultations, etc - typically donor financed
                         from say WB or bilaterals) and debt-equity finance (‘hard’ investment responding to the pilot
                         investment value proposition typically sourced from a private investor or investment bank / IFC).

                         The business plans will incorporate a value proposition for investment – the economic, technical,
                         financial and political/institutional rationale needed to attract public and / or private sector
                         investment. The business plans and associated planning processes will also inform regional and
                         global solutions to improved management of shared highly migratory fisheries through high impact
                         local private sector investments.

                         Once financed and implemented, each Pilot will contribute to increasing sustainable, net economic
                         benefits to coastal and island developing countries while enhancing ocean biodiversity conservation.
                         However, the actual pilots will not be financed out of the Project, and are beyond its scope.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The BPs will incorporate a value proposition for investment – the economic, technical, financial and
                         political/institutional rationale needed to attract public and / or private sector investment. The BPs
                         will also include the social and environmental instruments necessary to avoid, minimize, mitigate
                         and if necessary compensate for potential adverse impacts arising from the piloting of the four
                         business plans.

                         The project is a Technical Assistance (TA) operation that will finance prioritization, analysis and
                         development of business plans for up to four globally significant areas covering fisheries of highly
                         migratory stocks occurring within developing coastal and island states’ exclusive economic zone
                         (EEZ) and adjacent areas beyond national jurisdiction (ABNJ). Business plans will identify
                         investments that support sustainable rights-based fisheries management.

                         Business plan development will be undertaken through regional or global Executing Agencies (EA).
                         EAs will be selected during preparation of the project, and may include one or more of the following
                         entities:
                         •         Caribbean - West and Central Atlantic Fisheries Commission (WECAFC, www.fao.org/
                         fishery/rfb/wecafc/en)
                         •         Eastern Pacific - World Wildlife Fund (www.worldwildlife.org); Inter-American Tropical
                         tuna Commission (IATTC - http://www.iattc.org/)
                         •         West and Central Pacific - Forum Fisheries Agency (Pacific Islands FFA - http://www.ffa.


                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                         int/)
                         •       Bay of Bengal - Bay of Bengal Program (BOBP-IGO - http://www.bobpIGO.org/)
                         •       Support to all 4 regions – Conservation International (www.conservation.org)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project is organized into three components:

                         Component 1: Development of Business Plans to support public or private sector investment in up to
                         four areas on sustainable fisheries. This component will support technical and financial development
                         of up to four regional long-term business plans for fisheries on highly migratory stocks occurring
                         within developing coastal and island states’ waters and in areas beyond national jurisdiction adjacent
                         to small island development states (SIDS) or coastal developing states.

                         Business Plan Candidates identified to date are as following:

                         1.       Caribbean billfish and shark: Potential institutional mechanisms to support compensation
                         payments to commercial / artisanal fishers to adopt catch and release, tagging or non-targeting of
                         iconic species. Partners include (for billfish) Western and Central Atlantic Fisheries Commission
                         (WECAFC).
                         2.       Bay of Bengal India/Tamil Nadu (Sri Lanka and Maldives):             Under consideration with
                         Bank IDA (Tamil Nadu and Puducherry Coastal Disaster Risk Reduction Project). Covers regional
                         (India, Sri Lanka, Maldives) tuna fisheries access management instruments, by-catch and
                         conservation. Partners include Bay of Bengal Programme and the Ministry of Fisheries in Tamil
                         Nadu.
                         3.       Western and Central Pacific:       Supporting efforts by Pacific Island Nations to develop and
                         take forward initiatives on more effective management of tuna stocks. Under consideration with
                         Bank IDA investment (Pacific Island Regional Oceanscape Program - PROP). Partners include the
                         Forum Fisheries Agency and Parties to the Nauru Agreement Office.
                         4.       Eastern Pacific Ocean: Exploring efforts to build on existing capacity measures under Inter
                         American Tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC) and ideas being tabled by industry and partners.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Ideas emerging include (1) tradable bigeye tuna by catch quotasin exchange for an exemption to the
                         annual closure; (2) trading of harvest capacity (expressed as hold capacity); (3) converting hold
                         capacity into tradable tonnage quota. Partners wide ranging and embrace industry (Mexico, Ecuador,
                         Spain), WWF, IATTC, ISSF.

                         Business Plan candidates will be selected based on their ability to demonstrate the potential to
                         achieve rapid transformational change. Once selected for inclusion in the project, activities to support
                         development of the Business Plans will involve: (i) preparatory analyses including identifying reform
                         pathways and supporting sector analytics and scenario planning, (ii) investment plan development,
                         and (iii) mapping of public and/or private capital to implement the final business plans.

                         The Project will not invest in the actual implementation of any of the suggested reform pathways that
                         are described in the Business Plans.

                         Component 2: An Innovation Grant Facility. This grant facility will be led by Conservation
                         International and will contribute to the transformational impact that the Business Plans are expected
                         to realize. A $2 million grant window will support further analytical work to inform development of
                         the business plans. The aim of the fund is to stimulate innovation that directly supports preparation of
                         the business plans including, for example, creation of links between market-based certification and
                         rights-based management in target fisheries as well as new techniques for by-catch reduction.

                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         Component 3: Inter-Regional Coordination, Implementation Support and Monitoring and Evaluation.
                         This Component will provide parallel support for Components 1 and 2 in the two following areas:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Global Think Tank:
                         Inter-regional coordination, outreach and collaboration between the four regional sub-project
                         activities work will be achieved through a small, but potentially influential, Global Think Tank
                         (GloTT). This will comprise the five project EAs together with a multidisciplinary group of thematic
                         specialists, GEF and FAO Tuna Project interests.
                         •        M&E tools:
                         With regard to monitoring and evaluation, this Component will design and deploy tools and
                         approaches to enable effective benchmarking of performance and progress against agreed targets. It
                         will also informally monitor any pilot projects that are successful in securing external finance during
                         the project’s lifetime, ensuring appropriate lessons are learned and disseminated.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Location: The project is global in scope and will invest in the preparation of business plans to
                         support sustainable fisheries in up to four seascapes, including: the Caribbean, Eastern Pacific,
                         Western and Central Pacific and the Bay of Bengal.

                         Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis: This is a TA project, with no
                         physical footprint. Component 1 will finance analytical work and the preparation of business plans
                         for up to four areas. Though these business plans will not be implemented under the Project, the
                         investments will have a physical footprint and will generate both adverse and positive environmental
                         and social impacts that will need to be addressed.

                         Examples of the type of business plan investments that will be proposed under the business plans
                         include, among others:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         a)       Investment into private enterprise including infrastructure works to enable improved
                         postharvest handling on fishing craft and foster value creation; high-value / value-added processing
                         with improved market access; innovative technologies to reduce bycatch and improve catching
                         efficiency; buy-back schemes and other operations to reduce fishing capacity. Investments and the
                         value proposition these offer, would leverage public-private commitment to institute secure and
                         exclusive access, including appropriate allocative and enforcement mechanisms agreed by key
                         parties.
                         b)       Investment into public sector schemes (such as national collective action initiatives) to
                         improve the ‘business model’ of existing management schemes such as the Pacific Vessel Day
                         Scheme, or new collective action models yet to be identified, in order to generate value proposition
                         incentives for enabling reform and downstream private sector investment.
                         c)       Investment into tourism/fisheries schemes such as innovative information technologies in the
                         Caribbean for monitoring billfish (also shark) catch / tag / release compensation programs involving
                         recreational and commercial fishers.
                         d)       Integral with the above would be opportunities for investment in technologies for improved
                         real time catch data generation and management to support future management and certification
                         schemes, and cost effective fisheries monitoring and surveillance.

                         Similar investment opportunities in pollution control may be available where processing of high
                         value fish may be impacted negatively by pollution from say urban outfalls. Asserting access rights


                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                         to hygienic and sanitary working conditions may provide a value proposition to exporters.

                         The business plans will require that all pathways proposed in each plan will be screened to ensure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         that potential adverse environmental and social impacts that may be generated as a result of each
                         investment are identified, and appropriate safeguard instruments are prepared to avoid, minimize,
                         mitigate and, in such cases where there are residual impacts, offset adverse environmental and social
                         impacts. The screening of the business plans for environment and social impacts and the preparation
                         of appropriate safeguard instruments for each plan will be guided by the Environment and Social
                         Management Framework (ESMF), which will be developed during project preparation and disclosed
                         prior to appraisal.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Josefo Tuyor (EASDE)
                         Valerie Hickey (AES)
                         Peter Leonard (EASDE)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             While this is a TA project with no physical
                         BP 4.01                                             investment, the development of business plans
                                                                             under Component 1, when implemented
                                                                             regardless of the funding source, will have
                                                                             physical footprints and will generate both adverse
                                                                             and positive environmental and social impacts
                                                                             that will need to be addressed. For these reasons,
                                                                             OP4.01 is triggered.

                                                                             To ensure that the business plans are developed
                                                                             with due consideration of environment and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             impacts and in compliance with OP 4.01, an
                                                                             ESMF was prepared during preparation. The
                                                                             ESMF will guide the screening of the business
                                                                             plans for environment and social impacts and the
                                                                             preparation of appropriate safeguard instruments
                                                                             for each plan. The ESMF contains an
                                                                             environmental and social assessment screening
                                                                             process associated with specific investments
                                                                             proposed in each business plan, as well as
                                                                             examples of good practice avoidance,
                                                                             minimization and mitigation measures for the
                                                                             breadth of reform pathways that the business plan
                                                                             may propose. This Framework will ensure that
                                                                             each business plan will put in place a robust
                                                                             approach to consider environmental and social
                                                                             risks and impacts in line with Bank safeguard
                                                                             policies, and to prepare appropriate good practice
                                                                             safeguard instruments for the actual reform
                                                                             pathways identified in the final business plan.



                                                                     Page 5 of 10
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           The business plans developed by this TA will
                                                                         lead to subsequent investments that are likely to
                                                                         impact natural habitats, although most of these
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         impacts are expected to be positive.

                                                                         The ESMF prepared for the project includes
                                                                         provisions of how each business plan will screen
                                                                         for potential impacts related to natural habitats,
                                                                         and will describe the necessary measures to
                                                                         avoid, minimize or mitigate these adverse
                                                                         impacts.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            Following discussions during preparation, it was
                                                                         agreed that the business plans developed by this
                                                                         TA will not impact mangrove forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            Following discussions during preparation, it was
                                                                         agreed that there will be no impacts from this
                                                                         Project related to pest management.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            Following discussions during preparation, it was
                         BP 4.11                                         agreed that there will be no impacts from this
                                                                         Project related to physical cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           Indigenous Peoples are likely to be present in
                                                                         some of the areas and are likely to benefit from
                                                                         reform pathways when implemented.

                                                                         Each area and business plan will be screened to
                                                                         determine whether Indigenous Peoples are
                                                                         present. The ESMF prepared for the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         includes an Indigenous Peoples Planning
                                                                         Framework (IPPF), the main elements of which
                                                                         would be a free, prior and informed consultation
                                                                         process to ensure that IPs are not adversely
                                                                         affected by project activities (e.g. siting of
                                                                         infrastructure and construction work related to
                                                                         component 2) and that they are not excluded from
                                                                         project benefits.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The subsequent investments identified from the
                         4.12                                            business plan may result in loss of access to
                                                                         natural resources in legally designated parks.

                                                                         The ESMF prepared for the project includes a
                                                                         Process Framework (PF) that describes the
                                                                         procedures and requirements in case there is loss
                                                                         or restriction of access to natural resources.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No            Neither this project nor the implementation of the
                                                                         business plans will involve building dams nor will




                                                                 Page 6 of 10
                                                                                any of the future investments envisaged depend
                                                                                on an existing dam.
                            Projects on International           No              Following discussion with LEGEN and the RSA,
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                it was agreed that there will be no impacts from
                                                                                this Project or downstream implementation of
                                                                                Business Plans on international waterways as
                                                                                described under OP 7.50.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 There may be unresolved territorial claims or
                            7.60                                                disputes within the project boundaries identified
                                                                                during the preparation of Business Plans. In this
                                                                                case, the Business Plan activities in these areas
                                                                                will be declared ineligible and removed from the
                                                                                Business Plans.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is global in scope and will invest in the preparation of business plans (BPs) to support
                              sustainable fisheries in up to four seascapes, including: the Caribbean, Eastern Pacific, Western
                              and Central Pacific and the Bay of Bengal. This is a TA project, with no physical footprint.
                              Component 1 will finance analytical work and the preparation of business plans in each of the four
                              seascapes mentioned above. Though these business plans will not be implemented under the
                              Project, the investments will have a physical footprint and will generate both adverse and positive
                              environmental and social impacts that will need to be addressed. Thus the project is given a
                              Category B rating.
                              The business plans will be screened to ensure that potential adverse environmental and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                              impacts that may be generated as a result of each potential pilot investment are identified, and
                              appropriate safeguard instruments are prepared to avoid, minimize, mitigate and, in such cases
                              where there are residual impacts, offset adverse environmental and social impacts. The screening
                              of the business plans for adverse environment and social impacts and the preparation of
                              appropriate safeguard instruments for each plan will be guided by an Environment and Social
                              Management Framework (ESMF).
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The potential impacts will be identified during the preparation of the BPs. The ESMF provides
                              guidance on the preparation of appropriate safeguard instruments to respond to the potential
                              impacts found during the preparation of the business plans. Though these plans will not be
                              implemented by the Project and are beyond its scope, each BP will include robust safeguard
                              instruments to guide the agencies who will implement them.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              These will be considered within each BP in consultation with all affected stakeholders and
                              knowledgeable and interested peoples.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an


                                                                        Page 7 of 10
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Project has prepared an ESMF to outline the process by which potential adverse impacts will
                           be identified and robust instruments prepared as part of each BP. It also includes a Process
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Framework (PF) that describes the procedures and requirements in case there is loss or restriction
                           of access to natural resources.

                           A rapid assessment of the institutional capacity of each Project Executing Agencies to comply
                           with the World Bank’s safeguard policies was conducted during Project preparation. The results of
                           the rapid institutional assessment suggest that each of the Agencies has sufficient capacity to
                           understand their role and the technical capacity to undertake consultations and produce safeguard
                           instruments. For example, one agency, Conservation International has broad experience managing
                           Bank safeguard policies and instruments based on its work with another global biodiversity
                           operation (e.g., the Critical Ecosystem Partnership Fund). This experience includes successful
                           development, implementation and active supervision of a range of World Bank-approved
                           safeguard instruments. WWF also has similar experience given its past role as recipient of World
                           Bank funding. The Bay of Bengal Programme and the Forum Fisheries Agency both have
                           experience with World Bank safeguards because of their respective link to IDA-financed
                           operations.

                           Nonetheless, the World Bank will provide a series of refresher trainings to each Project Executing
                           Agency in the first year of the Project to build their capacity and provide implementation support
                           during the actual determination of the range of activities to be included in each BP. The budget for
                           this training will be included in the Project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Project stakeholders include both men and women from affected communities whose livelihoods
                           are implicated and/or who depend on migratory fisheries; the private sector (fishing industry from
                           harvesting through to value chains / processing and investment); the public sector (national
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ministries, regulatory and trade promotion authorities); and international bodies including regional
                           fishery bodies, RFMOs and LMEs. The numbers and specificity of stakeholders can only be
                           determined once the precise nature and location of the activities under each BP are identified.

                           Disclosure: The ESMF is made available through the World Bank website (www.worldbank.org),
                           as well as through the websites of each of the Project Executing Agencies. During the preparation
                           of BPs, any safeguard instrument prepared as part of a BP will also need to be publicly disclosed,
                           including locally in a language and format accessible to affected communities.

                           Disclosure will occur in two phases:
                           •        Disclosure of assessment documents (e.g. social assessment and environmental review)
                           and draft safeguard documents (e.g. IPP and PF) during business plan preparation and prior to
                           final review and approval of the BP. Disclosure during business plan preparation aims to seek
                           feedback and input from local communities, and as appropriate other stakeholders, on the business
                           plan proposal and safeguard measures and documents.
                           •        Disclosure of final safeguard documents prior to business plan finalization to inform local
                           communities of implementation measures concerning safeguard issues.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      27-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Apr-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           World                                                            01-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      27-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Apr-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           World                                                            01-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      27-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Apr-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           World                                                            01-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples




                                                                    Page 9 of 10
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Tim Bostock
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                               Date: 10-Apr-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Valerie Hickey (SM)                               Date: 19-Apr-2014




                                                                       Page 10 of 10
