                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC11005

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Dec-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Nov-2014, 17-Dec-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kazakhstan                       Project ID:       P150183
                            Project Name:      KZ SKILLS AND JOBS PROJECT (P150183)
                            Task Team          Keiko Inoue
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          26-Jan-2015                      Estimated         31-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEDDR                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General education sector (50%), Other social services (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (50%), Improving labor markets (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       147.00               Total Bank Financing:        100.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       47.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         100.00
                              Total                                                                         147.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed PDO is to enhance the quality assurance, relevance, and equity of skills development
                           programs and labor market services.
                           C. Project Description
                           The estimated total Project amount is US$147 million. Total duration of the Project is four years.
                           Further Project details are provided below.
                         Component 1. Building the Foundation of a National Qualifications System (Total US$12m). The
                         objective of this component is to enhance the institutional capacity for improving the quality
                         assurance and relevance of pre-employment vocational and technical education and in-service
Public Disclosure Copy




                         training. This will be achieved by establishing the key building blocks of a national qualifications
                         system that is well aligned with labor market demands.

                         Sub-component 1.1. Expansion and operationalization of occupational standards (US$4m). This Sub-
                         component will support technical assistance and capacity building to expand the occupational
                         standards to include economic sectors for which standards do not exist and/or for which standards do
                         not correspond to changing labor market demands. The standards will also address the needs of large,
                         as well as small and medium enterprises (SMEs). The methodology for developing the occupational
                         standards will be driven by the private sector and build on prior experience of the respective private
                         sector organizations, the MHSD, and the World Bank’s Technical Vocational Education
                         Modernization (TVEM) Project implemented by the MOES. The occupational standards will also be
                         expanded to cover all four levels of competencies of occupations, ranging from technical vocational
                         and professional, to management. The Sub-component will also establish a process for regular
                         review and updating of occupational standards to ensure ongoing alignment with labor market
                         fluctuations.

                         The specific activities to be supported by the Project include: (i) development of a national
                         classification of occupations; (ii) review of the existing regulatory framework to identify gaps for
                         adjustment; (ii) harmonization of the processes and methodologies developed to date; and (iv)
                         selection of developers based on established criteria through competition. A national body
                         representing industries and firms will coordinate the development of occupational standards through
                         the competitive selection of developers representing respective industries and sectors in accordance
                         with established criteria. The Sub-component will also support the adoption of the standards
                         developed for modernizing the educational and training standards and curriculum.

                         Sub-component 1.2. Modernization of educational and training standards and curriculum (US$4m).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This Sub-component will build on the achievements of the TVEM Project and support the continued
                         modernization of educational and training standards and curriculum towards competency-based
                         modular programs aligned with occupational standards. This effort will build on prior good practice
                         and with strong ownership and participation by the private sector. The education and training
                         standards and curriculum should include career guidance norms, as well as attention to a balance
                         among cognitive, job-relevant, and life skills development. A process will also be put in place for
                         ongoing review and updating of educational standards and curriculum.

                         The MHSD will begin a pilot of the development of educational and training standards and
                         curriculum, in conjunction with Kasipkor Holding, with selected colleges and universities. Once the
                         selection criteria for educational and training institutions are developed, the Project will determine
                         whether the pilot institutions are eligible for inclusion.

                         The Sub-component will support the following activities: (i) review of international experiences and
                         ongoing pilots in Kazakhstan on modernizing educational and training standards and curriculum; (ii)
                         refinement of methodology for developing the standards and curriculum; and (iii) selection of
                         developers based on established criteria through competition. A national body will coordinate this
                         effort through a competitive selection of developers in accordance with established criteria to assure
                         quality and cost effectiveness.
                         Sub-component 1.3. Enhancing independent qualifications assessment and award system (US$4m).
                         This subcomponent will support technical assistance and capacity building to enhance the
                         qualifications assessment and award system by piloting sector/industry specific skills testing and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         certification, and build the capacity of assessment and awarding institutions towards an independent
                         institutional structure and practice. A process will also be put in place for ongoing review and
                         updating of the qualifications assessment and award system.

                         The Sub-component will support the following activities: ( i) pilot of three sector-specific skills
                         testing and certification centers—in mining, energy, and tourism—and an evaluation of the pilot
                         before a system-wide scale up; (ii) review of the regulatory framework and structures of the existing
                         qualifications assessment and award system; (iii) development of a roadmap for a comprehensive
                         system and build capacity to undertake independent assessment and award of qualifications aligned
                         to the National Qualifications Framework; and (iv) development of accreditation procedures and
                         practice for in-service training programs that target firm employees under Component 2.

                         Component 2. Providing more relevant and equitable training to the working age population (Total
                         US$130m). The purpose of this component is to provide morerelevant and equitable training to the
                         working age population, contributing to the longer-term objective to improve worker and firm
                         productivity and earning capacity. The proposed approach is to address existing market failures and
                         inefficiencies in public delivery of training services. The proposed activities will enhance access to
                         and financing of training, which are chosen by beneficiaries based on improved information on labor
                         and skill demand. The increased demand and financing of relevant training is expected to have a
                         positive impact on the provision of demand-driven training supply.

                         Target beneficiaries are the unemployed and underemployed, as well as current employees. While
                         this is a potentially large beneficiary pool, it should be noted that adult training is uncommon in
                         Kazakhstan. In 2013, according to official data, only 3.4 percent of the employed undertook training,
                         retraining, or upgrading of qualification courses in the 12 months prior to the survey. Further, there is
                         a large gap between urban and rural areas, where only 2.4 percent of employees received training
Public Disclosure Copy




                         compared to 4.2 percent in urban. Furthermore, less than 1 percent of the self-employed took training
                         in comparison to 4.6 percent of wage employees. Adult training in Kazakhstan, therefore, is
                         underutilized and hence, a wider beneficiary pool is proposed under this project. However, target
                         beneficiaries who are hard-to-reach (for example, people residing in rural areas or with disabilities)
                         will be a particular focus. For all beneficiaries, the training will offer a balance between cognitive,
                         job-relevant, and life skills development. Proposed sub-components include: (i) the establishment
                         and implementation of a Training Grant Program (TGP) which will finance the provision of demand-
                         driven training; (ii) outreach activities to encourage TGP participation of hard-to-reach and under-
                         served target beneficiaries and of potential training providers; (iii) capacity building activities for the
                         TGP’s implementing institutions and coordination of stakeholders; and (iv) activities to modernize
                         the integration, analysis, and use of labor market information to improve labor market services.

                         Sub-component 2.1: Increasing access to relevant training through a demand-driven Training Grant
                         Program (TGP) (US$70m). This sub-component will establish a TGP, which will apply a demand-
                         driven approach to financing training activities with increased relevance. The TGP will be advised by
                         a high level entity that will, at minimum, represent the private sector, MHSD, and MOES. The TGP
                         is an umbrella program that will deliver training to all target beneficiaries through three windows
                         (see below for further details). There will be a gradual nationwide roll-out of the program, whereby
                         the findings from evaluations of initial interventions will inform adjustments in further program
                         design and implementation.
                         The first window will focus on unemployed and underemployed workers, while the other two will
                         offer options for either customized or pre-identified training for current employees. For the first
Public Disclosure Copy




                         window, in addition to the unemployed and underemployed, self-employed or unregistered small and
                         medium enterprises (SMEs ) will qualify for training. The first window will be administered by
                         Employment Centers or Employment Units (EC/EU) staff and will finance training programs for
                         beneficiaries. The training program and the training provider will be chosen by the beneficiary in
                         consultation with EC/EU staff with the help of labor demand information.

                         The other two TGP windows will target firms, with a focus on registered SMEs, and will be designed
                         to encourage deeper collaboration across firms and also across firms and training providers. These
                         two windows will provide grants in response to proposals prepared by firms to provide training to
                         current employees, which should enhance the relevance of the content and pedagogy of the training
                         programs. The administration of the last two windows will be determined during project preparation.
                         However, an explicit strategy will be put in place to ensure private sector ownership and leadership
                         of the training programs for current employees. This will include regular and broad stakeholder
                         consultation, with representatives from SMEs, sector associations, and other industry/economic zone
                         groups.

                         Sub-component 2.2 Integration of hard-to-reach workers, firms, and training providers into the TGP
                         (US$20m). This sub-component will conduct outreach to potential project beneficiaries and training
                         providers that are difficult to integrate through regular communication channels. Those living in rural
                         or remote areas will be a focus, but also potential beneficiaries who may not consider themselves as
                         good candidates for the program because they are older/youths, have disabilities, or are single
                         parents. The outreach effort under the sub-component is important given Kazakhstan’s geographic
                         size and the difficulty for the EC/EUs to inform all the potential beneficiaries of the new training
                         opportunities, the traditionally low uptake among underemployed workers, and the difficulty of
                         integrating older people and youth, people with disabilities, and single parents into the labor market.
                         The sub-component will expand training coverage by enhancing outreach through the use of media
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (TV, radio, web, SMS, etc.) and mobile units.

                         The sub-component will also conduct outreach to training providers to ensure that all prequalified
                         training providers are included in the TGP. The outreach will be conducted by providing information
                         about the programs (i.e., the benefits) and about the prequalification criteria. The outreach will also
                         include awareness building about the distinction between pre-employment training and training that
                         targets the unemployed, underemployed, or firm employees. Training providers in rural or remote
                         areas will be a focus and the outreach will also include sensitization about the importance of
                         providing training to microenterprise employees, people with disabilities, or people in low wage/
                         productivity jobs.

                         Sub-component 2.3 Strengthening capacity and collaboration of key stakeholders involved in skills
                         development programs and labor market services (US$10m). Capacity building and enhanced
                         collaboration will focus on two levels: (i) administration and management of the TGP and (ii) higher
                         level coordination of the linkages between skills development programs and labor market services as
                         well as key stakeholders such as training providers, firms, industry/sector associations, and
                         government and employee representatives at both national and local levels.

                         For the administration and management of the TGP, the activities will include the establishment
                         (where necessary) and capacity building of TGP management and implementing entities, including
                         the EC/EU. Given the complexity of the TGP, with respect to a diverse group of target beneficiaries
                         and the three modalities of training delivery, effective administration and management of the
                         program is critical. This includes strengthening coordination and information flow among firms,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         working age people, and training providers. This Sub-component will also ensure the integrity and
                         transparency of the process for selecting the grantees and prequalifying training providers.

                         This Sub-component will support effective coordination between the TGP and other skills
                         development programs and labor market services, as well as with broader national programs. For
                         example, the Damu Entrepreneurship Development Fund and technical assistance provided through
                         the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) provide capacity building to
                         entrepreneurs, some of whom (or their employees) may be potential beneficiaries of the TGP. The
                         Project also needs to link to national level efforts, which are also undertaken through the PFA, to
                         generate better quality jobs, stimulate the private sector, or enhance trade and competitiveness:
                         without which the TGP is constrained. The Sub-component will provide technical assistance to
                         ensure that the TGP remains relevant, responsive, and coordinated with other initiatives to diversify
                         Kazakhstan’s economy. It will also promote collaboration and coordination among key stakeholders
                         such as training providers, firms, industry/sector association, and government and employee
                         representatives at both national and local levels around skills development and job creation policies.
                         The details of ways to improve the coordination across national level efforts will be discussed during
                         project preparation.

                         Sub-component 2.4 Strengthening the integration, analysis, and use of information management
                         systems to improve labor market services (US$30m). This subcomponent aims to improve the
                         manner in which visitors to EC/EU are assigned to training and other labor market programs or
                         services by supporting three key activities. The subcomponent is structured in three areas:

                         First, it will support the implementation of a jobseeker profiling and targeting tool. By implementing
                         this tool, EC/EU staff can prioritize services as well as better target interventions based on the
                         recommendations provided by a statistical (data-assisted) profiling tool together with a more in-depth
Public Disclosure Copy




                         interview that is undertaken by the EC/EU staff. The statistical profiling tool complements the staff
                         member’s assessments about a candidate’s suitability for different labor market programs.
                         Implementation of such a tool will help increase efficiency of labor market services and programs as
                         well as their effectiveness.

                         Second, it will strengthen the labor market information system so that beneficiaries are better able to
                         make informed choices about the types of training that will benefit them based on labor market
                         demand, and also make choices about the actual training providers (based on the training provider’s
                         past performance) for the courses. In the past, decisions about the types of training and the actual
                         training provider were often made based on availability of training positions in the local area, leading
                         to surpluses in some trades (trained cooks, seamstresses, and hairdressers, for instance).

                         Third, this subcomponent will maintain information about prequalified training providers, and will
                         periodically update the performance of those training providers. The performance indicators will be
                         generated under a Joint Economic Research Program (JERP) and will be reflected in the Project
                         Operations Manual (POM).

                         Component 3. Project management and monitoring and evaluation (Total US$5m). A small Project
                         Management Unit (PMU) will be financed within the MHSD to manage the fiduciary aspects of the
                         project, supervise the entities involved with the implementation of the project, ensure project
                           monitoring, and prepare and submit timely reports. The PMU will also ensure that the project is well
                           coordinated with the diagnostics and technical assistance offered through the two Joint Economic
                           Research Program (JERP) engagements, respectively focusing on labor and jobs. The PMU will also
Public Disclosure Copy




                           develop a rigorous monitoring and evaluation framework to track the intermediary and PDO level
                           indicators of the project. Thus the PMU will ensure that the project remains flexible in its design so
                           as to accommodate emerging recommendations from the JERP engagements, results of the project
                           M&E, as well as feedback from stakeholders and beneficiaries. An important task of the PMU will
                           be to update the Project Operations Manual (POM) on a regular basis. The staff comprising the PMU
                           will be determined during project preparation.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Unknown.

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The GOK went through extensive restructuring in August 2014 in an attempt to enhance efficiency
                           of government entities and reduce the number of ministries and committees. The main counterpart
                           for the proposed Project is the Ministry of Healthcare and Social Development (MHSD), and other
                           key counterparts include the Ministry of Education and Science (MES) and the Ministry of National
                           Economy (MNE).

                           The MHSD is the implementing agency for the World Bank’s Health Sector Technology Transfer
                           and Institutional Reform Project (P101928, effective as of 2010). No environmental assessment
                           safeguards were triggered (Category C), thus the Project Management Unit does not include a
                           safeguards specialist. Although unconfirmed, the MHSD's capacity to carry out safeguards policies is
                           likely to be low.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Lola Ibragimova (GSURR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Rustam Arstanov (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            Component 2 includes the provision of competitive
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      training grants to be used by firms. Some firms may
                                                                           request minor civil works, including the upgrading of
                                                                           training facilities. Potential environmental impacts
                                                                           associated with the above interventions are minor,
                                                                           short-lived, and primarily limited to the project sites
                                                                           (except for movement of equipment and materials to/
                                                                           from the site). These issues are primarily dust, noise,
                                                                           disposal of waste material and/or older equipment,
                                                                           some traffic disruption (depending upon specific
                                                                           location), worker safety (e.g. works at height) etc.
                                                                           All these impacts are addressed with good
                                                                           engineering and construction practices and with
                                                                           mitigation measures specified in the project EMP
                                                             checklists. EMP checklist with project description
                                                             and potential environmental issues usually related to
                                                             rehabilitation as well as typical mitigation measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             shall be disclosed on the website of the MHSD and
                                                             the Infoshop prior to appraisal.

                                                             The Safeguards Policies are also relevant for
                                                             Component 1 in that the educational standards and
                                                             the certification standards developed under the
                                                             project should incorporate environmental and social
                                                             Safeguards aspects that are relevant to the fields in
                                                             question (notably the pilot of three sector-specific
                                                             skills testing and certification centers, which will be
                                                             in the fields of mining, energy, and tourism –
                                                             environmental and social sustainability and
                                                             protection are important elements to include in
                                                             capacity building and certification/standards
                                                             processes in all three of these fields).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No

                         Physical Cultural Resources    No
                         OP/BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   No   The project will bring positive social impacts as the
                         BP 4.12                             proposed activities would increase the youth and
                                                             women employability and capabilities for continuous
                                                             skills upgrading. Component 2 includes the provision
                                                             of competitive training grants to be used by firms.
                                                             Some firms may request minor civil works, including
                                                             the extension or upgrading of training facilities.
                                                             There will be no expansion of buildings beyond
                                                             existing site boundaries, and no land acquisition will
                                                             be required. Thus OP4.12 is not triggered and no
                                                             resettlement documents have to be prepared.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No

                         Projects on International      No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                         BP 7.60
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 24-Dec-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The pre-appraisal mission was held from November 10-21, 2014, and will be followed by
                                      appraisal in late January 2015. Given the tight preparation schedule, the team proposes to agree on
                                      the TORs for the safeguard-related studies and complete them by end of December.

                                      Guidance from Social Safeguards team: Both gender, citizen engagement assessment but also
                                      vulnerable groups targeting (identification, outreach, design of relevant training modules,
                                      participation, feedback) should be done during the social assessment phase (i.e soon) and
                                      recommend to include a simple institutional mapping (key actors involved in the project) to check
                                      their capacity to reach those groups and current channels used (so we could propose relevant
                                      feedback/citizen engagement mechanisms). This social assessment would allow the team to create
                                      a baseline which could be useful for both the result framework but also to monitor the project
                                      impact during the MTR and ICR phases. The social safeguards team has provided a draft TOR, for
                                      discussion during pre-appraisal. The assessment will be completed by end of December.

                                      Prior to Appraisal the checklist EMP will be disclosed in-country (MHSD website) and in
                                      Infoshop, with the first section describing the overall project and subsequent sections listing
                                      typical rehabilitation activities with related environmental issues and mitigation measures.

                                      No formal public consultation is required prior to appraisal. However, should the sub-project
                                      activities include substantial rehabilitation activities triggering OP 4.01 the checklist EMP shall be
                                      developed for particular subprojects and formal public consultations might be conducted
                                      depending on the scale of activities and related risks to environment.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Keiko Inoue

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 09-Dec-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Andrea C. Guedes (PMGR)                                                                                              Date: 17-Dec-2014
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
