                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC7104

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Dec-2013, 13-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           El Salvador                      Project ID:      P124935
                            Project Name:      El Salvador FCPF REDD Readiness (P124935)
                            Task Team          Gerardo Segura Warnholtz
                            Leader:
                            Estimated
                            Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSAR

                            Sector(s):        Forestry (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          3.60                 Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                      3.60
                              Total                                                                         3.60
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           1.      The Project Development Objective is to assist El Salvador in the implementation of key
                           REDD+ readiness activities identified in its R-PP including: (i) institutional arrangements and
                           participatory processes, (ii) development of a national REDD+ Strategy, and (iii) establishment of a
                           national forest reference/emission levels, and a national system to monitor greenhouse gas
                           emissions.
                           C. Project Description
                         The Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP) identifies a broad set of activities aimed at strengthening
                         the technical and institutional capacities for the GoES to participate in a future REDD+ mechanism.
                         The financial envelope for these activities is estimated at US$8.187 million. The activities to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         financed by the FCPF Preparation grant were selected jointly with MARN, and in coordination with
                         other donors, considering the following criteria: (i) activities needed to strengthen the immediate
                         institutional capacity of MARN to conduct participatory and consultation processes for REDD+; (ii)
                         fundamental readiness activities for which the GoES had specific financial needs, not covered by
                         other donors; (iii) a discrete set of activities that would generate a specific outcome (with no- or
                         minimal parallel-financing that could jeopardize the achievement of the project objective); and (iv) a
                         activities that complemented those of other donors and the government, and that could serve to
                         strengthen the achievement of the project objective.

                         Below is a detailed description of the grant components and the activities to be financed by the FCPF
                         as portion of the REDD+ Readiness in El Salvador:

                         Component 1: REDD+ Readiness Organization and Consultation (US$1.208M).

                         1.a National Readiness Management Arrangements. (US$318,000.00). This subcomponent will
                         support efforts initiated by MARN to establish, strengthen and operate the national Committee on
                         Climate Change, integrated by MARN, Ministry of Public Works, Housing and Urban Development
                         (MOP for its acronym in Spanish), MAG, Ministerio de Hacienda (MH), and Ministry of Foreign
                         Affairs (MIREX for its acronym in Spanish) under the SINAMA. Within this institutional
                         framework, MARN will also complete the participatory design and initiate operations of the
                         Interministerial Consultative Platform (PCI for its acronym in Spanish), as the consultative body for
                         climate change, including REDD+. The PCI will operate at both national and local levels and will be
                         integrated by a broad array of actors previously identified by MARN under a stakeholder analysis
                         and mapping developed during the formulation phase of the R-PP. Activities to be funded by this
                         subcomponent include salaries for consultants to administrate the platforms, travel costs for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         participants, studies, workshops and meetings.

                         1.b. Information Sharing and early Dialogue with Key Stakeholders Groups. (US$ 280,000.00).
                         Under this sub-component a national communications and dissemination strategy for REDD+ will be
                         designed and implemented. This activity will strengthen the communications capacity of MARN in
                         the areas of climate change and REDD+ by designing and implementing a national communications
                         strategy. A communications specialist will be hired to develop and produce knowledge, attitudes and
                         abilities baseline, and a communications and training strategy based on annual implementation plans.
                         The strategy and its plans will be designed based on the principles of communication for
                         development, which emphasizes the broad and effective participation of all REDD+ stakeholders
                         with a culturally sensitive approach. The subcomponent will finance salaries for a communications
                         specialist, studies for the design of the strategy, dissemination campaigns, operating costs and
                         materials.

                         1.c. Consultation and Participation Process and Grievance Redress Mechanism. (US$ 610,000.00).
                         This subcomponent will support the design and implementation of a national participation and
                         consultation plan for REDD+, which will be developed in close coordination and with the support of
                         the communications and dissemination strategy. The strategy will include specific guidelines and
                         activities for the engagement with indigenous communities. In addition, this subcomponent will also
                         finance the strengthening of the national Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) as outlined in the
                         general R-PP template. The general R-PP template indicates that such a mechanism needs to be
                         available to REDD+ stakeholders from the earliest stages of R-PP implementation in order to
                         facilitate the handling of any requests for feedback or complaints by any REDD+ Readiness
Public Disclosure Copy




                         stakeholders, wherever they originate, with particular attention to providing access to geographically,
                         culturally or economically isolated or excluded groups. The Bank considers the GRM to be a key
                         element of social accountability and meaningful participation. In terms of activities, the
                         subcomponent will finance consultancies and analytical work required to prepare the participation
                         and consultation plan and the GRM as well as implementation costs such as workshops (national and
                         regional) and production of materials including necessary adaptation and translation.

                         Component 2: National REDD+ Strategy (US$965,000.00).

                         2.a Drivers of Deforestation and Landscape Degradation. (US$150,000.00). This subcomponent will
                         focus on expanding and deepening the analysis of the critical direct and underlying causes of
                         deforestation and degradation, focusing on those identified during the engagement of national and
                         local stakeholders and in the first phase of the SESA process. Emphasis will be put in those drivers
                         that reduce the resilience of local communities to climate variation and that continue to exacerbate
                         ecosystem degradation in areas that have already lost forest cover. Attention will also be given to the
                         analysis of legal and institutional elements that need to be in place to ensure the harmonization,
                         coordination and synergy of policies and programs of the various relevant sectors affecting REDD+.
                         Among others, these will include a revision of access to land and forest tenure rights by local
                         stakeholders . The subcomponent will finance specialized national and international consultancy
                         services, studies, and dissemination/consultation activities.

                         2b. REDD+ Strategy Options (US$250,000.00). This subcomponent will contribute to the design of
                         policies and programs for the implementation of REDD+ activities with an MbA approach and under
                         the institutional framework of the PREP program currently in implementation by MARN. Some of
                         these would include incentive and compensation mechanisms and technology transfer packages to
                         promote the conservation and sustainable management of natural resources and agricultural/livestock
Public Disclosure Copy




                         practices (e.g. agro-silvo-pastoral systems). The technical and social soundness, and long term
                         viability of these instruments will also be assessed at the local level, and with additional technical
                         support from the Bank . The subcomponent will finance specialized national and international
                         consultancy services and studies, and dissemination/consultation activities.

                         2c. REDD+ Implementation Framework (US$200,000.00). This subcomponent will focus on the
                         design of legal and technical instruments needed to ensure effective implementation of the national
                         REDD+ strategic options. These include a legal framework analyses to identify possible legal/
                         institutional perverse incentives that induce deforestation/degradation, inter-sectoral harmonization
                         plans, and a national entity to be in charge of managing REDD+ funds in a transparent fashion, with
                         robust fiduciary and safeguard standards. The subcomponent will finance specialized national and
                         international consultancy services and studies, and dissemination/consultation activities.

                         2.d Social and Environmental Impacts (SESA and ESMF). (US$365,000.00). This subcomponent
                         will finance activities that are outlined in the National SESA Workplan, including an update of the
                         stakeholder map, analytical studies to evaluate possible social and environmental impacts associated
                         with the REDD+ strategic options and a comprehensive consultation and participation process. One
                         of the main products of the SESA will be an ESMF, or other safeguard instrument as appropriate,
                         that will be prepared in order to manage risks and impacts and maximize the potential benefits of any
                         future REDD+ investments. A preliminary list of the analytical work that will be undertaken includes
                         research on: indigenous rights; land tenure and property rights in forest lands (including protected
                         areas); carbon ownership and benefit sharing for REDD+; social and environmental assessments of
                         areas that may be subject to REDD+ activities; traditional knowledge related to climate change
Public Disclosure Copy




                         adaptation; and gender analysis and role of local governments in REDD+ processes. This
                         subcomponent will finance consultancies, studies, training events, and consultation and participation
                         workshops as outlined in the budget in the attached National SESA Workplan.

                         Component 3: National Forest Reference/Emission Level (US$247,000.00).

                         Establishing a national Reference Emissions Level/Reference Level (REL/RL) for the forest sector
                         based on historical data is one of the key pillars of a ENA-REDD+, as it constitutes the benchmark
                         against which future REDD+ efforts will be assessed as measured by the national forest monitoring
                         and MRV system. The GIZ will play an important role in the development of the REL/MRV system
                         in El Salvador as it is providing the bulk of technical support as well as the necessary hardware/
                         software through its Regional REDD Program for Central America and the Dominican Republic.

                         The component will complement existing support from GIZ to assist MANR in the definition of
                         methodologies, identification and collection of major data requirements, and institutional capacity
                         needs to design and establish a REL/RL scenario for El Salvador. Given the emphasis of El
                         Salvador’s REDD+ strategy on adaptation, particular attention will be given to define reference
                         levels for the conservation of remnant forests lands (e.g. mangroves, native and riparian forests),
                         sustainable forest management, and enhancement of degraded forest lands (e.g. agroforestry and
                         silvo-pastoral systems). The component will finance studies, equipment, software, training; and
                         information sharing, outreach, and consultation with key stakeholders to conduct the following
                         activities: (i) establish a forest definition for REDD+ (US$ 25,000.00); (ii) develop a consistent time
                         series of land use change based on standardized protocols (e.g. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
                         Change (IPCC)) as a basis for the country’s REL/RL (US$ 100,000.00); (iii) Develop potential
                         Business as Usual scenarios based on econometric and spatial modeling (US$ 17,000.00 with parallel
                         financing); (iv) strengthen the capacity of key institutions on IPCC methodologies for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         compilation of GHG inventories for the Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) sector
                         (US$ 105,000.00).


                         Component 4: National Forest Monitoring Systems (NFMS) (US$960,000.00).

                         As in the case of the REL/RL GIZ will play an important role in the development of the MRV
                         systems in El Salvador. Complementary support is necessary to conduct several key activities at the
                         national level and to strengthen the focal team of staff across the key agencies in charge of the
                         design, planning and implementation of the national MRV system (MARN, MAG, National
                         Geographic and Cadaster Institute (CNR)). In addition, given the contribution of GIZ to the national
                         REL/MRV systems the F CPF preparation grant will place a strong emphasis in supporting the
                         design of the information system for multiple benefits responding to El Salvador’s national
                         circumstances, related to environmental degradation and extreme climate variability.

                         4.a. National Forest Monitoring Systems. (US$460,000.00). This subcomponent will complement
                         existing support by GIZ to assist MANR in developing national forest monitoring systems to
                         measure, report and verify (MRV) GHG emissions reductions and removals from the implementation
                         of REDD+. As in the case of REL/RL, special attention will be given to activities related to
                         sustainable management, conservation, and enhancement of carbon stocks. Protocols for the
                         monitoring of multiple benefits and other impacts potentially generated from the implementation
                         REDD+ activities will also be designed an established. The subcomponent will finance salaries,
                         studies, computer equipment, software, and information sharing, outreach, and consultation with key
Public Disclosure Copy




                         stakeholders in order to carry out the following activities: (i) establish the logical framework and
                         required institutional arrangements for MRV (US$ 50,000.00); (ii) strengthen the institutional
                         capacity of key agencies involved in the NFMS for REDD+ (hiring of four specialists, hardware and
                         software) (US$ 310,000.00); (iii) develop and pilot community-based carbon monitoring
                         methodologies (US$ 50,000, co-financed); (iv) support a research program on forest monitoring (US
                         $ 50,000.), with parallel financing).

                         4.b National Information system for Multiple Benefits, Other Impacts, Safeguards and Governance
                         (US$500,000.00). Given El Salvador’s priorities on climate change adaptation, it is important to
                         develop systems and protocols to report on the co-benefits generated by the country’s REDD+
                         strategy. This sub-component thus will assist MARN in assessing non-carbon benefits, and design
                         protocols and methodologies for their monitoring. This system will also address other impacts related
                         to the implementation of the REDD+ strategy including information on safeguards compliance. The
                         component will finance studies, equipment, software, training; and information sharing, outreach,
                         and consultation activities with key stakeholders to conduct the following activities: (i) development
                         of monitoring protocols to assess the environmental impacts of the REDD+ strategy (e.g.
                         biodiversity, soils, water) (US$ 150,000.00 co-financed); (ii) development of monitoring protocols to
                         assess the socioeconomic impacts of the REDD+ strategy (livelihoods, governance, safeguards,
                         adaptation) (US$ 300,000.00 co-financed); (iii) develop and pilot community-based, non-carbon
                         monitoring methodologies (US$ 50,000.00 with parallel financing).


                         Component 5. Monitoring and Evaluation Framework and Grant Administration (US$220,000.00).

                         This component will support the establishment and operation of a technical/administrative
                         implementation unit that will be in charge of coordinating and executing the technical and fiduciary
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities of the readiness phase, including a monitoring and evaluation framework. This unit will be
                         integrated by highly qualified staff in each of the areas of specialization required by the project (e.g.
                         communications, social, environmental, forestry/carbon, fiduciary). Given the limited capacity of
                         MARN to execute its mandate, and the relevance of the elements of the REDD+ process to El
                         Salvador, an exit plan will be discussed and agreed with MARN at project initiation to ensure that
                         staff, initially hired as external consultants for this project, would remain or formally be incorporated
                         as regular staff of the ministry by project closure. In addition to salaries, the grant under this
                         component would also cover operating costs, office equipment and supplies, computers, software and
                         consulting costs necessaries to develop internal grant audits.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The FCPF Readiness Preparation Grant is national in scope but will not finance physical investments
                         or pilot projects on the ground. It is acknowledged that while Readiness Preparation is conceived as
                         mostly strategic planning at this stage, key policy and regulatory precedents are being set that will
                         have downstream impact at the national level once the National REDD+ Strategy is ready to be
                         implemented. The activities of the Grant itself will not have specific impacts per se but may lead to
                         recommendations for actions in the future which could bring such risks which will be assessed
                         during the Grant period. In order to address any potential risks and/or negative impacts associated
                         with the actions being considered for the National REDD+ Strategy, the grant will finance a number
                         of analytical and diagnostic studies as well as a series of consultation meetings and workshops with
                         relevant stakeholders as outlined in the SESA Workplan (see Annex XIII of the Assessment Note)
                         that has been reviewed by civil society in El Salvador and approved by the Bank.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         According to the main legal framework for public institutions of the GoES, MARN is the National
                         Authority mandated to address all matters on environment and natural resources. It formulates,
                         proposes, manages, and supervises compliance with national environmental policies, such as the
                         Environmental Impact Assessment. . MARN has a number of experienced staff that worked on the
                         preparation of the R-PP and this project. However, most of the staff have recently started
                         collaboration with World Bank and have a rather limited experience with the Bank’s consultation,
                         participation guidelines and safeguard policies.

                         The Climate Change directorate of MARN (DGCCAE), who will be in charge of implementing the
                         FCPF Preparation grant, has moderate capacity to manage social and environmental safeguards.
                         Although they do not have a social specialist among their permanent staff, GIZ financed a consultant
                         who provided technical assistance regarding safeguards during the preparation of the R-PP and the
                         Bank’s due diligence process. Going forward, MARN has agreed to hire a social specialist to assist
                         with the implementation of the SESA process and to provide continued technical assistance
                         regarding social issues including safeguards. This additional technical support and a strong SESA
                         work plan that includes a clear methodology for the continued participation of indigenous peoples
                         and other key stakeholders during REDD+ Readiness will certainly help to mitigate this risk. MARN
                         will also be encouraged to increase their institutional support for consultation and participation as
                         well as social safeguards by working with existing specialized offices focused on indigenous peoples
                         already established in the GoES. It has also been agreed with MARN that at least one full-time
                         environmental and social specialist staff would be dedicated to deal with future project activities and
                         environmental/social requirements, as well as supervision. Incremental budget for compliance with
                         environmental and social safeguards has been considered for this project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Engagement with stakeholders. As MARN made progress in their stakeholder analysis and built a
                         more robust stakeholder map during the preparation of the R-PP, participation became more
                         inclusive reaching an acceptable coverage by the time the Bank concluded the due diligence process
                         for this grant. Many NGOs and several universities provided technical assistance and were actively
                         involved in the discussions regarding the National Environmental Policy and the preparation of the
                         National Program for the Restoration of Ecosystems and Landscapes (PREP), both of which are
                         important precursors for the ENA-REDD+. At the local level, many forest or resource dependent
                         communities are part of the Asociaciones de Desarrollo Comunal (ADESCOs) and these platforms
                         will continue to be used during the preparation phase (see annexes VIII and XIII of the SESA
                         Workplan ).

                         National Indigenous Peoples Roundtable (Mesa Nacional Indígena). It is noteworthy that in order to
                         address the historical gap in the relationship between the government and indigenous peoples,
                         MARN created a special platform during the preparation of the R-PP specifically for them formally
                         called, “Mesa de Dialogo con Pueblos Indígena y Ministerio de Medio Ambiente y Recursos
                         Naturales”. The “Mesa Nacional Indígena” currently includes 15 leaders representing all four of the
                         indigenous areas in the country and its members have participated in some of the REDD+ early
                         information sessions as well as several of the pre-SESA dialogues hosted by MARN (meeting reports
                         on file). In addition, MARN financed two special meetings of the Mesa Nacional Indígena on May
                         17th and 30th, 2013 in order to provide the indigenous leaders with an opportunity to discuss REDD
                           + issues among themselves and to assist them with formally establishing the framework for the Mesa
                           Nacional Indigena and to define their participation in the National SESA Workshop and other FCPF
                           related events in the region (meeting reports on file).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (LCSEN)
                           Kristyna Bishop (LCSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The policy on Environmental Assessment (OP/
                           BP 4.01                                            BP 4.01) is triggered. However, since the
                                                                              explicit goal of the REDD+ strategy is to
                                                                              promote the reduction in rates of deforestation
                                                                              and degradation by rewarding measures to
                                                                              protect and conserve forests, the environmental
                                                                              impacts of the strategy are expected to be
                                                                              mostly positive. The REDD+ strategy itself
                                                                              would not finance the harvesting or conversion
                                                                              of forests so there is little to no direct adverse
                                                                              impact associated with activities planned as part
                                                                              of the strategic options.
                                                                              The principal risk from REDD+ would arise in
                                                                              the event that the strategies fail to achieve their
                                                                              objectives thereby creating unexpected indirect
                                                                              adverse impacts through the unintended creation
                                                                              of incentives to clear forests for other purposes.
                                                                              For these reasons, and due to the critical nature
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              of strategic options and choices being
                                                                              considered, OP 4.01 is applicable to the R-PP
                                                                              activities. The principal instruments to
                                                                              document the environmental benefits and risks
                                                                              of the REDD+ strategy will be the Strategic
                                                                              Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA).
                                                                              SESA will assess key social and environmental
                                                                              risks and potential impacts associated with
                                                                              REDD+, and will develop a safeguard
                                                                              instrument (ESMF or other appropriate
                                                                              instrument) to manage and mitigate any possible
                                                                              risks and potential impacts during the
                                                                              implementation phase.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        Yes             The policy on Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
                                                                              will apply considering that the REDD+ strategy
                                                                              will likely involve work both within existing
                                                                              protected areas as well as other forest habitats of
                                                                              varying significance. If the REDD+ strategies
                                                                              are successful, the impacts on critical forest
                                                                 habitats are expected to be positive, nevertheless
                                                                 SESA will evaluate the possible risks associated
                                                                 with strategic options on forest habitats within
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 PA as well as other sensitive forest habitats
                                                                 under private or communal control. It is
                                                                 expected that the ESMF or other safeguard
                                                                 instrument will include provisions to assess
                                                                 possible impacts prior to any actions being
                                                                 undertaken on the ground. Monitoring activities
                                                                 will be established during implementation to
                                                                 ensure that critical natural habitats are not
                                                                 adversely affected.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   The policy on Forests (OP/BP 4.36) will apply
                                                                 considering the importance of REDD+ as part of
                                                                 El Salvador’s long term forest and
                                                                 environmental management programs and due
                                                                 to the fact that El Salvador faces severe
                                                                 degradation of its natural resources, especially
                                                                 its natural forests, soil, and water resources.
                                                                 Only two percent of its natural forests remain.
                                                                 Yet, there is evidence of a significant recovery
                                                                 of secondary forests and biodiversity. The
                                                                 R_PP will not finance the harvesting or
                                                                 conversion of forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   The policy on Pest Management (OP 4.09) is
                                                                 triggered since it is conceivable that some forest
                                                                 management practices may involve pesticide
                                                                 use. At present it is not envisioned that the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 REDD+ strategy would finance or lead to an
                                                                 increased use of pesticides or other agricultural
                                                                 chemicals. The SESA will evaluate the
                                                                 potential for such use of chemicals in forest
                                                                 management and, if necessary, appropriate
                                                                 guidelines and analytical approaches would be
                                                                 defined in the ESMF or other appropriate
                                                                 safeguard instrument.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The policy on Physical Cultural Resources (OP
                         BP 4.11                                 4.11) will apply given the uncertainty regarding
                                                                 the exact locations of activities to be carried out
                                                                 under the REDD+ Strategy. Some forests or
                                                                 landscapes concerned by the REDD+ strategy
                                                                 might be considered to have historical or
                                                                 cultural significance such as spirit forests,
                                                                 sacred valleys or other features of the natural
                                                                 landscape. The ESMF or other safeguard
                                                                 instrument would include specific provisions to
                                                                                                                                 assess the possibility of such impacts prior to
                                                                                                                                 any activities being undertaken on the ground.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     Yes                           The policy on Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 triggered as there are indigenous peoples in El
                                                                                                                                 Salvador that meet the four criteria outlined in
                                                                                                                                 the policy. These populations are especially
                                                                                                                                 vulnerable to changes in land use or restrictions
                                                                                                                                 on their use of natural resources. The potential
                                                                                                                                 impacts of a future National REDD+ Strategy
                                                                                                                                 on indigenous peoples will be further identified
                                                                                                                                 during the SESA process and measures to
                                                                                                                                 mitigate any impacts or maximize the benefits
                                                                                                                                 associated with future REDD+ investments will
                                                                                                                                 be reflected in an ESMF or other appropriate
                                                                                                                                 safeguard instrument that will be prepared for
                                                                                                                                 use during the implementation of the National
                                                                                                                                 REDD+ Strategy. See Annex ?X? for full
                                                                                                                                 assessment of application of OP 4.10.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP
                                 4.12                                                                                            4.12) has been triggered as there is potential for
                                                                                                                                 restrictions on the use of natural resources in
                                                                                                                                 national protected areas. During REDD+
                                                                                                                                 readiness, an assessment of the nature of these
                                                                                                                                 impacts as well as a survey of the potential
                                                                                                                                 affected populations will be carried out as part
                                                                                                                                 of the SESA process and depending upon the
                                                                                                                                 geographical focus of REDD+ investments and
                                                                                                                                 the strategic options selected for the final
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 version of the National REDD+ Strategy,
                                                                                                                                 mitigation measures including support for
                                                                                                                                 improving the livelihoods of those impacted
                                                                                                                                 will be included in the ESMF or other safeguard
                                                                                                                                 instrument prepared to manage these issues
                                                                                                                                 during implementation of the National REDD+
                                                                                                                                 Strategy.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This policy is not triggered as the project will
                                                                                                                                 not support the construction or rehabilitation of
                                                                                                                                 dams nor will it support other investments
                                                                                                                                 which rely on the services of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The proposed activities are not the types of
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            projects or studies covered by the policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The proposed activities are not the types of
                                 7.60                                                                                            projects or studies covered by the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Nov-2016



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             During the formulation of the R-PP, MARN prepared a draft SESA Workplan that was then
Public Disclosure Copy




                             reviewed by a representative group of stakeholders during the National SESA Workshop held on
                             August 29-30, 2013. The SESA Workplan includes a stakeholder map that clearly indicates which
                             stakeholders will be involved in the SESA process, a methodology for participation of these
                             stakeholders, a list of the analytical work that will be undertaken to address key social and
                             environmental issues related to the REDD+ strategic options, information regarding how the
                             SESA process will be integrated into the larger process of preparing the National REDD+ Strategy
                             and a budget table that outlines how resources have been allocated for each of the above. The
                             SESA Workplan has an execution period of ? years and will be supervised by the Climate Change
                             Unit in MARN.
                             It is expected that an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared
                             based on the results of the larger consultation and participation process as well as the SESA
                             process. The ESMF (or other safeguard instrument as appropriate) will provide guidance regarding
                             the management of environmental and social safeguards during the implementation of the National
                             REDD+ Strategy. An ESMF with a stand-alone IPPF/IPP and RF/RAP must be submitted as part
                             of the R-Package in order to be considered by the Carbon Fund.
                             The ESMF is intended to be a live document that may evolve and be updated over time when new
                             REDD + strategy options and projects or activities (including investments), or policies/regulations
                             are identified during implementation of REDD+.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Gerardo Segura Warnholtz

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                              Date: 13-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Laurent Msellati (SM)                              Date: 13-Dec-2013
