                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6596
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Dominica                           Project ID:    P129992
                            Project Name:     Third Phase Disaster Vuln.Reduction APL for Dominica (P129992)
                            Task Team         Zoe Elena Trohanis
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         24-Feb-2014                        Estimated   01-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    LCSDU                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Flood protection (40%), Central government administration (10%), Water supply
                                              (15%), General transportation sector (35%)
                            Theme(s):         Natural disaster management (50%), Climate change (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        39.50           Total Bank Financing:  17.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       1.50
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             17.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Credit                                                            9.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                            12.00
                              Total                                                                                   39.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to reduce vulnerability to natural hazards and



                                                                      Page 1 of 10
                         climate change impacts in Dominica through investment in resilient infrastructure, as well as
                         improved hazard data collection and monitoring systems
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed Project would consist of the following four components: (1) Prevention and
                         Adaptation Investments; (2) Capacity Building and Data Development, Hazard Risk Management
                         and Evaluation; (3) Natural Disaster Response Investments; and (4) Project Management and
                         Implementation Support.

                         Component 1: Prevention and Adaptation Investments. This component is designed to reduce
                         physical vulnerability and pilot adaptive measures to build resilience to current and future hydro-
                         meteorological shocks. Activities under this component would include a suite of civil works to
                         improve infrastructure resilience to disaster events and climate change adaptation measures. Sub-
                         projects to be financed under this component, through the provision of works, technical advisory
                         services, operating costs, and acquisition of goods, include: (a) Construction of water storage and
                         distribution infrastructure; (b) Slope stabilization interventions; (c) Climate resilient rehabilitation of
                         primary and secondary roads and bridges along the East coast and in the South; and (d) Improved
                         climate resilient drainage systems.

                         Component 2: Capacity Building and Data Development, Hazard Risk Management and Evaluation.
                         The Project would support building the capacity for analysis and assessment of risks from natural
                         hazards and climate change including the integration of this analysis in the development decision
                         making process. This component will support the creation of relevant core data and data collection
                         systems as well as the integration analytical tools to permit improved decision making and
                         engineering design for risk reduction and climate change adaptation. Core data systems to be
                         developed under this component include inter alia: (a) creation of a high resolution digital
                         topographic and bathymetric model for Dominica; (b) creation of a high resolution soils survey map
                         including chemical and physical characteristics for each soil unit; c) design and deployment of a
                         robust hydromet network to provide high resolution hydrologic data for use in a wide range of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities to support, for example, engineering design, land use and coastal zone planning, disaster
                         management, roads construction practices and design, agricultural development and others; and (d)
                         district and community level hazard risk mapping and training on climate adaptation measures.

                         Component 3: Natural Disaster Response Investments. This provisional component under this Project
                         would allow for rapid reallocation of IDA funds during an emergency, under streamlined
                         procurement and disbursement procedures. The emergency component would be triggered following
                         an adverse natural event, by an official Government of the Commonwealth of Dominica declaration
                         of a national emergency. Under this component, expenditures on critical imports (imported or locally
                         manufactured) required by the public/private sectors, and reconstruction/rehabilitation (civil works,
                         goods, and services) of damaged infrastructure may be financed as per (OP/BP 10.00).

                         Component 4: Project Management and Implementation Support. Activities under this component
                         would support strengthening and developing the institutional capacity for Project management,
                         including: (a) financing the establishment of a new Project Coordination Unit (PCU) within the
                         Ministry of Environment, including staffing, training, and operating costs; (b) preparation for designs
                         and tender documents; (c) preparation of project reports; (d) processing of contracts and tender
                         evaluation; (e) coordination of participating line Ministries; (f) supervision of the quality of works;
                         (g) training of staff in project management and implementation support; (h) monitoring and
                         evaluation of project progress and results, and (i) related activities to support efficient project


                                                                        Page 2 of 10
                         management and implementation, through the provision of technical advisory services, training,
                         operating costs, and acquisition of goods.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         Project works would be undertaken throughout the island of Dominica, including in the Carib
                         Territory where Dominica’s indigenous population resides. Civil works investments include a suite
                         of activities designed to improve resilience to disaster events and adapt to impacts relating to climate
                         change. Activities include comprehensive road rehabilitation and landslide and slope stabilization.
                         Works also include new construction activities in the water sector to improve supply and resilience to
                         drought events.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong (LCSSO)
                         Michael J. Darr (LCSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The Environmental Assessment Policy is
                          BP 4.01                                             triggered because civil works from subprojects
                                                                              may create negative environmental effects.
                                                                              A project-level EA (Environmental Assessment)
                                                                              has been prepared and disclosed to encompass
                                                                              and evaluate the potential environmental effects
                                                                              of the program as a whole. An EMF
                                                                              (Environmental Management Framework) is also
                                                                              included to set out the principles, rules, guidelines
                                                                              and procedures for screening and assessment of
                                                                              environmental impacts of future individual
                                                                              subprojects of Components 1 and 2 once they
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              have been defined with sufficient detail to be
                                                                              specifically evaluated. The EMF includes a
                                                                              generic standardized Environmental Management
                                                                              Plan (EMP) for simple civil works, as well as
                                                                              criteria for requiring EIAs of individual
                                                                              subprojects if complex or sensitive conditions
                                                                              exist. The EMF also includes a section with clear
                                                                              safeguards guidelines for emergency investments
                                                                              and works under Component 3 including types of
                                                                              activities, responsibilities for screening and
                                                                              environmental/social management, and for
                                                                              preparation of any safeguards studies prior to
                                                                              works as pertinent under OP 10.00 and consistent
                                                                              with the project category. It is likely that the
                                                                              majority of works will be relatively minor in
                                                                              nature and involve simple civil works where the
                                                                              environmental impacts are limited to the
                                                                              construction phase, requiring only the application
                                                                              of the standardized generic EMP. However, any



                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                                                                         exceptions will be identified during screening in
                                                                         the EMF and additional assessment work will be
                                                                         done during project implementation as required.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           The Natural Habitats policy has been triggered as
                                                                         a precaution. Potential project activities may
                                                                         occur in highland forest areas, on coastlines, in
                                                                         sensitive riparian areas along streams or rivers, or
                                                                         in other areas where the policy could be triggered
                                                                         owing to the richness of Dominican natural
                                                                         habitat. The EMF would consider natural habitats
                                                                         in screening known works and in screening
                                                                         procedures for any demand-driven or undefined
                                                                         activities to identify areas that may trigger this
                                                                         policy and require additional assessment to
                                                                         develop site-specific mitigation and management
                                                                         measures. Effects on critical natural habitat and
                                                                         primary forests would be excluded.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes           The Forests policy is being triggered as a
                                                                         precaution because limited forest resource
                                                                         harvesting may be done. The term forest
                                                                         harvesting only refers to incidental clearing of a
                                                                         very limited number of trees as may be required
                                                                         for the agroforestry pilot plots which would also
                                                                         include planting of trees for slope stabilization,
                                                                         erosion prevention, or planting of climate resilient
                                                                         crops. All proposed project activities will be
                                                                         screened using the EMF and any negative effects
                                                                         on primary forest would be excluded.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           This policy is being triggered as a precaution.
                                                                         Works for greenhouses, crop management, and
                                                                         others is likely to involve the use of pesticides
                                                                         and herbicides. It is likely that simple
                                                                         management procedures can be applied, since the
                                                                         quantities stored and used are likely to be small.
                                                                         Standard measures will be specified for incidental
                                                                         use of pesticides (e.g. termite treatments for
                                                                         buildings, or safe use of pesticides for vector
                                                                         control) and will be built into a generic
                                                                         standardized EMP. The EMF will screen for any
                                                                         significant pesticide use and will require that a
                                                                         Pest Management Plan be developed if indicated
                                                                         by the Policy.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The Physical Cultural Resources Policy is
                         BP 4.11                                         triggered as a precaution. Project activities may
                                                                         potentially include retrofitting of historical
                                                                         buildings, restoration of culturally important sites,



                                                                 Page 4 of 10
                                                                        and chance finds of historically or culturally
                                                                        important resources during construction of works;
                                                                        accordingly, the EA/EMF include screening for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        historical structures, as well as a "chance-find"
                                                                        procedure. Stakeholder contribution to
                                                                        conceptual design of any rehabilitation works will
                                                                        also be solicited.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes           The Indigenous Peoples Policy is triggered as the
                                                                        project will be implemented in the Carib
                                                                        Territories. Consultations have been held with the
                                                                        Ministry of Carib Affairs, Members of the Carib
                                                                        Council, including the Carib Chief, and members
                                                                        of the Carib community. An Indigenous People’s
                                                                        Plan with associated social assessment has been
                                                                        prepared. Prior and informed consultations with
                                                                        the community were undertaken during project
                                                                        preparation to inform the IPP and ensure
                                                                        community support.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           The Involuntary Resettlement Policy is being
                         4.12                                           triggered as a precaution, as it is possible that
                                                                        works planned under the project, including
                                                                        rehabilitation of primary and secondary roads and
                                                                        bridges, and construction of structures and
                                                                        monitoring stations, might encroach upon private
                                                                        lands therefore necessitating compensation. All
                                                                        works requiring private land acquisition will be
                                                                        subject to prior review. Any voluntary concession
                                                                        of land by the indigenous community will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        monitored and legal documentation obtained prior
                                                                        to any transactions. In addition, populations
                                                                        would only be resettled in the event of an
                                                                        emergency, as per component 3. The client
                                                                        prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                        (RPF), which will be consulted and disclosed in
                                                                        country and at the Bank’s InfoShop prior to
                                                                        appraisal. In the event that land acquisition
                                                                        becomes necessary sub-project resettlement plans
                                                                        will be prepared and affected parties compensated
                                                                        prior to sub-project financing.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No            There are no project activities that will support
                                                                        the construction or rehabilitation of dams, nor
                                                                        which rely on the services of existing dams.
                         Projects on International        No            There are no project activities which will affect
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                           international waterways.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No            There are no project activities which will take
                         7.60                                           place in disputed areas.



                                                                Page 5 of 10
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental Safeguards:

                             Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01. The borrower has prepared a project-level
                             Environmental Assessment (EA) to encompass and evaluate potential environmental impacts of
                             the entire program, with an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) to screen future
                             projects for additional assessment needs. The EA will be a program-wide evaluation of the
                             potential impacts anticipated from all the types of subprojects being considered under the program.
                             For more complex projects or those in sensitive areas, the EMF will establish under which specific
                             circumstances other safeguards policies for Natural Habitats, Physical Cultural Resources, Forests,
                             or Pest Management may be triggered. The EMF will specifically respond to the types of Projects/
                             subprojects under Components 1 and 2 as well as include standard procedures for mitigating
                             environmental impacts of construction, monitoring and reporting. For relatively simple
                             subprojects and activities, a screening procedure and draft contract clauses for generic
                             standardized environmental mitigation measures will be developed to serve as a generic
                             standardized Environmental Management Plan (EMP) suitable for inclusion into the Project’s
                             Operations Manual (OM) to be applied as needed to works construction contracts. The EMF also
                             includes a section with clear safeguards guidelines for emergency investments and works
                             including for the preparation of any safeguards studies prior to works as pertinent under OP 10.00
                             (as may be considered under Component 3). Consideration would be given to internal/external
                             safeguards specialist review of activities proposed under Component 3 and applying the screening
                             measures in the EMF on an expedited basis.

                             The Natural Habitats policy (OP 4.04) is triggered as a precaution due to potential Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                             activities which may occur in highland forest areas, river valleys, coastlines and / or marine areas.
                             The EA and EMF account for natural habitats when screening both known works and any future
                             activities currently undefined. Potential application of this policy is identified in the EA, while
                             screening of future subprojects would be described in the EMF to determine if additional
                             assessment and specialized mitigation measures would be required for these Projects, once
                             detailed designs are known during implementation. Scoping for well-preserved vegetation, intact
                             forest areas, rare or endangered species habitat, and other complex or sensitive ecosystems will be
                             conducted for projects of any considerable size or with potential impacts extending off-site to any
                             considerable extent (e.g., downstream areas, riverbeds, etc.).

                             The Forests policy (OP/BP 4.36) is triggered as a precaution. This is because limited forest
                             resource harvesting may be done, in the sense that incidental clearing of a very limited number of
                             trees may be required for the agroforestry pilot plots, which would also include planting of trees
                             for slope stabilization, erosion prevention, or planting of climate resilient crops. In addition, some
                             of the projects have implications for changes in forest management, as any lessons learned during
                             the pilot projects may inform future national policy, but this is not an expected output of the
                             project. There are new Land Use Policies being developed by the government, and given that 60%
                             of Dominica’s territory is forested (while 20% is officially protected), there will be effects on
                             forested areas and their use, therefore triggering of the Policy was deemed prudent.




                                                                        Page 6 of 10
                          The Physical Cultural Resources Policy (OP/BP 4.11) has been triggered as a precaution. The
                          EMF and EMP include a "chance-find" procedure, particularly during activities such as major
                          excavations, road realignments or similar works where such assets could be affected by clearing,
Public Disclosure Copy




                          blading, excavation or trenching. Archaeological relics may also be encountered and a robust
                          chance-find procedure should be developed, for which interaction with the Carib Community may
                          be relevant, even for lands outside the designated Carib Territory. There is no formal body to
                          screen antiquities, except for Historic Buildings in Roseau; rather, the local practice is to consult
                          the island’s historian, if any items of interest are uncovered.

                          The Pest Management policy (OP/BP 4.09) has been triggered as a precaution. Works for
                          greenhouses, crop management, and others could involve the use of pesticides and herbicides.
                          Simple management procedures could be developed, since the quantities stored and used would
                          likely be small. Standard measures may be applied for incidental use of pesticides (e.g. termite
                          treatments for buildings, or safe use of pesticides for vector control), and will be built into a
                          generic standardized EMP. The EMF will screen for any significant pesticide use and will require
                          that a Pest Management Plan be developed if indicated by the Policy.


                          Social Safeguards:

                          Involuntary Resettlement: The project triggers the Involuntary Resettlement safeguard policy (OP/
                          BP 4.12) as the proposed civil works may entail both temporary and permanent involuntary land
                          acquisition The scale of any acquisition is likely to be small and the impacts relatively
                          insignificant.

                           Indigenous Peoples: The Indigenous Peoples safeguard (OP/BP 4.10) is triggered as subprojects
                           will be implemented in the Island’s Carib Territory. The Carib/Kalinago population has been
                           consulted during the course of project preparation and an Indigenous Peoples Plan with associated
                           Social Assessment and consultations has been prepared. The community has indicated its broad
Public Disclosure Copy




                           support of the project during consultations held on February 5, 2014. An Indigenous Peoples Plan
                           has been prepared during project preparation to guide implementation and ensure consultation
                           with and involvement of the Carib/Kalinago community in the sub-projects to be implemented in
                           their territory. Project impacts are likely to be positive and significant/irreversible impacts u
                           nlikely.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The environmental and social impacts of the Project are likely to be positive and the project
                           beneficiaries would be the entire Dominican population, including the Island’s Indigenous
                           Population.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The PCU, once established, will be a new entity with predominantly fiduciary functions and will
                           be housed within the Ministry of Environment . As the project focal point, the Ministry of
                           Environment would be responsible for communicating project decisions made to participating line


                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                           ministries and foster coordination between technical agencies and central Government. To build
                           capacity, the Bank will provide continued support and training as part of preparation and
                           supervision to build capacity of the PCU and Ministry of Environment. The Ministry of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environment will take the lead in the hiring of key PCU staff and has taken the lead to mobilize
                           staff to prepare the safeguards instruments. As part of PCU staffing, an environmental specialist
                           would be mobilized; a Social Specialist will also be hired by the PCU on a full time basis to
                           implement the IPP and conduct regular consultations with the Carib/Kalinago population as well
                           as to handle the land acquisition aspects of the project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders are the residents of the Island of Dominica since the planned works and
                           activities will be conducted Island-wide and will have benefits for the entire population. In
                           addition, the Island’s Indigenous Population will benefit through activities specifically planned for
                           the Carib Territories. An Indigenous Peoples Plan with associated Social Assessment has been
                           prepared and consultations held with the Carib/Kalinago population. Consultations with the
                           general population and the Carib population more specifically will continue during project
                           implementation as the Resettlement Framework and Indigenous Peoples Plan are implemented.
                           All safeguards instruments, including the EA/EMF, the Resettlement Policy Framework and
                           Indigenous Peoples Plan have been consulted and publicly disclosed prior to project appraisal, as
                           per OP/BP 4.12 and OP/BP 4.10.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         20-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      21-Feb-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Dominica                                                            27-Feb-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         25-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      26-Feb-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Dominica                                                            05-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         19-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      25-Feb-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Dominica                                                            25-Feb-2014
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      NA

                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   NA
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Dominica                                                         00000000
                           Comments: N/A
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?


                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Zoe Elena Trohanis
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Anna Wellenstein (SM)                         Date: 06-Mar-2014




                                                                       Page 10 of 10
