                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC7448

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                            Project ID:      P148531
                            Project Name:      Uttarakhand Health Systems Development Project (P148531)
                            Task Team          Somil Nagpal
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                           Estimated        10-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASHN                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Health (75%), Non-compulsory health finance (15%), Public administration-
                                               Health (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Health system performance (50%), Child health (20%), Injuries and non-
                                               communicable diseases (20%), Other Financial Sector Developmen t (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    125.00                     Total Bank Financing:        100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            25.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  100.00
                              Total                                                                        125.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed PDO is to support Uttarakhand in progressing towards Universal Health Coverage, as
                           measured by improvement in access to and quality of health services and in providing health
                           financial risk protection .

                           Specifically, the project would focus on improving access to health services for the predominantly
                         remote population of the state, through strengthening public and private health-delivery systems;
                         promoting greater stewardship and managerial capacity in the state directorate; improving
                         information systems; augmenting monitoring and research; and extending coverage of RSBY beyond
Public Disclosure Copy




                         hospitalization to include primary healthcare services.

                         A key area the project supports is innovative mechanisms for Uttarakhand to engage with private
                         health care providers, expanding their role in meeting the unmet access needs of the state’s
                         population. A greater involvement of the private sector would create additional human resource
                         availability for the public health system as a whole, also providing an opportunity to redeploy
                         existing public staff in a more efficient and effective manner.
                         C. Project Description
                         Taking into account evidence around the shifting trends in morbidity and mortality, the Project
                         would support the stewardship role and capacity of the state’s Department of Medical Health and
                         Family Welfare (DoMHFW) for improving health outcomes through multi-sectoral actions;
                         innovations in developing and engaging the private sector; institutional strengthening; and improved
                         management of health services.. Interventions support the state’s plans for scaling up health system
                         reform initiatives and making progress towards universal health coverage. Special focus would be on
                         improving access to quality health services for the geographically dispersed and remote populations
                         in the state, and finding innovative ways to engage with the private sector. The project also aims to
                         reduce financial risk and make affordable, high quality healthcare available to all of the state’s
                         citizens.

                         The proposed project will have two components as follows:

                         (i) Stewardship and system improvement component that aims to address system-wide challenges in
                         strategic planning, data generation and management, health communication, human resources
                         management and development, procurement and supply chain management and multisectoral
                         coordination (US$ 35 million). The project will build upon the foundations of the previous Bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project in the state. It will work closely with the present structure of the National Rural Health
                         Mission (NRHM), which is the flagship initiative of the national government, providing additional
                         financial resources to strengthen the state’s health delivery infrastructure, with a focus on public
                         health, maternal and immunization services, and disease control programs. The project will expand
                         the existing financial protection scheme for inpatient care (RSBY) to incorporate primary care
                         services related to child health and NCDs.

                         The project will maximize the use of available human resources and expand the manpower available
                         to provide health services by engaging the private sector, as described in the second component
                         below. At the state level, this component will strengthen the program management capacity for the
                         health system as a whole, by hiring contractual expertise to augment and supplement the available
                         human resources in specific areas where skills and expertise are not adequately available in the
                         state’s health system, and yet vital for the state's stewardship and strategic management functions.
                         This includes expertise in areas such as health economics, hospital administration, quality
                         assessment, health informatics, operational research, health communications, epidemiology and
                         biostatistics, logistics management, project management, and contract management.

                         This component will also be used to make investments in designing and implementing information
                         systems, to support research studies in public health including impact evaluations of project
                         interventions, and to promote capacity building initiatives aimed at human resources across all levels
                         of the health system.

                         (ii) Innovations in engaging the private sector component would augment the state’s capacity in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improving access to health services, particularly for remote populations, and in strengthening of
                         primary care. The component would improve upon the current PPP practices in the state to enhance
                         the reach and quality of health care service delivery, integrate primary care coverage into the state’s
                         health insurance program (RSBY), as also address the capacity building needs of the health system.
                         This component , will have three key sub-components: (a) Outsourcing of community health centers
                         (CHCs) (US$45 million); (b) Expanding RSBY to include primary care (US$35 million); and (c)
                         Performance-based contracting for mobile medical units for basic as well as specialist care (US$10
                         million). These are further detailed below.

                         The state has already commenced outsourcing the operations of its CHCs on a pilot basis, wherein
                         the selected private operator is required to bring in the complete team of human resources (including
                         medical officers as well as specialist doctors) for running the outpatient and inpatient services at the
                         CHC, and is also responsible for maintenance of the infrastructure. With some innovations and
                         improvements in contract design and management, such outsourcing of CHCs holds great potential
                         for augmenting the state’s pool of human resources and thus improving the quality of care in remote
                         areas for which the existing human resources are insufficient and/or unwilling and the health
                         facilities remain barely operational with only skeletal staff.

                         The RSBY sub-component is unprecedented in the country’s context and will focus on designing,
                         implementing and evaluating benefit packages around childhood and adolescent health as well as
                         case management of non-communicable diseases in primary care settings. By focusing on children’s
                         health and NCDs, the project will tackle two key priorities for the GoUK and essential determinants
                         of catastrophic health expenditure for the poor.

                         The outsourced mobile medical units, already being piloted in the state, also hold potential for
                         improving access to primary medical care, particularly if closely integrated with the state’s plans for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         a medical helpline and telemedicine services to complement the same. The ‘Specialist Mobile Units’,
                         again a first-time innovation, would require the private operator to deploy teams comprising of a
                         medical specialist, nurse, laboratory technician and a driver, following a hub-and-spoke model.
                         These teams would be headquartered in semi-urban locations for part of the week, and in the
                         remaining days, they would reach out to PHCs and CHCs within their geographic jurisdiction, as per
                         a predetermined schedule. This will ensure that specialists are available to manage elective services
                         at the local level, minimizing the need for referral and transportation costs.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Uttarakhand is the 27th state of the Republic of India and was carved out of Uttar Pradesh in 2000
                         with the primary objective of bringing development to hill region of the state. The state is bordering
                         Himachal Pradesh in the north-west and Uttar Pradesh in the South and has international borders
                         with Nepal and China. There are 13 districts in Uttarakhand. The state can be also divided into three
                         distinct geographical regions, the High mountain, the Mid-mountain, and the Terai. Hills account for
                         over 90 percent of its area, and forests cover two-thirds, with numerous small, scattered communities
                         which makes inaccessibility a crucial aspect in Uttarakhand.

                         Uttarakhand’s population has reached approximately 10,116,752 in 2011 with an increase of 19.17
                         percent from the past decade. District-wise, there is enormous variation in the density of population
                           with Haridwar, US Nagar and Dehradun having a high density of above 500 persons per square km;
                           while on the other hand there are districts like Uttarkashi, Chamoli and Pithoragarh where the
                           population density is quite low with less than 50.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The earlier Bank project in the state successfully implemented an Environment Management Plan,
                           and instituted systems for effective healthcare waste management, including development of
                           guidelines, training and capacity building and monitoring. The proposed project will build upon this
                           achievement of Phase I and work closely with the present structure of the NRHM to mainstream
                           occupational health and safety measures and sound waste management practices. There may be need
                           to systematically provide additional rounds of training to all levels of healthcare staff and relevant
                           officials. These requirements are, however, clearly defined in the Government of India’s Infection
                           Management and Environmental Plan (IMEP) which is a mandatory requirement, along with the
                           GOI’s legal requirement under the BioMedical Waste Management Rules.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Ruma Tavorath (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The Government of India has comprehensive
                           BP 4.01                                              national regulations on Occupational safety and
                                                                                good practices for infection control and waste
                                                                                management (BioMed Rules, IMEP and IPHS
                                                                                Guidelines) which the project will need to
                                                                                comply with. The project will institute systems
                                                                                to ensure that public and private sector and
                                                                                mobile services are in compliance with national
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                regulations related to infection control and
                                                                                infectious waste management. The project can
                                                                                provide further value-add by including and
                                                                                mainstreaming environmental due diligence
                                                                                measures into the revised systems for
                                                                                implementing, monitoring and reporting related
                                                                                to healthcare service delivery. Any changes in
                                                                                the project design or project activities related to
                                                                                physical investments will require re-visiting the
                                                                                environmental risks and Environmental
                                                                                Safeguards category.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                           BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     Yes                           The project aims to enhance access and equity
                                                                                                                                 of health services to all underserved populations
                                                                                                                                 of the state. The project supports interventions
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 to strengthen state health systems to expand
                                                                                                                                 universal health coverage, ensuring affordable
                                                                                                                                 and high-quality health care for all. Project
                                                                                                                                 design will take into account the findings of the
                                                                                                                                 Social Assessment, Stakeholder and Gender
                                                                                                                                 Consultations to ensure that appropriate
                                                                                                                                 strategies are built in. Monitoring and
                                                                                                                                 evaluation mechanisms will ensure the regular
                                                                                                                                 tracking of progress and impact of project
                                                                                                                                 interventions on women and vulnerable
                                                                                                                                 populations.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-May-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      NA
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Somil Nagpal

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Zia Al Jalaly (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 06-Feb-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Julie McLaughlin (SM)                                                                                                Date: 07-Feb-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
