                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA7798
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Guinea                           Project ID:    P146696
                            Project Name:      Power Sector Recovery Project (P146696)
                            Task Team          Moez Cherif
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          17-Apr-2014                      Estimated   16-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTG2                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Thermal Power Generation (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          50.00                 Total Bank Financing:       50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             50.00
                              Total                                                                                   50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the technical and commercial performance
                           of the national power utility.
                            3. Project Description
                           The IDA project will support electricity sector institutional and managerial reforms aimed at
                           catalyzing the development of sector investment and access in line with Government and SE4All

                                                                      Page 1 of 8
                         objectives; and short term improvement in the quality of power supply, through physical investments
                         and technical assistance. The project is structured under three components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Financing of a Management Services Contract to support EDG performance
                         improvement (US$ 14 million). This component will finance a Management Services Contract
                         (MSC) between MEH and a private firm (“the Operator”) with sufficient technical and fiduciary
                         capacity to provide management, operation and capacity building services for EDG over 3-5 years.
                         Specifically, the operator will be selected through a rigorous and competitive process on the basis of
                         technical capacity and a proposed business plan. This component will fund the fees to be paid to the
                         Operator, including fees for mobilizing a full-time team of senior managers to run EDG, experts in
                         specialized areas of utility management for specific needs such as training and capacity building for
                         utility personnel, and communications to target EDG customers. The MSC will also include a bonus
                         component to be paid only if EDG exceeds certain performance outputs or targets.

                         The Operator will be given fully delegated authority to run EDG as a vertically integrated electricity
                         utility, including carrying out the reorganization or restructuring in line with recommendations made
                         in the Power Sector Diagnostic and Recovery Plan, and will be the solely authorized agent to
                         administer its assets and control all business functions for the duration of the contract. The main
                         deliverable of the MSC will be the implementation of a business plan proposed by – and agreed with
                         – the Operator that will reflect the objectives and investment activities of the Power Sector
                         Diagnostic and Recovery Plan. As such, the MSC will be signed between MEH and the Operator,
                         and designed to strengthen performance of EDG through improvements in staff skills and morale,
                         data management, and grid infrastructure.

                         Component 2: Selected investments in the Conakry power network (US$ 33.7 million). This
                         component will support investments that will enable EDG to improve the reliability of electricity
                         supply in the capital city of Conakry where 80 percent of its clients are located. In response to
                         frequent rolling blackouts, this component further adds to the ESEIP financed rehabilitation and
                         upgrading of the network in the district of Kaloum and AfDB/IsDB financed rehabilitation works in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Ratoma and Matoto. Proposed investments under this component are extracted from the
                         Government’s priority investment plan but the exact scope of each activity will be finalized once the
                         Operator is in place.

                         Sub-component 2.A – Improving distribution network conditions in Conakry. This sub-component
                         will support the priority investment program of the GoG including:

                         i.      Rehabilitating and upgrading the dilapidated distribution infrastructure in the Dixinn district
                         of greater Conakry.
                         ii.     Provision of operation and maintenance equipment and tools.
                         iii.    Supply and installation of the protection system of hydropower plants against voltage surges
                         to ensure sustainable and safe supply of power.
                         iv.     Equipment to compensate for reactive power and improve power factor in the system.
                         v.      Contingencies and unallocated.

                         Sub-component 2.B – Improvement of Commercial performance of EDG. Investments under this
                         sub-component will include:

                         i.      Implementation of a census of all EDG customers and revision the client database
                         accordingly. Each client will be assigned a specific client code to facilitate account management.

                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         ii.     Upgrading the integrated IT management system of EDG.
                         iii.    Rehabilitation of household connections in Kaloum, Ratoma and Matoto districts.
                         iv.     Standardization of household connections in the areas of Kaloum, Ratoma and Matoto,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         including informal and illegal connections.
                         v.      Contingency and unallocated.

                         Component 3: Technical Assistance to MEH and Project Implementation Support (US$ 2.3 million).
                         This component envisages the following three sub-components.

                         Sub-component 3.A: Technical Assistance to the MEH. This sub-component will support the MEH’s
                         supervision of the Operator, and provide TA to MEH to carry out other sector policy and oversight
                         activities. Activities will include:

                         i.      Technical assistance to implement a financial restructuring of EDG.
                         ii.     An independent technical auditor to directly track Operator’s deliverables and certify
                         whether agreed results have been achieved.
                         iii.    Technical assistance to develop the GoG’s anti-fraud policy and the legal instrument to
                         enforce it.

                         Sub-component 3.B: Project Implementation Support. This component will cover the costs related to
                         the utilization of experts and equipment for the efficient operation of the Project Implementation Unit
                         (PIU) within MEH, in the following areas: (i) procurement of goods and consultant services, (ii)
                         financial and disbursement management, (iii) safeguards supervision, and (iv) monitoring and
                         evaluation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project activities will be undertaken mainly in Greater Conakry area and to a lesser extent in the
                         center of the country, where EDG’s two main power networks are located.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Hocine Chalal (AFTN1)
                         Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (AFTCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             An environmental audit of EDG has been
                          BP 4.01                                             finalized and has been disclosed before appraisal.
                                                                              This will feed into the MC environmental
                                                                              requirements, applicable to the client (MEH and
                                                                              EDG) as well as to the contractors, which will
                                                                              have to be in line with Bank safeguard policies.
                                                                              The audit includes an assessment of potential
                                                                              impacts and proposed mitigation measures. An
                                                                              ESMP will be prepared, consulted upon and
                                                                              disclosed during project implementation.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No              To the extent that the investment component of
                                                                              the project pertains to existing connections close




                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                                                                                to consumer premises, the Natural Habitats policy
                                                                                is not triggered.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              To the extent that the investment component of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                the project pertains to existing connections close
                                                                                to consumer premises, the Forest policy is not
                                                                                triggered.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No              Not applicable

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No              The project does not involve or affect Physical
                            BP 4.11                                             Cultural Resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No              There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                                area.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes             The policy is triggered because of the activities in
                            4.12                                                component 2; the rehabilitation and upgrading of
                                                                                distribution facilities. Since the exact locations of
                                                                                these works are not known, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                Framework (RPF) has been prepared and
                                                                                consulted upon and has been publicly disclosed
                                                                                in-country and at InfoShop before appraisal. The
                                                                                RPF contains the guidelines for the preparation, if
                                                                                and when necessary, of Resettlement Action
                                                                                Plans in case of land acquisition and losses of
                                                                                assets, or access to resources. The RPF will also
                                                                                feed into the MC’s social requirements,
                                                                                applicable to the client (MEH and EDG) as well
                                                                                as to the Operator contract clauses, which will
                                                                                have to be in line with Bank safeguard policies. A
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                RAP will be prepared, consulted upon and
                                                                                disclosed -- as and when necessary -- during
                                                                                project implementation.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              Not applicable

                            Projects on International        No                 Not applicable
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 Not applicable
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Project is expected, in general, to positively impact the beneficiary communities by improving
                              the quality and reliability of electricity services that are provided to them. The net social and
                              environmental effect of the project is expected to be highly positive as greater access to reliable
                              energy will improve living conditions for the beneficiaries. This includes districts in Conakry, the


                                                                        Page 4 of 8
                           capital. Households, which currently depend on illegal connections for electricity, will not be left
                           without electricity but will be connected by legal connections through extension of the network;
                           and businesses and institutional users (local government, schools, places of worship, etc.) would
Public Disclosure Copy




                           also benefit from reliable service provision. The potential negative environmental and social
                           impacts of the proposed project activities are expected to be small-scale and site-specific.

                           The safeguard category of the Project is determined to be B, since there are no significant and/or
                           irreversible adverse environmental and social issues expected from the upgrade and extension of
                           distribution facilities as envisaged under component 2 of the Project. These facilities largely
                           include the existing distribution network of Conakry. Impacts are anticipated as a result of the
                           activities to reinforce, rehabilitate, and expand the primary and secondary MV distribution grid
                           and selected components of the LV distribution grid. The World Bank policies for Environmental
                           Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) are triggered. An
                           environmental audit of EDG and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) are being prepared and
                           will be disclosed before appraisal. These will feed into the MC environmental and social
                           requirements, applicable to the client (MEH and EDG) as well as to the Operator contracts, which
                           will have to be in line with Bank safeguard policies.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           There has been no significant indirect, long term, irreversible or cumulative impacts identified in
                           relation to any of the project components mentioned above.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           To the extent the investment component consists mostly of rehabilitation of existing assets, this is
                           not relevant.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The RPF is being prepared, since the exact locations for rehabilitation of the infrastructure have
                           not yet been identified while the district has been identified. The RPF contains: (i) an assessment
                           of the country regulatory and institutional framework for land acquisition and compensation; (ii)
                           likely categories of affected assets and parties, as well as the scope of impacts; (iii) a gap analysis
                           and a compensation framework consistent with OP 4.12 and the national legislation; (iv) measures
                           to assist vulnerable groups; (v) a consultation framework to enable the participation of affected
                           populations in the preparation of specific resettlement plans; (vi) an institutional framework to
                           implement the resettlement policy framework; (vii) a grievance redress mechanism; and (viii) a
                           monitoring and evaluation framework and budget. It will also feed into the Operator’s social
                           obligations. The RPF has been consulted upon and will be disclosed both in-country and in the
                           World Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.

                           Under Component 2, potential negative impacts are possible from the rehabilitation of the
                           dilapidated distribution facilities (sub-component 2.A). These facilities largely include the existing
                           distribution network of Conakry. Impacts are anticipated as a result of the activities to reinforce,
                           rehabilitate, and expand the primary and secondary MV distribution grid and selected components
                           of the LV distribution grid. This work is similar to the ongoing Bank-financed project ESEIP in
                           the district of Kaloum in Conakry. OP 4.12 is triggered to cover any potential land acquisition and/
                           or subsequent losses of assets or restrictions of access to resources. In case compensation is
                           required, the costs will be covered by the Borrower. The RPF contains guidance for preparing


                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                           specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for issues related to land acquisition and loss of
                           economic activities and assets to minimize negative impacts on Project Affected Persons. Any
                           RAPs will need to be cleared by relevant authorities in Guinea and by the World Bank and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           subsequently disclosed in-country and at the World Bank’s InfoShop before any civil works can
                           begin.

                           The Operator will be responsible for the implementation and monitoring of the RPF and/or
                           subsequent RAPs to ensure compliance with national and Bank policies and procedures. Training
                           in safeguards will be provided by Bank safeguards staff to facilitate these activities. Regular
                           monitoring reports (two per year) on the implementation of environmental and social safeguards
                           provisions will be provided to the Bank for approval. These reports will be verified during project
                           supervision missions, which will include environmental and social safeguard experts.

                           The environmental audit being carried out will identify the potential environmental impacts of the
                           current practices of EDG in the context of its distribution and connection works and will spell out
                           the requirements to be applicable to the Operator in terms of applicable environmental and social
                           systems that will have to be implemented.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders include the Ministry of Energy and Hydraulics, the national power utility EDG
                           and the potentially affected population.

                           During the preparation of the RPF, consultations have been held with these key actors in order to
                           discuss the project contents as well as to understand any concerns the affected people may have
                           and to ensure any concerns are taken into account in the project design. The report will be
                           validated in a national level workshop. The RPF has been disclosed publicly in-country and at the
                           InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     10-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  16-Apr-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Guinea                                                          16-Apr-2014
                           Comments: Disclosed in-country by the national utility on behalf of the client in line with Bank
                                         policies.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     10-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  16-Apr-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Guinea                                                          16-Apr-2014
                           Comments: Disclosed in-country by the national utility on behalf of the client in line with Bank
                                         policies.


                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Moez Cherif
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                       Date: 17-Apr-2014
                            Advisor:


                                                                        Page 7 of 8
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Meike van Ginneken (SM)   Date: 18-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           Page 8 of 8
