                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA7571
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                             Project ID:    P132277
                            Project Name:      Jiaozuo Green Transport & Safety Improvement Project (P132277)
                            Task Team          Fei Deng
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          03-Feb-2014                       Estimated   24-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Urban Transport (90%), General transportation sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       200.19                 Total Bank Financing:      100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 100.19
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    100.00
                              Total                                                                                    200.19
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project development objective is to improve transport safety and efficiency along the
                           selected transport corridors and to promote non-motorized trips within the pilot green corridor in
                           Jiaozuo City.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project will include the following four components:

                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         Component A – Safe System Integrated Corridor Management.
                         This component will develop and implement an integrated package of engineering, education and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         regulation improvements with embedded Safe System approach on the selected corridors in Jiaozuo.
                         It includes: (i) establishment of the Safe System foundation for transport safety data collection,
                         performance monitoring and evaluation, and remedial measures development; (ii) implementation of
                         engineering works, traffic management measures and intelligent transport systems (ITS) along the
                         selected corridors and in the adjacent areas; and (iii) development of road safety education facilities,
                         carrying out of road safety education programs, and improvement of post-crash medical services.

                         Component B – Green Corridor Development.
                         This component will develop a green corridor dedicated to pedestrians and cyclists, which links the
                         downtown area and a scenic tourist area in the mountains north of the city. It will include the
                         construction of a new road section in the mountains (about 8.6 kilometers), rehabilitation of the
                         sections along the river and existing urban roads (about 8.3 kilometers), and provision of safe
                         intersections, NMT facilities, green corridor signage and markings, and greening and landscaping
                         along the corridor.

                         Component C – Public Transport Improvement.
                         This component will assist Jiaozuo Municipality to improve the service quality of its public transport
                         system through: (i) construction of a bus interchange adjacent to the railway station; (ii) upgrading
                         and construction of bus depots; (iii) expansion of the advanced bus operation system; and (iv)
                         procurement of new buses.

                         Component D – Institutional Strengthening.
                         This component will support the implementation of the project and its long-term sustainability
                         through: (i) provision of trainings and study tours to relevant officials and staffs; (ii) carrying out of
                         technical assistance studies on urban transport; and (iii) provision of technical consultancy and
                         software for project management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Jiaozuo Municipality, a prefecture-level city in northern Henan Province, is bordered to the north by
                         the Yun Tai Mountains. The municipality is north of the provincial capital of Zhengzhou and
                         northeast of Luoyang, the second largest city in the province. The municipality has a surface of 4,071
                         square kilometers, and administers four districts, two county-level cities, and four counties, of which
                         the total population is over 3.5 million with an urban population of nearly one million according to
                         the 2010 census. The majority of the project is in the urban area of Jiaozuo City. An 8.6 kilometer
                         loop of the green corridor, part of the 16.9 kilometers green corridor will be situated in a mountain
                         area north of the city’s urban area.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Youxuan Zhu (EASCS)
                         Feng Ji (EASCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              See Section II.A (1)
                          BP 4.01



                                                                        Page 2 of 9
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            The component will introduce an 16.9 km ‘green
                                                                         corridor’, about 5 meters wide, totally dedicated
                                                                         to pedestrians and cyclists crossing the core of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Jiaozuo and a scenic tourist area (i.e. Fengshan
                                                                         Park) north of the city center.
                                                                         The alignment includes an urban portion of that is
                                                                         about 8.3 kilometers long and an 8.6 kilometer
                                                                         long loop on a mountain north of the urban area.
                                                                         The EA shows that no ecologically sensitive sites
                                                                         (e.g., natural habitats) will be impacted along the
                                                                         proposed alignment. The project will not have the
                                                                         potential to cause significant conversion (loss) or
                                                                         degradation of natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            The project does not have the potential to have
                                                                         impacts on the health and quality of forests or the
                                                                         rights and welfare of people and their level of
                                                                         dependence upon or interaction with forests, or
                                                                         aims to bring about changes in its management or
                                                                         protection.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project will not finance procurement of
                                                                         pesticides or pesticide application equipment, or
                                                                         lead to substantially increased pesticide use and
                                                                         subsequent increase in health and environmental
                                                                         risk, or could maintain or expand present pest
                                                                         management practices that are unsustainable.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           See Section II.A (1)
                         BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            Based on social screening, no ethnic minority
                                                                         communities are affected by the Project. The
                                                                         Bank policy on Indigenous People will not be
                                                                         triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           For the proposed project, the components of
                         4.12                                            integrated road safety corridor (A), Green Tourist
                                                                         Corridor (B), and Public Transit Infrastructure
                                                                         Improvement (C) will involve civil works. For
                                                                         Component A, based on final feasibility study,
                                                                         most of proposed measures will be carried out
                                                                         within the current right-of-way with no
                                                                         demolition. For Component B, it involves
                                                                         construction of a 16.9 km of a non-motorized
                                                                         vehicle and pedestrian pathway connecting the
                                                                         northern mountainous area and to Renmin Park,
                                                                         and Longyuan Lake Park in the center of the city,
                                                                         which will involve acquisition of 9.06 hectares of
                                                                         land areas, including 3.2 ha of slop land from four
                                                                         villages. For Component C, it involves



                                                                 Page 3 of 9
                                                                                 construction of one interchange and five bus
                                                                                 depots. Only three bus depots will involve
                                                                                 acquisition of about 7.76 hectares of land. Most
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 of them are farmland and a total of 38 households
                                                                                 from four villages will be affected.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No              The project will not involve impacts to any dams
                                                                                 in the project area. This policy is not triggered.
                            Projects on International        No                  The project will not involve trans-boundary
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 rivers. The policy is not triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The project is not located in any disputed areas.
                            7.60                                                 The policy is not triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental safeguards
                              The majority of the project (Components A and C as well as approximately half of Component B)
                              is in the urban area of Jiaozuo City where land is already heavily influenced by human activities.
                              An eight kilometer loop of the green corridor, part of the 16 kilometers green corridor(about 5
                              meter wide) dedicated to pedestrians and cyclists, will be situated in a mountain area at the north
                              of the urban area; however, no ecologically sensitive sites (e.g., natural habitats) are impacted
                              along the proposed alignment. There are six physical cultural resources in the vicinity of the
                              alignment of the green corridor. The project therefore triggers Environmental Assessment
                              (OP4.01) and Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11). The project is classified as a Category B
                              project. An EA and a stand-alone EMP have been prepared in accordance with Chinese EA
Public Disclosure Copy




                              regulations and the Bank safeguards policies.

                             Environmental Assessment (OP4.01). The project, by design, will bring about positive impacts
                             such as the improvement of road safety, reduction of traffic congestion and accidents, as well as
                             contribute to the reduction of vehicle emissions in the selected areas of Jiaozuo. However, it will
                             also cause general construction related impacts, such as disturbance to local communities and
                             traffic, dust, noise, wastewater, and disposal of spoil materials. During operation, major adverse
                             impacts will include: (i) disposal of waste and wastewater generated at the bus depots; (ii) safety
                             issues related to gas filling facilities at the bus depots; and (iii) disposal of waste generated by the
                             green corridor users. The green corridor will connect to the entrance of two recreation parks, and
                             pass through one park which features recreation squares and vegetation in the urban area. It is
                             estimated that the green corridor will attract 670 people on a daily basis and 1,400 per day at the
                             peak season. These green corridor users will not likely pose significant pressures on the PCRs and
                             the three parks along the green corridor, given that these users accounts for a small percentage of
                             the total people visiting these sites. The EA confirms that these potential impacts are small scale,
                             site-specific, and can be readily mitigated with good engineering design and good construction
                             management practices.

                             Physical Cultural Resources (OP4.11). There are six physical cultural resources in the vicinity of
                             the alignment of the green corridor, i.e. Qunying Aqueduct; Wanglanguang Grave, Niangniang


                                                                         Page 4 of 9
                          Temple, Dangyangyu Porcelain Kiln Site, Longsi Cemetery and Yuanrong Temple. The first four
                          are classified as registered cultural relics, and the last two are un-registered PCR. Site
                          investigation has been conducted by the EA consultants, together with consultation with the PCRs
Public Disclosure Copy




                          specialist and local PCRs management authority. The EA concluded that green corridor will not
                          have significant impacts on the PCRs during construction and operation phases. Jiaozuo PCRs
                          Management Authority has approved the alignment of the green corridor.

                          Social safeguards

                          Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12). For limited land acquisition impacts, a Resettlement Action
                          Plan (RAP) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared by Jiaozuo City
                          PMO in accordance with relevant Chinese laws, regulations, and World Bank Operational Policy
                          (OP4.12). The reason a RPF is prepared is that on the one hand, whether Component A will
                          involve any resettlement will be determined by detailed design to be completed during project
                          implementation; and on the other hand, the scope of Component B and C might need to be
                          changed during implementation. A screening had been conducted for all three components; and
                          there are no any local funded projects linked to these components. For the currently identified land
                          acquisition impacts, the proposed compensation for land is set at CNY34,000 to CNY62,000 per
                          mu, which is based on most recent provincial regulation on comprehensive land price for acquired
                          land areas in 2013.

                          Under oversight of resettlement leading group in Jiaozuo City, the PMO will lead resettlement
                          operations. They will work closely with Jiaozuo Land Resources Bureau and Jiaozuo Urban
                          Demolition and Resettlement Office under Housing and Construction Bureau, with cooperation of
                          working groups in town and sub-district. During rese ttlement implementation, an experienced
                          external monitoring agency will be selected to conduct independent resettlement monitoring and
                          evaluation. The monitoring results will be regularly reported twice a year and, if needed, remedial
                          actions will be designed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Public consultations had been conducted during RAP/RPF preparation including social economic
                          survey and public meetings with project affected people. Information about the project impacts,
                          compensation policies, rehabilitation options and grievance procedures had been provided to the
                          affected people through disclosure of RAP and RPF in city PMO and government website.

                           Focus group discussions and key informant interviews have been used to consult with potentially
                           affected persons and obtain views and preferences regarding resettlement impacts, compensation
                           policies, and rehabilitation measures. These views and preferences have been taken into account
                           during RAP revision, and the majority of potentially affected persons agree that the resettlement
                           and rehabilitation measures planned under the RAP would be adequate to address and mitigate any
                           adverse impacts.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Jiaozuo is attempting to transform its economic development to be more focused on tourism and
                           the service industry. The project has the potential to play a demonstration role, influencing the
                           transportation design and promoting the non-motorized transport in the city.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.



                                                                    Page 5 of 9
                           Alternatives of the selection of green corridor, and options for the safe integrated corridor have
                           been considered during the feasibility study and EA process.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environmental Assessment (OP4.01):
                           The PMO has engaged an environmental assessment (EA) consulting firm to prepare an EA and
                           environmental management plan (EMP) for the proposed project in accordance with the Chinese
                           EA laws/regulations and the Bank safeguards policies. The EMP includes, amongst others, the
                           following:

                          a)        Environmental codes of practice (ECOP) for construction contractors have been developed
                          to address construction related impacts including solid and wastewater management, source and
                          transport of construction waste and materials, and disturbance to local businesses, etc;
                          b)        For re-allocation of road space, the ECOPs specify requirements for notification of public
                          civil works, restoring local businesses during construction, on-site traffic safety management, and
                          mitigation of other construction related nuisances;
                          c)        For the bus depots, mitigation measures have been developed to collect and dispose of
                          waste and wastewater during the operation phase. Risk assessment has been conducted for the gas
                          filling facilities, and adequate mitigation measures have been proposed; and
                          d)        For the proposed green corridor, mitigation measures have been developed for both
                          general impacts from construction and site-specific environmental impacts and special
                          considerations have been given to the road safety design, good drainage provisions, as well as
                          inclusion of toilets and garbage bins for the green corridor’s users.

                          Physical Cultural Resources (OP4.11):
                          Taking a precautionary approach, specific measures for PCRs conservation have been proposed in
                          the EMP, including that (i) further site survey will be conducted prior to construction; (ii) the
                          design and construction plan will be sent to the PCRs authority for further review and comments;
Public Disclosure Copy




                          (iii) construction will be designated in the area out of the PCRs’ protection area; (iv) heavy
                          machinery will be strictly restricted in the area close to these PCRs; and (v) Chance Find
                          Procedures for Physical Cultural Resources are included in the civil work contracts.

                          The EMP specifies institutional arrangements during the construction and operation phases,
                          capacity building activities, a monitoring plan, and the budget for the EMP implementation. An
                          environmental management unit with qualified and designated staff will be established within the
                          PMO. Contractors and supervision engineers will be required to assign qualified environmental
                          staff to their team to ensure effective implementation of the EMPs.

                          Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12):
                          For potential land acquisition and resettlement impacts, a RAP has been prepared based on
                          detailed impact survey, social economic survey, and consultations with affected people. It includes
                          compensation policies, rehabilitation measures, grievance procedures, and institutional setup, as
                          well as arrangement for implementation and monitoring.

                          Jiaozuo Municipality has established a Project Leading Group (PLG) that is headed by the deputy
                          mayor and consists of directors of 14 government agencies. The PLG will guide, coordinate,
                          ensure adequate communication, and supervise project implementation amongst the established
                          lead and supporting agencies. The Project Management Office (PMO), situated within the Finance


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                           Bureau, will act as the project implementation agency. Project Implementation Units (PIUs) will
                           implement the various sub-components through the appropriate government agencies. The
                           responsible agencies will be accountable for implementing all the project activities in accordance
Public Disclosure Copy




                           with Bank guidelines and domestic regulations. Their responsibilities include collaboration with
                           other relevant government agencies that will act in a supporting role, engineering design
                           management, procurement management, financial management, land acquisition and resettlement,
                           environmental management, construction management, reporting, as well as monitoring and
                           evaluation. Further, a special team will be responsible for land acquisition and resettlement of the
                           project. This team includes representatives from the HURDB, Land and Resource Administration
                           Bureau, districts, and other relevant government agencies. Safeguards training and guidance have
                           been provided to the PMO and PIUs during the project preparation stage. More safeguards training
                           are included in the EMP. The Bank team will closely supervise the project safeguards performance
                           during implementation stage.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders( project beneficiaries) envisioned include: (i) local road users, (ii) residents
                           of Jiaozuo, (iii) tourists, (iv) the Government of Jiaozuo, and (v) women public transport users;
                           and (vi) involuntary resettled people.

                           In accordance with OP4.01, public consultations have been conducted during the EA process,
                           including questionnaire surveys and meetings with project affected people and local EPB and PCR
                           Authority. The Consultation on the EA TOR was undertaken in June-July 2013; while the
                           consultation on the EA and EMP in September 2013. Information about the project, potential
                           environmental and social impacts, as well as planned mitigation measures has been provided to the
                           public during consultations. Local villagers generally supported this project, and gave comments
                           on how to reduce construction impacts. PCR Authority provided specific recommendations on the
                           alignment of the green corridor. Feedback and concerns from the consultation have been addressed
                           in the project design and in the EA and EMP. The EA and the EMP were locally disclosed at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           governmental website and the PMO on November 14, 2013; and were disclosed at the Bank
                           Infoshop on January 24, 2014.

                           In accordance with OP4.12, public consultations have been conducted during preparation of RAP,
                           including questionnaire surveys and public meetings with project stakeholders as well as project
                           affected people. Information about the project, potential social impacts, as well as planned
                           mitigation measures has been provided to the public during these consultations. Informant
                           concerns have been addressed in the project design and in the RAP. The RAP and RPF were
                           disclosed locally at the governmental website and the City PMO on November 27, 2013; and were
                           disclosed at the Bank Infoshop on January 6, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          11-Dec-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       24-Jan-2014
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            14-Nov-2013
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-Jan-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            27-Nov-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?


                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:     Name: Fei Deng
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:       Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (SM)                       Date: 17-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 9 of 9
