INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12142
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Feb-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Mauritania                 Project ID:  P150430
Project Name: Mauritania Social Safety Net System (P 150430)
Task Team       Aline Coudouel
Leader(s):
Estimated       09-Mar-2015                Estimated    14-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSPDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Other social services (100%)
Theme(s):       Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care Services (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     29.00             Total Bank Financing:   15.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         10.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                15.00
Free-standing TFs AFR Human Development                                     4.00
Total                                                                      29.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The objectives of the proposed Project are to support the establishment of key building blocks of the
national social safety net system and to provide targeted cash transfers to extreme poor households.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 7


﻿The Government of Mauritania has decided to complement its food-based emergency programs with
a more sustainable long-term strategy for poverty reduction. The national social protection strategy
highlights the need for a national social safety net program, a need expressed by key social sector
stakeholders, from civil society to the highest levels of the national administration, and technical and
financial partners. The national social safety net program responds directly to the desire to better
channel resources to the poor and vulnerable and have a greater impact on poverty than untargeted
programs have had to date. The program also responds to the government's wish to gradually replace
existing untargeted programs with a more effective, targeted, alternative. Furthermore, the national
social protection strategy establishes the rationale for the development of core instruments for the
social protection sector - including strong coordination mechanisms and a national social registry to
better target the poorest households and coordinate interventions.
To achieve the proposed development objectives, the proposed Project has three components: (1)
support to the national safety net system, (2) support to the national social transfer program, and (3)
project management.
Component 1: Support to National Social Safety Net System (US$3.5million: US$2.0m IDA credit
and US 1.5m ASP grant)
The objective of this component is to support the central government's capacity for the establishment
and coordination of the national social safety net system. The component will support: (1) the
implementation of the national Social Registry, and (2) in-depth analysis to inform program design
and the implementation of improved early-warning systems to trigger effective social protection
responses to crises or disasters.
Subcomponent 1.1: Implementation of the National Social Registry (US$2.7m: US$1.7 IDA credit
and US$1.0m ASP grant).
This sub-component will support the development and implementation of the Social Registry. The
O
C.        first task of the Social Registry will be to identify households for the Social Transfer Program
supported by Component 2. However, it is developed with a view to serve all targeted social
programs in Mauritania. In practice, subcomponent 1.1 will support:
- Development of social registry tools and mechanisms. Development of the management
information system (MIS), calculation of quotas and proxy-means test, grievance mechanisms,
communication material, etc. - and the acquisition of key equipment, software and hardware.
- Implementation of the national social registry. The implementation of the Social Registry for
a share of the targeted population (100,000 out of total 150,000). Activities include the organization
of the community committees for community targeting, implementation of questionnaires,
management of grievances, as well as preparation of lists of eligible households for targeted
programs.
- Support activities to help registered individual obtain a national identity number and/or card.
While a significant portion of the individuals to be enrolled in the Social Registry are likely to have
national identity numbers or cards, some might lack such numbers, especially among children. This
activity will include information campaigns among Social Registry households to inform them of the
procedures to request a number and/or card. It also includes a commitment to address these needs
Page 2 of 7


﻿promptly, possibly with financial support from the Project.
- Evaluation activities. Activities to assess the implementation of the Social Registry, evaluate its
targeting efficiency, and potentially propose adjustments or reforms as needed.
o
Subcomponent 1.2: Support to the implementation of the National Social Protection Strategy (US
$0.8m: US$0.3 IDA credit and US$0.5m ASP grant)
Subcomponent 1.2 will contribute to the strengthening of the capacity of the central actors
responsible for spearheading the national social protection strategy. It supports activities aimed at
informing the design of interventions or analyzing their impacts, and strengthening the early-warning
system and emergency contingency plan. In practice, subcomponent 1.2 will support:
- Analytical services and related capacity building activities. Support for a series of analytical
services to help the various actors involved in the implementation of the national strategy plan their
investments and design their programs in the most effective way. These could include the analysis of
options for targeting of potential beneficiaries for selected programs, the analysis of gaps in the
supply of basic services on the basis of the Social Registry and maps of services, the analysis of
patterns of vulnerability to better design responses, the analysis of the distributional impact of
subsidies to inform their potential reform, and the analysis of barriers faced by the poor when
accessing basic goods (formation and transmission of food prices, etc.).
- Implementation of the early-warning system. This sub-component will support the
implementation of an expanded early-warning system, which can trigger social protection
contingency plans. The mechanism would include: the indicators, thresholds, scale of response as
well as their duration and subsequent scale-down. It will also propose targeting criteria for the
emergency response. The design of this broader early warning system will be supported by other
technical assistance activities, and the proposed Project would focus on its implementation.
Component 2: Support to Social Transfer Program (US$14.Omillion: US$11.5m IDA credit and
US2.5m ASP Grant)
The o bjective of this component is to support the design and implementation of the Social Transfer
a        Program. The program combines regular transfers with promotion activities designed to promote
knowledge of essential family practices and investment in households' human capital and resilience.
The component will support: (1) program tools and processes, (2) payment of transfers to
beneficiaries and (3) social promotion activities.
Subcomponent 2.1: Program tools and processes, monitoring and evaluation (US$2.5m: US$2.0 IDA
credit, US$0.5m ASP Grant)
Subcomponent 2.1 will focus on supporting the tools and processes to effectively implement the
program. In practice, subcomponent 2.1 will support:
- Program tools. A management information system (MIS) that includes modules for the registration
of beneficiaries, payment of transfers, verification of households' respect of their conditionality,
management of grievances and redress, management and monitoring of daily program activities, and
production of regular reports on program implementation. A grievance mechanism to respond to
complaints and ensure a high level of transparency. An operational manual which specifies the roles
Page 3 of 7


﻿of all actors, as well as the formats, communication tools, and all support required for
implementation.
-     Operational and training costs. These include core program staff and operating costs at
O
central and regional levels and equipment and operating costs for the program.
- Monitoring and evaluation, audit and impact evaluation costs. These include regular
monitoring based on the MIS as well as supervision in the field; process evaluations that review the
implementation of the program and identify bottlenecks; spot checks to assess the quality of
implementation, respect of procedures, etc. in randomly selected localities; beneficiary surveys that
gather beneficiary understanding, perception and experience with the program; and an evaluation of
the impacts of the program (or some of its components) to provide government and development
partners with evidence on the impact obtained on the welfare of households and inform discussions
on the modification and/or expansion of the Program.
Subcomponent 2.2: Payment of transfers to beneficiaries (US$9.5m: US$7.5 IDA credit and US$2.0
ASP Grant)
28.    Subcomponent 2.2 will focus on supporting the payment of cash transfers to a share of
program beneficiaries. In practice, subcomponent 2.2 will support:
a.     Payment of transfers to 15,000 beneficiaries of the cash transfer program and associated
financial fees. This corresponds to approximately 15 percent of extreme-poor households in
Mauritania. The national program itself aims to reach all of Mauritania's households living in
extreme poverty, approximately 100,000 households or 620,000-700,000 individuals, by 2020.
Subcomponent 2.3: Promotion of investment in human capital and resilience (US$2.0m: US$1.5 IDA
credit and US$0.5 DFID grant)
Subcomponent 2.3 will focus on supporting the payment of cash transfers to a share of program
beneficiaries. In practice, subcomponent 2.3 will support:
O
- Development of modules and materials for social promotion. The core curriculum for the
a        promotion activities will consist of five modules: (i) Social Transfer Program objectives, activities
and conditions, (ii) health, (iii) nutrition, (iv) early-childhood development (ECD) and (v) resilience.
The project will support development of modules and materials for modules (i-iii), with modules (iv)
and (v) currently planned to be developed through additional trust fund resources in collaboration
with cross-sectoral Bank units.
- Implementation of promotion activities. The project will support implementation of the
component to a subset of program beneficiaries and their communities, through contracting of
qualified NGOs. Promotion activities will be implemented once every three months, matching the
transfer payment cycle.
- Supervision, monitoring and evaluation of activities. The project will support activities for the
programming, supervision, monitoring and evaluation of the activities by the Tadamoun Agency
central and regional teams.
Component 3: Project Management (US$1.5million: US$1.5m IDA credit)
Page 4 of 7


﻿This component will support activities related to the management of the proposed Project. It will
ensure that the project operational team within the Tadamoun Agency is operational and that it
successfully and efficiently implements the project in conformity with the Financing Agreement,
O
U        project document and the implementation manual. Specifically, it will support:
- Core project staff, including a Project operational coordinator and fiduciary specialists
(procurement and financial management) who will be located in the Tadamoun Agency and support
all Project activities.
- Equipment and operating costs directly linked to the daily management of the Project
(utilities and supplies, communications, vehicle operation, maintenance and insurance, equipment
maintenance costs, etc.);
-      Regular internal and external audits (focusing on financial and procurement aspects)
- Training for the Project operational support team.
- Costs associated with Project reporting, including a mid-term review involving stakeholders and
civil society.
f.     Project Cost and Financing
The proposed Project has a total cost of US$19.0 million (see economic analysis for detailed cost of
the two programs that the proposed Project supports). The proposed Project will be financed with
IDA resources (US$15.0 million) and a grand from the Sahel Adaptive Social Protection MDTF (US
$4.0 million).
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
0
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Hocine Chalal (GENDR)
Zarafshan H. Khawaja (OPSOR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           No
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Page 5 of 7


﻿Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP   No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed   No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
O
0         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ x]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Page 6 of 7


﻿All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes   No        NA   X
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes  No       NA   X
o          in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[       NA[
o          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[      NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Aline Coudouel
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name:                                      Date:
Practice Manager/     Name:                                      Date:
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


