                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA7322
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Panama                            Project ID:    P145621
                            Project Name:     Sustainable Production Systems and Conservation of Biodiversity (P145621)
                            Task Team         Teresa M. Roncal
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         31-Mar-2014                       Estimated   28-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    LCSAR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              Biodiversity
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%), Public administration-
                                              Agriculture, fishing and forestry (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Biodiversity (40%), Rural non-farm income generation (20%), Micro, Small and
                                              Medium Enterprise support (20%), Participation and civi c engagement (10%),
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              Decentralization (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      30.98           Total Bank Financing:                0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 8.16
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                        9.59
                              Municipalities of Borrowing Country                                                      0.10
                              LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                                      0.63
                              Foreign Private Commercial Sources (identified)                                         12.50
                              Total                                                                                   30.98
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:




                                                                     Page 1 of 12
                         Is this a           No
                         Repeater
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project?

                         2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                         The proposed global environmental objective is to conserve globally significant biodiversity through
                         improved management effectiveness of 12 project protected areas and mainstreaming, and linking to
                         markets, biodiversity-friendly management practices in their buffer zones.
                         3. Project Description
                         The project would be organized into four components:
                         Component 1 - Sustainable Management of Protected Areas (US$16.44 million, GEF financing US
                         $4.64 million). The objective of this component is to improve the management effectiveness and
                         long-term sustainability of selected protected areas with a focus on financial sustainability and the
                         monitoring of biodiversity in the selected PAs. This goal will rest on three interdependent pillars:
                         (a)      Alliances for participatory management. The proposed project would support ANAM to
                         develop a mechanism to expedite the granting of concessions for administration and services, and
                         will pilot implementation of these concessions, as well as co-management agreements, and pilot
                         payment for environmental services (PES) schemes in the project area.
                         (b)      Biodiversity monitoring. A baseline for biodiversity information will be generated for
                         selected PAs and will be monitored annually to make available reliable scientific information for
                         decision-making and for substantiating financing from partners and sponsors. As part of the support
                         to the SNIMDB, biological information will be collected for at least eight PAs.
                         (c)      Endowment fund for financial sustainability. A financial and governance mechanism to
                         finance NPAS’s management costs sustainably will be established by ANAM through the newly
                         created public-private foundation, Fundación de Áreas Protegidas y Corredores Biológicos. A total of
                         US$1.5 million from GEF will be allocated as a seed endowment fund. The fund is expected to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         matched immediately by approximately an additional US$3.5 million from private sector sources
                         already identified. It is expected that once the institutional arrangements are in place, several donors
                         and the government will provide additional funding to gradually reach a sustainable level of
                         resources.

                         Component 2 - Biodiversity and Sustainable Productive Landscapes (US$6.91 million, GEF
                         financing US$3.28 million). This component focuses on activities to mainstream biodiversity and
                         sustainable production landscapes in production areas in the buffer zones of selected PAs. It focuses
                         on three areas of intervention:
                         (a)      Funding of biodiversity-friendly production systems. Building on the experience of the
                         previous project, the component will support producer groups or producer associations that live
                         outside PAs and that have implemented successful subprojects with financing from CBMAP II, to
                         scale up their operations and implement biodiversity-friendly production and management practices
                         with a focus on gaining or increasing access to markets for their products so that biodiversity-
                         friendly practices become economically sustainable. Subprojects to be developed may include
                         adoption of practices for biodiversity-friendly and climate-smart production in agro-forestry and
                         nature-tourism activities. A detailed list of potential activities will be incorporated in the Project’s
                         Operational Manual. Subproject grants would range from US$50,000 to 100,000 for which producer
                         organizations, communities and municipalities will contribute at least 10 percent (in cash or in kind)
                         of total subproject cost.


                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                         (b)     Technical assistance and training for strengthening producers’ groups and associations. The
                         component will finance training and technical advice to producer groups and associations. A training
                         strategy will be developed by ANAM to include capacity building activities to improve technical and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         business management skills of producers, and marketing strategies, and customized training to
                         indigenous communities in their native language.
                         (c)     Support to municipalities for implementation of municipal environmental subprojects.
                         Several environmental municipal plans were developed under CBMAP II. The proposed project
                         would provide funding for priority activities of those plans through a matching grant scheme.

                         Component 3 - Knowledge Management and Communications (US$5.20 million, GEF financing US
                         $1.20 million). This component will support the development and implementation of a
                         communication and outreach strategy for dissemination of information, promotion of partnerships,
                         and awareness and fund raising. It will educate consumers about the benefits of consumption of
                         biodiversity-friendly products for their health and their environment, and the economic value of
                         biodiversity. It will also support the foundation fund raising campaigns. It will focus on the following
                         three areas:
                         (a)       Knowledge management. Activities include (i) capacity-building activities with key project
                         stakeholders of both genders (e.g., producers, indigenous peoples, local government, and private
                         sector) on good practices and knowledge management at local and regional levels to support
                         biodiversity mainstreaming; (ii) training and professional certification of park guards by a university;
                         (iii) strengthening of the capacity of the recently established economic unit in ANAM to lead the
                         authority’s efforts to carry out environmental economic analysis that could demonstrate clearly the
                         economic value of biodiversity to decision and policy makers in Panama; (iv) dissemination and
                         promotion of PAs biodiversity information, and (v) fund raising campaign and transparency of the
                         use of funds.
                         (b)       South-South cooperation and promotion of partnerships. ANAM will work together with the
                         National Commission for the Knowledge and Use of Biodiversity (CONABIO) in Mexico on the
                         implementation of a regional program for training and technology transfer related to sustainable
                         production, and the development of biodiversity standards and/or market labels, and certification.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Exchanges will be promoted with other trust funds (FIDECO, Chagres and Darien, managed by
                         Fundación NATURA) within Panama, and with other countries like Peru and Mexico. On private
                         reserves, a cooperation agreement with Nicaragua will be developed to learn from their experience
                         on private reserves and connectivity biological corridors.
                         (c)       Strategic communication and outreach. Communications and educational campaigns will be
                         developed and implemented, including information and communication technologies, printed
                         materials, conferences, products exhibits, and mass media publicity to raise awareness among
                         citizens, business people, and producers to influence production and consumption of bio-labeled
                         goods and to promote fund raising and contributions from private companies, donors, government
                         agencies, projects and citizens.


                         Component 4 - Project Management (US$2.43 million, GEF financing US$0.47 million). This
                         component will support the technical and administrative coordination of the project to ensure
                         efficient implementation of the proposed project. Consulting services, office equipment, and
                         operational costs for activities to be undertaken by the Project Implementing Unit (PIU) for project
                         management, supervision, monitoring and evaluation will be financed.

                         The project implementation period will be five years. The Recipient will be the Republic of Panama
                         represented by the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF), and the implementing agency will be

                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                         ANAM, in particular the Department of Protected Areas and Wildlife (DAPVS), in charge of the
                         NPAS.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project will be implemented in twelve protected areas (PA) and respective buffer zones
                         geographically located in the Atlantic and central-eastern part of the country within the Panamanian
                         MBC. Ten of these twelve PAs correspond to the ones that have been supported under the CBMAP
                         II, and two are new. Project activities will take place in seven provinces: Bocas del Toro, Coclé,
                         Colón, Chiriquí, Los Santos, Panamá and Veraguas; two comarcas: Guna Yala and Ngäbe-Buglé;
                         and two indigenous peoples territories: Bribri and Naso-Teribe. Environmental and socio-economic
                         criteria were applied in targeting these areas.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Mary Lisbeth Gonzalez (LCSSO)
                         Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (LCSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes            The proposed project is expected to generate
                          BP 4.01                                           overall positive environmental impacts given its
                                                                            objective to mainstream biodiversity management
                                                                            into commercially viable production systems in
                                                                            buffer zones and to promote participatory
                                                                            management of Panama’s protectedareas. OP/BP
                                                                            4.01 is triggered and the project has been
                                                                            categorized as B, requiring a partial assessment
                                                                            considering the social and Environmental context
                                                                            of the interventions. As specific sites and exact
                                                                            activities are not known at this stage, an
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            environmental and social management framework
                                                                            (ESMF) was prepared to screen, assess, and
                                                                            mitigate environmental impacts related to
                                                                            proposed subprojects that may involve
                                                                            investments in productive activities and
                                                                            construction or rehabilitation of small
                                                                            infrastructure. The ESMF outlines the process to
                                                                            prepare the necessary Environmental and social
                                                                            safeguards instruments for each investment
                                                                            activity that may be required to mitigate and
                                                                            manage potential environmental impacts. The
                                                                            ESMF also provides specific guidelines to avoid
                                                                            or minimize risks and manage potential
                                                                            environmental impacts. Any subprojects
                                                                            considered as Category A will not be eligible for
                                                                            funding by the project.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        Yes            The proposed project is on protected areas,
                                                                            including their buffer zones or influence areas,
                                                                            which are all important critical natural habitats


                                                                    Page 4 of 12
                                                                         within high priority ecosystems in Panama.
                                                                         The project activities will promote
                                                                         environmentally sound agricultural practices in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         protected areas, which may include payment for
                                                                         environmental services, and other innovative
                                                                         ideas to protect environmentally sensitive
                                                                         habitats. Human activity in the buffer zones
                                                                         induced by the project may indirectly impact
                                                                         natural habitats. But the project will not finance
                                                                         any activity that could potentially cause
                                                                         significant conversion or degradation of natural
                                                                         habitats.
                                                                         The ESMF outlines the procedures and
                                                                         mechanisms for screening out activities that may
                                                                         cause degradation or contemplate any significant
                                                                         conversion of natural habitats. The ESMF also
                                                                         includes criteria and procedures to avoid and
                                                                         minimize these risks and manage potential
                                                                         negative impacts on natural habitat.
                                                                         The ESMF includes provisions to assess possible
                                                                         impacts prior to any actions being undertaken on
                                                                         the ground. Monitoring activities will be
                                                                         established during implementation to ensure that
                                                                         critical natural habitats are not adversely affected.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes           The proposed project will be developed in natural
                                                                         forest areas of importance for biodiversity. Yet it
                                                                         is too early to know at this stage whether
                                                                         interventions could affect the rights and welfare
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         of people dependent on forests and if this would
                                                                         bring changes in the management, protection, and
                                                                         utilization of natural forests. OP/BP 4.36 is
                                                                         triggered as a precautionary measure, and also to
                                                                         improve forest conservation.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           The work on a production system may involve
                                                                         pest management and the use of agro-chemicals
                                                                         in subproject activities. The ESMF includes
                                                                         screening procedures for pest management and
                                                                         pesticide use. A Pest Management Plan will be
                                                                         prepared for subprojects likely to procure
                                                                         pesticides or envisage changes in pest
                                                                         management practices. The ESMF adequately
                                                                         describes the risks associated with pesticide use
                                                                         and the proposed measures for managing these
                                                                         risks.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The policy on Physical Cultural Resources (OP
                         BP 4.11                                         4.11) applies given the uncertainty regarding the
                                                                         exact locations of activities to be carried out


                                                                 Page 5 of 12
                                                                       under the project. Some forests or landscapes
                                                                       concerned by the project might be considered to
                                                                       have historical or cultural significance such as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       spirit forests, sacred valleys or other features of
                                                                       the natural landscape. The ESMF includes
                                                                       specific provisions to assess the potential impacts
                                                                       on forests, sacred valleys or landscapes
                                                                       considered to have historical or cultural
                                                                       significance prior to any activities being
                                                                       undertaken on the ground. The ESMF also
                                                                       includes provisions for the treatment of physical
                                                                       cultural resources that may be discovered during
                                                                       project implementation (chance finds).
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10   Yes           A Social Assessment (SA) was carried out and
                                                                       will be updated during the life of the Project to
                                                                       gather the cultural characteristics and socio-
                                                                       economic profile of the wide-range of
                                                                       stakeholders. The objective was to help design
                                                                       and implement differentiated mechanisms and
                                                                       services to meet the specific characteristics of
                                                                       different local contexts and beneficiaries by
                                                                       ethnic and socioeconomic groups. Grievance
                                                                       redress mechanism and conflict resolution
                                                                       strategies were included.

                                                                       An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) was prepared
                                                                       to ensure that indigenous peoples are informed
                                                                       and consulted and their participation is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       encouraged and promoted during the life of the
                                                                       project. The project builds upon the experience of
                                                                       CBMAP-II. It continued working with indigenous
                                                                       authorities to ensure that Congress and
                                                                       governance structures are respected, consulted
                                                                       and have the opportunity to actively participate in
                                                                       the decision-making process that might concern
                                                                       or affect their interests. Action Plan details
                                                                       activities to ensure that IP of both genders will
                                                                       have access to the economic benefits of the
                                                                       Project. This operation promoted culturally
                                                                       adequate, free, prior, and informed consultations
                                                                       with indigenous peoples.

                                                                       The CBMAP-II has successfully engaged
                                                                       indigenous peoples Congresses and authorities in
                                                                       the identification, preparation and implementation
                                                                       of subprojects, with their broad participation in
                                                                       biodiversity conservation. The Project build up on



                                                               Page 6 of 12
                                                                        the lessons learned from CBMAP-II and other
                                                                        projects to improve indigenous peoples’
                                                                        participation and it also improved the consultation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        mechanisms to obtain broad community support.
                                                                        Based on the experience of the previous projects,
                                                                        this operation will have a detailed communication
                                                                        strategy to ensure that indigenous peoples, mainly
                                                                        those who are monolingual are well-informed and
                                                                        consulted about the objectives and activities of
                                                                        the project, and benefit from its development
                                                                        objective. The ultimate objective of the
                                                                        communication strategy is to ensure indigenous
                                                                        peoples and stakeholders engagement project took
                                                                        into account the following principles: (a) cultural
                                                                        heritage and identity as assets; (b) free, prior and
                                                                        informed consultation and participation process;
                                                                        (c) community-driven development; (d) land
                                                                        assessment and biodiversity conservation; (e)
                                                                        indigenous peoples’ knowledge in natural
                                                                        resources management; (f) environmental issues
                                                                        and indigenous peoples views on climate change;
                                                                        (g) access to markets; and (h) gender equality
                                                                        particularly promoting participation of women in
                                                                        subprojects, strategic alliances and in community-
                                                                        based innovation processes. This later issue will
                                                                        be supported by the preparation of an action plan,
                                                                        as part of the IPDP that will specify clear
                                                                        mechanisms to promote the inclusion of women
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        and youth.
                                                                        The IPDP also identified specific actions to
                                                                        support and mainstream biodiversity and
                                                                        sustainable production in production units of the
                                                                        buffer zones of selected PAs seeking to balance
                                                                        peoples’ livelihood with conservation. This
                                                                        component will enable producers to implement
                                                                        management systems to improve profitability
                                                                        while addressing sustainability challenges and
                                                                        biodiversity conservation.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           A Process Framework (PF) was prepared to
                         4.12                                           ensure that procedures are in place to mitigate any
                                                                        potential restrictions in access to protected areas
                                                                        and ensure consultations with potential
                                                                        beneficiaries on resource management activities
                                                                        in and around protected areas as part of the
                                                                        management plans. The PF identified a clear
                                                                        protocol to ensure that activities supported by the
                                                                        project within indigenous territories have broad



                                                                Page 7 of 12
                                                                               participation and consultation and will not incur
                                                                               in any type of restriction of access to resources.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               One of the main lessons learned from CBMAP-II
                                                                               is the integration of biodiversity conservation and
                                                                               livelihoods with local governance. The CBMAP-
                                                                               II worked to harmonize social issues with
                                                                               biodiversity conservation. The goal is to achieve a
                                                                               better integration of rural communities—
                                                                               including indigenous peoples and peasants—to
                                                                               harmonize people’s livelihoods, biodiversity
                                                                               conservation and local governance to develop
                                                                               more sustainable conservation practices,
                                                                               including agriculture that will facilitate access to
                                                                               markets for the producers.

                                                                               This operation is not supporting the expansion of
                                                                               protected areas or expropriation of land for
                                                                               productive projects.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No              This policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                                                               support the construction or rehabilitation of dams
                                                                               nor will it support other investments which rely
                                                                               on the services of existing dams.
                            Projects on International          No              This policy is not triggered as any subproject
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               activities that may affect International Waterways
                                                                               will not be eligible.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                This policy is not triggered as there will be no
Public Disclosure Copy




                            7.60                                               subprojects in disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed project builds on the experience and lessons learned from the CBMAP I and II.
                              This, combined with the activities under the proposed project, should have a strong overall
                              positive environmental impact and advance global biodiversity goals by (i) strengthening
                              management of Protected Areas and natural habitats and (ii) fostering environmentally sustainable
                              productive activities in rural areas that encourage preservation of natural resources. Potential
                              negative environmental impacts from productive activities and small public works are expected to
                              be minimal and are adequately addressed through a solid identification, evaluation, and mitigation
                              framework. No potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are expected.
                              Considering the minimal environmental impacts, the project was assigned a category B requiring a
                              partial assessment.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:



                                                                       Page 8 of 12
                           Considering the nature of the activities proposed by the project, no potential and/or indirect
                           impacts are anticipated in the project area.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.
                           Since the proposed project activities relate to conservation, they should have a strong overall
                           positive environmental impact and advance global biodiversity goals, no alternatives were
                           contemplated.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The preparation of safeguard-related instruments adopted a phased approach. As specific sites and
                           exact activities are not known at this stage, an environmental and social management framework
                           (ESMF as Volume 1) was prepared to screen, assess environmental and social impacts related to
                           the proposed project. The ESMF outlines the process to prepare the necessary environmental and
                           social safeguards instruments for each investment activity. An environmental management
                           framework (EMF as Volume 2) was prepared to provide specific guidelines to avoid or minimize
                           risks and to assess and manage potential environmental impacts associated with subproject
                           activities. An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP as Volume 3) was prepared to ensure that indigenous
                           peoples have been informed and consulted and their participation has been encouraged and
                           promoted during the life of the project. A Process Framework (PF as Volume 4) was prepared to
                           ensure that procedures are in place to mitigate any potential restrictions in access to protected
                           areas and ensure consultations with potential beneficiaries on resource management activities in
                           and around protected areas as part of the management plans.
                           Preparation of these instruments has been done in close collaboration with the respective Bank’s
                           specialists; have been adequately consulted, duly reviewed and cleared for disclosure.
                           ANAM, as implementing agency, has gained experience addressing social and environmental
                           safeguard issues, most recently in the Rural Productivity Project (Loan 7439-PA), which is being
                           implemented partially blended with a GEF Project for Rural Productivity and Consolidation of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Atlantic Mesoamerican Biological Project (TF056628). The Project has a social specialist and an
                           environmental specialist. These projects were successful in developing organizational,
                           administrative and technical capacity in rural and indigenous communities in extreme poverty.
                           Both projects complied with all social and environmental safeguards policies in a satisfactory
                           manner. While the national team has a good grasp of safeguard policies and their respective
                           disciplines, there is a need for training on social and environmental issues at the various
                           implementation sites. The Bank´s respective specialists will facilitate the delivery and monitoring
                           of these training activities.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           During the process of preparing the Environmental and Social Safeguards documents, public
                           Consultation workshops were conducted with community leaders, representatives of civil society,
                           field staff of CBMAP and ANAM in the regions of Kuna Yala, Campana National Park, Azuero
                           Peninsula , Santiago , Cocle , Chiriquí, Ngöbe Buglé and Bocas del Toro. The workshops were
                           held in Rio Hato CEDESAM (Cocle ) , in the City of Santiago ( Veraguas) and the City of David
                           ( Chiriquí). Using a participatory methodology, participants assessed the current environmental
                           situation in the areas of interventions of the proposed project and the priorities of the new project
                           intervention within the framework of national environmental policies and social and
                           environmental safeguards of the World Bank.



                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                           In the case of the Environmental Management Framework, preparation work included extensive
                           consultations with community leaders from all geographic areas of the project, with experts in the
                           field of environmental conservation and sustainable development. In all consultations, participants
Public Disclosure Copy




                           identified the lack of management capacity of local and national efforts to safeguard ecosystems
                           and the goods and services provided by authorities.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        07-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     14-Jan-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Panama                                                             06-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        05-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     14-Jan-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Panama                                                             06-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        10-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     14-Jan-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Panama                                                             18-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     NA
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         N/A
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment


                                                                    Page 10 of 12
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?




                                                                     Page 11 of 12
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Teresa M. Roncal
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Laurent Msellati (SM)                       Date: 24-Feb-2014




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
