                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSR8416
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Philippines                                  Project ID:           P088926
                            Project Name:       Participatory Irrigation Development Project (P088926)
                            Task Team           Maria Theresa G. Quinones
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           20-Oct-2008                                  Estimated   25-Jun-2009
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GWADR                                        Lending     Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:             Irrigation and drainage (71%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and
                                                forestry (29%)
                            Theme:              Water resource management (36%), Administrative and civil service reform
                                                (12%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural polic ies and institutions
                                                (12%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                         No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       113.59           Total Bank Financing:                                        70.36
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                              43.23
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                 70.36
                              Total                                                                                                113.59
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           While contributing to the broad government?s goals of rural poverty alleviation, increased


                                                                                 Page 1 of 10
                         agricultural productivity, and enhanced food security, the APL/projec
                         t has two specific development objectives: (a) improve O&M and routine rehabilit
                         ation of irrigation systems; and (b) improve the operational efficiency of exist
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ing NISs and narrow the gap between their service area and the actual irrigated
                         area. The objectives would be achieved through sector restructuring, principall
                         y, through rationalization of NIA to improve its financial situation and deliver
                         y of irrigation services, IMT to water users in NISs, establishment of funds for
                         the management of NISs and CISs, reform of the cost recovery system, and invest
                         ments in NIS improvement and modernization.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         While contributing to the broad government?s goals of rural poverty alleviation, increased
                         agricultural productivity, and enhanced food security, the APL/projec
                         t has two specific development objectives: (a) improve O&M and routine rehabilit
                         ation of irrigation systems; and (b) improve the operational efficiency of exist
                         ing NISs and narrow the gap between their service area and the actual irrigated
                         area. The objectives would be achieved through sector restructuring, principall
                         y, through rationalization of NIA to improve its financial situation and deliver
                         y of irrigation services, IMT to water users in NISs, establishment of funds for
                         the management of NISs and CISs, reform of the cost recovery system, and invest
                         ments in NIS improvement and modernization.
                         3. Project Description
                         PIDP (APL 1) is the first of three APLs designed to support NIA's long term sector reform program.
                         It has the following components:

                         Component 1: Irrigation Sector Restructuring and Reform - This component provides support to the
                         implementation of NIA's Rationalization Plan, incorporating the program of severance payments and
                         the corresponding institutional strengthening activities. In addition, it would help establish more
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sustainable financial and institutional mechanisms for improved participatory O&M and routine
                         rehabilitation of NIS through the NIA's Irrigation Management Transfer Program.

                         Component 2: Irrigation Infrastructure Development - This component aims to improve the delivery
                         of irrigation services in about 58 NIS through rehabilitation and modernization of existing irrigation
                         systems in order to provide more reliable and flexible irrigation services. Out of the 58 NIS covered,
                         15 are categorized as Core A systems (original target is 14) and 43 as Core B systems (original target
                         is 44). (Note: The difference between Core A and Core B NIS are on the nature of rehabilitation and
                         modernization works to be carried out under the project. Core A NIS involve major rehabilitation
                         works such as repairs and/or establishment of dam and intake structures, installation of head gates,
                         concreting and repairs of main canal, etc. Core B NIS involve minor repair and restoration works
                         such as concreting and repairs of smaller main canals and secondary canals, replacement and/or
                         installation of secondary canal structures and facilities, de-silting of canals, etc.)

                         Component 3: Project Management and Coordination – This component provides the support for an
                         efficient coordination, implementation and management of the project, including strengthening the
                         financial management and procurement functions and the establishment and operation of the results
                         monitoring and evaluation system for the project.

                         The following changes are being proposed under a Level 2 restructuring:


                                                                     Page 2 of 10
                         a. Reallocation of US$3,414,100 from the “Unallocated” disbursement category (Category 4) to a
                         new “Civil Works” disbursement category (Category 2A) to finance the repair and retrofitting works
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in national irrigation systems/schemes (NIS) that were affected by Typhoon Yolanda (Typhoon
                         Haiyan).
                         b. Reallocation of US$5 million from the “Unallocated” disbursement category (Category 4) to
                         “Civil Works” disbursement category (Category 2) to finance the additional works for some existing
                         NIS to make them more climate resilient, including indicative allocation for unexpected overruns in
                         the ongoing contracts.
                         c. Extension of the loan closing date from March 31, 2015 to June 30, 2018 to implement the
                         required works under items (a) and (b) above, as well as to complete some ongoing civil works that
                         cannot be completed by the current closing date.
                         d. Amendment of Section III of Schedule 2 (Procurement) of the Loan Agreement to reflect the
                         addition of new procurement methods consistent with paragraph 11(b) of OP 10.00.
                         e.       Removal of Schedule 4 (Performance Indicators) from the Loan Agreement and reflecting it
                         through a Supplemental Letter. In addition, it is proposed to: (a) remove the inconsistencies in the
                         formulation of the project development objective (PDO) in the Loan Agreement and the Project
                         Appraisal Document by adopting the Loan Agreement formulation; (b) update some indicators to be
                         better aligned with the Loan Agreement PDO; and (c) update the indicators’ completion date to
                         reflect the proposed new closing date of June 30, 2018.

                         The proposed restructuring will not trigger any new safeguards policy as the project design will
                         remain unchanged. All the civil works in the NIS will fall under the project's Core B system
                         category. Their negative impacts are expected to be localized and to occur only during the
                         construction phase.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         As noted above, the original project supports the rehabilitation of 15 Core A and 43 Core B NIS in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the Philippines. One of the Core B NIS draws water from the reservoir retained by the existing Magat
                         Dam which was built in the 1980s with support from the World Bank.

                         Some indigenous peoples/indigenous cultural communities are present in the service areas of these
                         irrigation systems and their immediate environment.
                         The NIS that would be covered by the project restructuring are located in two of the regions that
                         were directly hit by Typhoon Haiyan (Region 8 and Region 4B). Region 8 is the only region in the
                         Philippines that does not have indigenous peoples. The NIS located in Region 4B have recorded IPs,
                         particularly in the provinces of Palawan and Mindoro. Also, since the project covers only existing
                         irrigation systems, the repair and retrofitting works will not entail any additional land acquisition.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Jonas Garcia Bautista ()
                         Roberto B. Tordecilla (GURDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                          BP 4.01




                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09            Yes

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      Yes

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          Yes

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The original project covers the rehabilitation of 15 Core A and 43 Core B NIS. As noted above,
                              Core A NIS involve major rehabilitation works such as repairs and/or establishment of dam and
                              intake structures, installation of head gates, concreting and repairs of main canal, etc. Core B
Public Disclosure Copy




                              systems involve minor repair and restoration works such as concreting and repairs of smaller main
                              canals and secondary canals, replacement and/or installation of secondary canal structures and
                              facilities, de-silting of canals, etc.

                             Environmental Impact. The experience of implementing the original project indicates that the
                             environmental impacts of the project are overall positive. These include addressing threats to long
                             term sustainability (siltation, erosion, flooding, etc.) by undertaking physical measures and
                             enhancements as part of the NIS’ rehabilitation and by providing capacity building activities to
                             IAs to undertake routine O&M activities. The negative impacts on one hand are those that relate to
                             civil works resulting from the rehabilitation of the existing NIS. These impacts, however, are all
                             localized and temporary and occurred only during the construction phase. The original project did
                             not significantly affect any natural habitats since the civil works were limited mostly to the
                             rehabilitation of the existing NISs.

                             Pesticide Use. The original project assisted farmers in the adoption of Integrated Pest
                             Management (IPM) under the Department of Agriculture's (DA) National KASAKALIKASAN
                             Program (Government’s national IPM Program). This program was even intensified in areas in
                             Mindanao where low adoption rate of the program was previously noted. With the increasing
                             adoption rate of farmers on IPM, the pesticide usage and dependence has been reduced.



                                                                       Page 4 of 10
                          Dam Safety. The original project triggered the Dam Safety Policy because of the rehabilitation of
                          Magat Dam. A dam safety assessment was carried out by a World Bank Dam Specialist on the
                          Magat Dam where one of the Core B NIS will draw water from. The assessment concluded that
Public Disclosure Copy




                          the Magat Dam and its appurtenant structures were designed according to good practice and built
                          with quality. The structures are also reasonably well maintained. As required, the Government had
                          previously submitted to the Bank its Operation, Maintenance and Safety Manual for Magat Dam
                          and used this in carrying out the repairs as well as the operation and maintenance of the
                          rehabilitated irrigation system. The restructuring will involve minor repairs of small ogee dams
                          such as repairs of check gate protection dike, restoration of intake embankment (gabion), riprap,
                          slope protection, replacement of intake and sluice gates, etc. The works in existing systems are
                          minor and thus impacts are expected to be minor, localized, manageable and to occur only during
                          civil works.

                          Involuntary Resettlement. The Social Assessment Report resulting from extensive joint field visits
                          by NIA and the Bank from June to September 2008 showed that of the 15 Core A NIS, 10 have
                          involuntary resettlement issues involving informal settlements within the irrigation systems,
                          mostly along the main canals. During implementation, the need for land acquisition cropped up as
                          a result of changes in the design of some NIS, affecting small land owners (holders of formal
                          legal instruments) and informal settlers. This resulted in the increased number of project-affected
                          persons (PAP) under these NIS. In systems with expansion areas like Pinacanauan RIS and
                          Zinundungan RIS, the areas that will be traversed by the new canals are privately owned lands and
                          will be compensated based on agreed options with the land owners.

                          Indigenous Peoples. The original project has some NIS wherein Indigenous Peoples (IP) live or
                          conduct economic activities in the irrigation service areas, irrigation canals or in the head water/
                          watershed areas. The IPs were not displaced as the project considered various alternatives to
                          reduce impact on IPs.

                           Under the restructured project, it is envisaged that environment and social impacts will also be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           manageable, localized and reversible since the works will only involve rehabilitation of existing
                           Core B NIS that have been damaged by the typhoon. Similar to the original project, the
                           restructured project will not support construction of new irrigation systems.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            The project will have a number of long term positive impacts in terms of: (a) achieving increased
                           yields and income through improved irrigation services; (b) reducing conflicts due to illegal
                           turnouts; and (c) addressing current threats to the long term sustainability of NIS due to problems
                           of siltation, erosion, flooding, etc.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            As relevant, the technical plans and designs of rehabilitation works of a few NIS were modified
                           to avoid and/or minimize displacement of settlers.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            Environmental Impact. NIA has prepared an Environmental Assessment (EA) report for the
                           original project, which was disclosed prior to appraisal. The EA included the individual stand-
                           alone Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) Report with Environmental Management Plan


                                                                     Page 5 of 10
                         (EMP) for each of the Core A NIS. These were submitted to and approved by the Department of
                         Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) and also reviewed and cleared by the Bank. The EA
                         also included the environmental guidelines that guide the screening and incorporation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mitigation measures into and preparation of EMP in the Core B NIS. The environmental
                         guidelines, however, were not submitted to the DENR since these were not required under the
                         Philippine EIA Law.

                         The implementation of the IEE and EMP for Core A NIS has been monitored by the DENR and
                         the Bank Task Team, whereas the implementation of the environmental guidelines for Core B NIS
                         has been closely followed up by the Bank Team during implementation support and follow-on
                         missions. All project-funded NIS are also required to strictly comply with the guidelines from the
                         design to actual implementation of the rehabilitation works. The same Environmental Guidelines
                         will be used for the NIS that will be rehabilitated under the proposed restructuring.

                         Pesticide Use. The project, as a policy of NIA, will continue not financing the purchase of
                         chemical pesticides nor will encourage its use. It will however support the continuous and
                         sustained adoption of IPM in all systems (both in Core A and Core B NIS) through training and
                         season-long Farmers’ Field Schools (FFS) under the KASAKALIKASAN Program. The funding
                         for training is part of the project.

                         Involuntary Resettlement. To mitigate the involuntary resettlement impacts, NIA has prepared a
                         Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that provides proper guidance in developing resettlement
                         action plans (RAP) for NIS with resettlement issues. Based on this framework, 4 resettlement
                         plans have been prepared by NIA and, of which 3 have been approved and disclosed by the Bank;
                         and are under implementation. The Bank however found during implementation support missions
                         and thematic review that some RAPs need to be improved and updated based on the final designs
                         of the rehabilitation works and current realities on the ground. The Bank missions have called
                         NIA's attention to improve analysis of impacts as well as screening and proper consultation with
                         project-affected persons. Ten (10) RAPs are being improved based on the updated RPF. The 2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Safeguards Thematic Review for the Philippines that included the original project also indicated
                         that the institutional arrangements for the RAP preparation, implementation and monitoring be
                         clearly delineated and the functions of the Project Management Office, Environmental and
                         Watershed Management Section, Regional Offices and the IAs be spelled out.

                         The RPF has been updated prior to the processing of the restructuring request to consider the
                         project lessons and experiences, provide specific guidance and clarifications, and strengthen the
                         implementation of the safeguards instruments. The revision of some of the RAPs also took into
                         account the EAP Safeguards Thematic Review’s specific comments and recommendations such as
                         in Dummun which required acquisition of right of way or easements but would not displace any
                         home or livelihood, thus a land acquisition documentation and compensation plan would be
                         submitted instead of a RAP. The same will be the case for Visitacion NIS and Banurbur NIS.
                         Pinacanauan NIS had another round of PAP identification undertaken with the changes in the
                         engineering designs.

                         Indigenous Peoples (IPs). An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) has been prepared
                         by NIA under the original project. Informed by the results of the 2008 Social Assessment, the
                         framework provides mechanisms for ensuring that when IPs are found affected by project
                         interventions, they are informed and consulted meaningfully by going through the Free and Prior
                         Informed Consent (FPIC) processes and mobilized to participate in project decision-making. The

                                                                  Page 6 of 10
                           recently completed Safeguards Thematic Review however pointed out that the framework needs to
                           be corrected to ensure that IP presence in or their collective attachment to project areas will be the
                           basis for triggering the policy and not impacts or being in ancestral lands, as what was in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           original version of the IP Policy Framework. In this regard, the IPPF has been updated prior to the
                           processing of the proposed restructuring to take into account the recommendations of the
                           safeguards thematic review and the lessons learned from implementing the original project.

                           Dam Safety. The environmental guidelin es include provision for ensuring that the repairs of the
                           ogee or diversion weirs for run-of-the river irrigation systems incorporate generic dam safety and
                           design measures to be done by qualified engineers.

                           As part of NIA’s effort to improve safeguards implementation and supervision in all NIS and to
                           specifically address safeguards concerns raised by the Bank, the Office of the Administrator
                           issued a memorandum circular in August 2013 providing guidelines to offices concerned on
                           safeguards compliance before any civil work is started. A process to address inter-unit
                           coordination especially between the Environmental and Watershed Management Section (EWMS)
                           and the Engineering Division has been established. A staff from the EWMS had been assigned to
                           assist the PMO in addressing the safeguards concerns of both Core A and Core B NISs. This
                           ensured that safeguards review is undertaken by the EWMS before contracts are signed and
                           safeguards documents are included in the contracts. This process was reflected in the updated
                           safeguards frameworks. The PMO has also started to conduct regular capacity building and field
                           coaching on the new frameworks for field implementers.

                           In response to the recommendations made in the 2013 Safeguards Thematic Review and based on
                           the lessons learned from implementing the original project, NIA updated the IPPF and the RPF.
                           The objective of updating the RPF is to improve the institutional arrangements and grievance
                           redress mechanism and in the process improve safeguards implementation for the remaining
                           project activities. The IPPF, on the other hand, was updated to reflect the actual trigger of the
                           policy (i.e., presence of IPs), and to also strengthen the impact assessment when IPs are present in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the NIS to be supported by the project. NIA has subjected the revised frameworks through three
                           regional consultations (Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao). The updated draft frameworks were also
                           disclosed locally through the NIA website (IPPF on March 27, 2014 and RPF on April 2, 2014)
                           and in the Bank's InfoShop on April 3, 2014.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             A participatory stakeholder analysis identified the project's major stakeholders among
                           government agencies, IAs, business groups and other non-government organizations. Acceptance
                           of the project is high but the terms of engagements with them to get their cooperation, due to
                           sometimes conflicting interests, will have to be seriously addressed on a per NIS basis. Most
                           significant of the stakeholders because of the critical functions they play in the sustainability of the
                           NIS are the IAs which have varying degrees of organizational capacities. Under the Irrigation
                           Management Transfer Program, the IAs are continuously provided with capacity building
                           activities to improve their skills and preparedness for O&M and other organizational development
                           activities.

                           As noted above, the revised frameworks have been subjected to regional consultations involving
                           the IPs, informal settlers, other affected sectors, relevant national agencies and local government
                           units. These were disclosed locally through the NIA website and in the Bank's InfoShop.


                                                                       Page 7 of 10
                           Safeguards orientation have been part of capacity building activities at the PMO and IMO levels,
                           with the PMO ensuring that all safeguards focal persons at the regional and IMO levels are
                           properly trained to carry on the safeguards tasks.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       16-Sep-2008
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    16-Sep-2008
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                       16-Sep-2008
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       03-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    03-Apr-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                       02-Apr-2014
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       03-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    03-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                       27-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    NA
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level


                                                                    Page 8 of 10
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies




                                                                    Page 9 of 10
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Maria Theresa G. Quinones
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                            Date: 23-Jun-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Ousmane Dione (SM)                             Date: 23-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
