                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA7440
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Georgia                            Project ID:    P133828
                            Project Name:      Irrigation and Land Market Development Project (P133828)
                            Task Team          Peter Goodman
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          30-Jan-2014                        Estimated   23-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSAR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Irrigation and drainage (90%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
                                              (3%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing an d forestry (3%), General
                                              public administration sector (4%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (90%), Land administration and management
                                              (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      63.30           Total Bank Financing:                  50.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                50.00
                              International Fund for Agriculture Development                                             13.30
                              Total                                                                                      63.30
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                                                       Page 1 of 15
                         The project development objective (PDO) is to improve (i) delivery of irrigation and drainage
                         services in selected areas and (ii) policies and procedures for land registration.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Irrigation and Land Market Development (ILMD) Project consists of three components:

                         Component 1 Irrigation and Drainage Improvement (US$58.00 million including US$45.20 million
                         IDA Credit and US$12.80 million IFAD Loan)

                         Irrigation and Drainage Rehabilitation and Modernization Subcomponent
                         1.       Scope of Rehabilitation and Modernisation: This subcomponent would finance the
                         rehabilitation and modernization of selected irrigation and drainage systems including design, design
                         supervision, construction and construction supervision. It would support the rehabilitation of
                         headworks, primary and secondary (off-farm) canals, tertiary (on-farm canals), small dams where
                         necessary, and any other minor structures as needed in the project areas. The Project will restore
                         previously irrigated and drained areas only, and not build new schemes. Based on an assumed
                         average cost of US$1500 per ha, Project funding would be sufficient to rehabilitate approximately
                         33,000 ha.

                         2.       While a large part of the rehabilitation will involve reconstruction of original systems, there
                         will be opportunities to modernize water control and delivery structures, including automation of
                         headworks or introduction of SCADA to monitor and control water distribution in some of the larger
                         canal systems. Low-pressure drip and sprinkler systems may also be employed in some schemes to
                         improve water use efficiency. The Project will employ international design expertise where
                         necessary to enhance the modernisation aspects of design.

                         3.       Selection Of Schemes: Schemes will be selected based on criteria including: (i) water
                         available to the scheme without affecting adversely other users in the basin, (ii) maximum cost of
                         rehabilitation about US$3,000 (for the main, secondary and tertiary systems), (iii) community
Public Disclosure Copy




                         willingness to participate; (iv) potential to establish viable water user organizations or alternative
                         institutional arrangements for on-farm irrigation management; (v) technical viability of
                         rehabilitation; (vi) willingness to pay for water, financial and economic viability; (vii)
                         complementarity between selected schemes in order to minimize off-farm rehabilitation costs per ha;
                         and (viii) complementarity with other sector developments ongoing in the area; as well as positive
                         environmental, social and safeguards assessments. Selection will be preceded by a public information
                         campaign to ensure widespread participation in consultations with water users on designs.

                         Flood Control Improvement Subcomponent
                         This subcomponent will finance: (i) improvement of flood control systems serving irrigation and
                         drainage schemes selected under the Project, including design, construction and construction
                         supervision of flood improvement and control systems which will include construction of gabions,
                         check dams, embankments, dikes for headworks, main canals, secondary canals and tertiary canals-
                         this would involve small works only; and (ii) study of required measures for erosion control in the
                         catchment area of these schemes and implementation thereof. This will result in the reduced
                         vulnerability of small farmers in the rehabilitated irrigation command areas to intermittent floods.

                         Strengthening of Irrigation and Drainage Institutions Subcomponent
                         I. National Irrigation and Drainage Strategy: The Project will finance technical assistance to support
                         the Department of Amelioration to prepare a National Irrigation and Drainage Strategy. The Strategy

                                                                      Page 2 of 15
                         will define the government’s long term vision for (i) national regulation and monitoring or irrigation
                         water delivery including environmental monitoring; (ii) institutional arrangements for on-farm and
                         off-farm irrigation s ervices; (iii) water pricing and cost recovery; and (iv) rehabilitation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         modernization. The strategy would also define the government’s approach to increasing resilience to
                         climate change through improved irrigation management.

                         II. National Rehabilitation and Modernisation Plan: The Project will finance technical assistance and
                         operating costs for the preparation of a national rehabilitation and modernisation plan that will
                         prioritize rehabilitation and modernization over the next 5-10 years as a basis for nationwide
                         government and donor funded investments. The plan will be based on (i) technical assessments
                         following completion of the on-going inventory to identify all canals and structures and their
                         functional condition; (ii) financial and economic assessments of the viability of rehabilitating
                         different types of systems in different agro-climatic regions; (iii) social assessments of the impact of
                         rehabilitation and (iv) environmental assessments including an assessment of the impact of
                         rehabilitation on national and river basin water balances and the implications of climate change.
                         Participatory rehabilitation is an important principle and the plan will include farmer consultations
                         assess their priorities. Opportunity to introduce modernizing technologies will be identified.
                         Examples of modernizing technologies include more efficient conveyance, distribution and
                         application of water for irrigation (to reduce waste of water), newer and cheaper technology for water
                         measurement, and new pumping technology. The FAO MASSCOTE approach (Mapping System and
                         Services for Canal Operation Techniques) may also be applied to identify the extent to different
                         which types of modernization are appropriate to Georgian irrigation and drainage systems. The
                         approach involve using rapid appraisal methods to map system capacity, stresses, operation and
                         maintenance practices, performance and needs for modernization.

                         III.     Institutional Strengthening of UASCG in Management Operations and Maintenance: The
                         Project will finance:
                         (i)      Maintenance management improvement - technical assistance to prepare guidelines on the
                         preparation of maintenance plans for on-farm systems, off-farm systems and dams, the preparation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         costed maintenance plans and operating guidelines for each Project irrigation schemes well as
                         training of UASCG staff on this topic;
                         (ii)     Maintenance equipment - the purchase of new UASCG maintenance and cleaning equipment
                         (including, excavators, bulldozers, small pickup trucks, technical service vehicles, back loaders,
                         compressors, weed cutters, GPS devices, canal diggers), office facilities and equipment needed to
                         service Project irrigation schemes.
                         (iii)    Water delivery management improvement - technical assistance for the introduction of
                         improved methods for estimating crop water requirements, scheduling and monitoring water
                         deliveries well as training of UASCG staff on this topic;
                         (iv)     Water delivery technology improvement - computer programs for calculating crop water and
                         irrigation requirements (such as Crop Wat from FAO), IT upgrading and measuring devices for
                         improved water delivery in Project selected schemes;
                         (v)      Irrigation service plans and performance based service agreements - Technical assistance to
                         prepare guidelines on irrigation service plans and service agreements between UASCG and their
                         clients for each scheme, as well as delivery of training to UASCG staff on this topic. The service
                         agreements would define water delivery and maintenance performance standards as a basis for
                         payment system and arrangements for dispute resolution.
                         (vi)     Billing system technology improvements -IT software and equipment upgrading to improve
                         billing and financial management systems as well as trainin g of staff in how to use improved billing
                         systems.

                                                                      Page 3 of 15
                         IV.      Preparation of Operation, Maintenance and Financing Plans for Each Scheme. The plan will
                         include: (i) preparation of a costed operation and maintenance schedule; (ii) an estimate of full
Public Disclosure Copy




                         operation and maintenance costs for the scheme, to be included in the annual budget of the
                         organization responsible for maintenance; and (iii) calculation of the relative contribution to
                         operation and maintenance costs from irrigation service fees from farmers and government subsidies
                         to that organization.

                         V.      Institutional Arrangements for On-Farm Service Delivery: On-farm irrigation services will
                         be provided by the UASCG until such time as water users indicate their interest in participating in
                         on-farm water management. During the transition period the Project will raise awareness of options
                         for on-farm irrigation service amongst water users and assist them to determine the most suitable
                         options. There Project will explore options for service delivery both in terms of the range of
                         functions undertaken by the WUO and how the WUO employs resources to undertake these
                         functions.

                         VI.     Preparation of annual UASCG Business Plans for 2015/16.

                         Component 2 - Land Market Development (US$3.5 million IDA Credit)

                         The Component will finance the pilot phase of the Strategy and Draft Action Plan for Reform Land
                         Registration June 2013 (hereafter the Draft Action Plan). The key elements of the Component
                         include:

                         A. Policy Development - the expected result of which will be: (i) Recommended policies and
                         associated legal reforms, which would define how different land possession scenarios would be dealt
                         with under the pilot. This would include defining standards for evidence in the absence of primary
                         documentation, simplifying registration in inheritance cases, setting procedures for regularizing
                         occupied areas which are larger or smaller than the size allocated in original privatization, rules for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         discriminating state and municipal properties, and streamlining conflict resolution procedures. (ii)
                         Recommended revisions to those policies, legal reforms and dispute resolution mechanisms at the
                         end of the pilot as a basis for the nationwide implementation. The Project would finance international
                         and local TA and operating expenses of a Land Reform Unit (LRU) to be established under NAPR to
                         implement this component.

                         B. Pilot Registration - the expected result of which will be registered land titles for all land plots
                         included in the pilot. A number of pilot districts will be selected for the pilot based a classification of
                         the variety of land tenure situations in the country, and implement pilot registration in these locations
                         over a 30 month period The Draft Action Plan calls for an initial focus on only agricultural lands in
                         rural areas and the pilot will therefore initially focus exclusively on agricultural land. Eight areas
                         containing a total of about 28,000 parcels have been preliminarily selected for piloting. Expansion of
                         the pilots to adjoining non-agricultural lands in rural areas may be considered as a subsequent phase
                         of pilots, to be funded by government outside the Project, if a policy consensus for doing so becomes
                         clear. Results from pilots will inform the design of national roll-out of land registration in years 2-5
                         of the project. The Project would finance salaries of additional short term NAPR and other staff and
                         associated operating costs, private surveyor contracts, surveying equipment, computer hardware and
                         software, and international and local technical assistance for the key elements of the pilot which
                         include: (i) training of staff and surveyors; (ii) public awareness and social mobilization; (iii) land
                         title document collection; (iv) surveying land plots; (v) updating maps and registration documents;

                                                                        Page 4 of 15
                         (vii) dispute resolution; and (viii) registration and issue of electronic certificates.

                         C. Impact Evaluation - the expected result of which will be a quantitative assessment of joint and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         individual impact of land reform and irrigation rehabilitation on land transactions, land disputes, land
                         investment, productivity and profitability. The Project would finance a contract with a local survey
                         company and supporting international and local TA.

                         Component 3 - Project Management (US$1.8 million including US$1.3million IDA Credit and US
                         $0.50 million IFAD Loan)
                         This component would finance overall project management, including coordination and technical
                         supervision of the implementation, financial management, procurement, and monitoring and
                         reporting on implementation progress. The Project will be implemented by the Project
                         Implementation Unit, which will be established by the MoA.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will be implemented county-wide. Individual investments may be made in any irrigated
                         and drained area of the country. Most of these investments will not be finally selected by the time of
                         Project preparation. Three irrigation schemes have been already selected for irrigation rehabilitation:
                         Kvemo Samgori Scheme in Kakheti Region, Tbisi-Kumisi Scheme in Kvemo Kartli Region and
                         Zeda Ru Scheme in Shida Kartli Region.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)
                         Joanna Peace De Berry (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              The Project will help to improve irrigation and
                          BP 4.01                                                drainage efficiency in several existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 deteriorated schemes. This would imply
                                                                                 rehabilitation or replacement of damaged
                                                                                 hydraulic structures, and cleaning and lining of
                                                                                 canals. No new schemes will be constructed and
                                                                                 no new agricultural areas will be covered with
                                                                                 irrigation/drainage services. Scheme
                                                                                 rehabilitation will improve service provision to
                                                                                 the areas currently covered and could allow
                                                                                 service delivery to some of the areas previously
                                                                                 served, but later cut-off due to deterioration of the
                                                                                 infrastructure. The Project will improve
                                                                                 efficiency of water use by decreasing water loss
                                                                                 during transportation through the rehabilitation
                                                                                 and upgrading of damaged canals, and by
                                                                                 educating, training and advising farmers on
                                                                                 optimal planning of irrigation and the use of new
                                                                                 technologies. Activities proposed for the Project
                                                                                 support trigger OP/BP 4.01 Environmental
                                                                                 Assessment. Based on the nature and scope of the



                                                                         Page 5 of 15
                                                                     planned physical works, the Project is classified
                                                                     through environmental screening as Category B.
                                                                     Its expected environmental and social impacts are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     low to medium. The Project does not carry risks
                                                                     of destroying natural habitats, damaging forest
                                                                     stands, significantly altering hydrology of the
                                                                     natural waterways, or affecting other ecosystems
                                                                     in any tangible and/or irreversible ways.

                                                                     The Project will support works on the schemes
                                                                     most of which are not identified at the Project
                                                                     preparation phase, though the nature and scope of
                                                                     these works are well known upfront and will be
                                                                     mostly similar in various locations. An
                                                                     Environmental and Social Management
                                                                     Framework (ESMF) was developed to cover all
                                                                     key aspects of screening, risk assessment,
                                                                     environmental evaluation and management
                                                                     planning of the schemes to be rehabilitated.
                                                                     Environmental screening of sub-project proposals
                                                                     will be part of their selection for the Project
                                                                     support. Screening will imply examination of
                                                                     water availability for the proposed irrigation
                                                                     schemes. ESMF provides sufficient information
                                                                     on the expected impacts and needed mitigation
                                                                     measures of all proposed investments. Depending
                                                                     on the complexity and associated risks of
                                                                     individual sub-projects, their environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     assessment (EA) may be required, resulting in the
                                                                     production of an EA report, including an
                                                                     Environmental Management Plan (EMP). In most
                                                                     cases, though, it is expected that completion of a
                                                                     simplified Environmental Management Plan
                                                                     Checklist for Irrigation Reconstruction Activities
                                                                     would be sufficient. ESMF carries detailed
                                                                     guidance on the selection and application of
                                                                     relevant tools for environmental review and
                                                                     mitigation planning.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes           The project aims at improving water availability
                                                                     and drainage for the serviced areas and, possibly,
                                                                     restoration of some agricultural areas back to
                                                                     irrigation/drainage. It is anticipated that because
                                                                     of improved services delivery, agriculture will


                                                             Page 6 of 15
                                                                         intensify in the coverage areas, which could entail
                                                                         more intensive usage of pesticides. Hence, OP
                                                                         4.09 Pest Management is triggered despite the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         fact that the Project will not finance their
                                                                         purchase and/or support to their application.
                                                                         While there is no need to develop a Pest
                                                                         Management Plan, promotion of good pest and
                                                                         pesticide management practices, including
                                                                         Integrated Pest Management (IPM), will be
                                                                         supported by complementary projects including
                                                                         (i) the parallel GEF/ IFAD financed Enhancement
                                                                         of Agricultural Resilience and Competitiveness
                                                                         Project which will involve field demonstrations in
                                                                         the project area including on integrated pest
                                                                         management and (ii) USAID support for the
                                                                         development of the national extension service
                                                                         which is also expected to include development of
                                                                         extension and training material for integrated pest
                                                                         management which will be delivered in the
                                                                         Project area. Under the Project, an extension plan
                                                                         for each scheme will be prepared defining the
                                                                         agricultural extension activities to be undertaken
                                                                         by GEF, USAID or other projects in the project
                                                                         areas, including in relation to pest management,
                                                                         to ensure that farmers are adequately informed
                                                                         about best practice on past management.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            Because the Project will not finance any new
                         BP 4.11                                         construction, no negative impacts on the known
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         physical cultural assets is expected. Likelihood of
                                                                         encountering chance finds is also modest, because
                                                                         no much excavation works will be required for
                                                                         rehabilitation of the existing irrigation schemes or
                                                                         provision of small flood control structures.
                                                                         However, if any archaeological finds are
                                                                         encountered in the course of earth works, the
                                                                         contractor will be mandated to immediately take
                                                                         activity on hold and inform the client. The client
                                                                         will contact the State Agency for Protection of
                                                                         Historical and Cultural Monuments and seek
                                                                         guidance on the further course of action. Works
                                                                         may resume only after receiving formal
                                                                         permission from the State Agency for Protection
                                                                         of Historical and Cultural Monuments.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           Under Component 1, the rehabilitation of
                         4.12                                            primary-, secondary- and tertiary-level irrigation


                                                                 Page 7 of 15
                                                                   infrastructure may necessitate land acquisition,
                                                                   although every attempt will be made to agree
                                                                   rehabilitation design plans that minimize land
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   acquisitions. The policy is triggered and a
                                                                   Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been
                                                                   prepared for the Component and will be disclosed
                                                                   in country and via the World Bank prior to
                                                                   Appraisal. Should land acquisition be required,
                                                                   the RPF will guide the development of site
                                                                   specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) to
                                                                   ensure that the possible risks of resettlement, loss
                                                                   of land and loss of income are mitigated.

                                                                   Under Component 2, the piloting of the land
                                                                   registration process may require resolving cases
                                                                   where landowners have extended their residences
                                                                   or land use onto State-owned land. Formalization
                                                                   of ownership could result in people losing access
                                                                   to State-owned land with adverse economic
                                                                   impacts. Rather than applying OP4.12 to this
                                                                   component however, it is agreed that a ‘Country
                                                                   Systems’ approach should be followed. In this
                                                                   case the country system to be evaluated for
                                                                   equivalence and acceptability (per OP 4.00) are
                                                                   the Land Reform Strategy and Action Plan and
                                                                   Operations Manual, which will set out the policy
                                                                   and standards to address such cases of loss of
                                                                   access to land, and the institutional mechanism
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   which is being set up to implement them.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   Yes           Some of the irrigation schemes to be rehabilitated
                                                                   under the ILMD Project are fed with water from
                                                                   the existing reservoirs. No new reservoirs will be
                                                                   constructed under the project, but because
                                                                   operation of some Project-supported schemes will
                                                                   depend on the integrity of the dams of the existing
                                                                   reservoirs, OP/BP 4.37 Safety of Dams is
                                                                   triggered. It means that for any scheme included
                                                                   for rehabilitation into the ILMD Project’s work
                                                                   program and dependent on a dam-supported
                                                                   reservoir, technical condition of such dam, as well
                                                                   as its operation and maintenance pattern will be
                                                                   examined and remedial actions will be undertaken
                                                                   as part of the Project, as required. More
                                                                   specifically, due diligence for ensuring dam
                                                                   safety may include updating of the dam safety
                                                                   information, undertaking physical works and/or
                                                                   providing additional equipment to address critical



                                                           Page 8 of 15
                                                                                issues of dam safety, and establishing a dam
                                                                                safety panel to review dams-related
                                                                                documentation and advise on the required actions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International           Yes             Most of the irrigation schemes of East Georgia,
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                including those provisionally identified for the
                                                                                Project support, abstract water from trans-
                                                                                boundary rivers Mtkvari and Alazani, or their
                                                                                tributaries. Water drained from the agricultural
                                                                                lands in West Georgia is discharged to the rivers
                                                                                draining into the Black Sea. Project interventions
                                                                                will not increase water intake or discharge beyond
                                                                                the designed parameters of the existing schemes,
                                                                                because they will be strictly limited to the
                                                                                rehabilitation of the existing irrigation and
                                                                                drainage infrastructure without altering of their
                                                                                original capacities. Therefore, while OP/BP 7.50
                                                                                Projects on International Waterways is triggered,
                                                                                communication between the riparian states on the
                                                                                project interventions is deemed unnecessary. An
                                                                                exception to notification is sought by the Project
                                                                                team from ECAVP and the memo requesting an
                                                                                exception has been cleared by LEGEN and
                                                                                LEGLE.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 The Ministry of Agriculture has provided written
                            7.60                                                confirmation that Project investments will not
                                                                                take place in Project disputes areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Under Component 1, the ILMD Project will help to improve irrigation and drainage efficiency in
                              several existing deteriorated schemes and provide small flood control structures mostly aimed at
                              safeguarding these target schemes from secondary damage after re-entering into operation. This
                              would imply rehabilitation or replacement of damaged hydraulic structures; cleaning and lining of
                              canals; arrangement of gabions, check dams, embankments, and dikes for headworks, main canals,
                              secondary canals and tertiary canals. No new schemes will be constructed and no new agricultural
                              areas will be covered with irrigation/drainage services. Scheme rehabilitation will improve service
                              provision to the areas currently covered and could allow service delivery to some of the areas
                              previously served, but later cut-off due to deterioration of the infrastructure. The Project will
                              improve efficiency of water use by decreasing water loss during transportation through the
                              rehabilitation and upgrading of damaged canals, and by educating, training and advising farmers
                              on optimal planning of irrigation and the use of new technologies. Its expected environmental and
                              social impacts are low to medium. The Project does not carry risks of destroying natural habitats,
                              damaging forest stands, significantly altering hydrology of the natural waterways, or affecting
                              other ecosystems in any tangible and/or irreversible ways.



                                                                        Page 9 of 15
                          Construction-phase impacts of the Project activities will be typical for rehabilitation of the existing
                          irrigation schemes, limited in time, and mostly contained within the work sites. Social impacts of
                          works in the section of canals, where encroachment to the right-of-way has happened in the past,
Public Disclosure Copy




                          may be the most sensitive impact of the construction phase. If service roads are impassible, or
                          access to irrigation infrastructure is otherwise restricted to the extent that the planned works
                          cannot be undertaken without affecting people's economic activity and/or residence, then
                          involuntary resettlement will occur. The borrower will then be challenged to provide full
                          compensation according to the guiding principles of OP/BP 4.12, RPF developed for this project,
                          and the requirements of the national legislation.

                          Under Component 2, the piloting of the land registration process may require resolving a small
                          number of cases where landowners have extended their residences or land use onto State-owned
                          land. Formalization of ownership could result in people losing access to State-owned land with
                          adverse economic impacts. Addressing this scenario has implications for the project, where the
                          adverse impact will need to be mitigated, but also poses a land access issue with national level
                          implications – requiring a strategic national policy response. Therefore a ‘Country Systems’
                          approach will be followed. In this case the country system to be evaluated for equivalence and
                          acceptability (per OP 4.00) are the Land Reform Strategy and Action Plan (LRSAP) and
                          Operations Manual (OM), which are to be developed under the Project, The challenge for the
                          client will be to develop the LRSAP and OM to also adhere to OP 4.12.

                           At the operation stage of the irrigation schemes to be rehabilitated under the Project, avoiding
                           possible negative impacts of water logging, intensified agriculture, and excessive intake of water
                           from natural aquifers would be important. The borrower will also have to safely maintain dams
                           that support reservoirs feeding the irrigation schemes, apply a basic mechanism for detecting and
                           addressing irrigation water quality issues, provide enabling environment for affordability of water
                           fees, and mediate conflicts for water use that may arise in future.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                           Implementation of the ILMD Project will not directly influence competition for water use, because
                           rehabilitation of schemes under the Project will not imply increase of water intake by the schemes.
                           However, operation of the rehabilitated schemes in future may be affected by intensified water use
                           upstream, or economic development downstream may cause increase demand for water which will
                           be limited during irrigation season due to operation of irrigation schemes. This may potentially
                           trigger conflicts between water users and hinder growth unless watershed management planning is
                           consistently applied.

                          Flood irrigation is the main technique used in Georgia. Over the extended periods of time, it may
                          potentially cause soil erosion and salinization through water logging. Therefore, some areas under
                          flood irrigation will require existence and proper operation of drainage systems. Application of
                          flood irrigation method in the areas with highly percolating soils, high ground water table and
                          saline lower layers of soil will have to be excluded to avoid soil degradation and economic loss to
                          agriculture.

                          Rehabilitation of the irrigation infrastructure will result in better yields, may lead to diversification
                          of crops, and eventually increase incomes of rural families from agriculture. Along with highly
                          positive social impacts of the above, activation of agro-production in better irrigated areas and
                          land plots brought back to production as a result of resumed irrigation services may lead to


                                                                      Page 10 of 15
                          increase in use of agrochemicals. Handling and application of pesticides carries risks to the heath
                          of people exposed to pesticides, consumers of the products farmed with the use of pesticides, and
                          may damage environment (soils, surface water, and ground water) with hazardous pollutants. In
Public Disclosure Copy




                          order to reduce public health and environmental risks of excessive, unsafe, or improper use of
                          pesticides the project beneficiary farmers will be provided with information on the IPM principles
                          and guidelines on safe storing, handling, and application of pesticides. This will be delivered by
                          two complementary projects: including (i) the parallel GEF/ IFAD financed Enhancement of
                          Agricultural Resilience and Competitiveness Project which will involve field demonstrations in
                          the project area including on integrated pest management and (ii) USAID support for the
                          development of the national extension service which is also expected to include development of
                          extension and training material for integrated pest management which will be delivered in the
                          Project area.

                           UASCG operates based on licenses for water intake issued by the Ministry of Environmental and
                           Natural Resources Protection. However, the licensing procedure is not based on the environmental
                           impact assessment of the permitted intake. There is no national standard or formally adopted
                           methodology for defining an ecological water flow to be maintained in natural water bodies by any
                           types of water users. Therefore, the risk of damage to river ecosystems from water intake and
                           discharge by irrigation schemes does exist. The licenses held by UASCG are valid till 2015, for
                           the water intake from specific river basins for the needs of specific irrigation schemes. These
                           licenses represent the primary tool of regulation of water use, however they are based on water
                           demand and on the scheme’s design capacity of water intake rather than on the scientifically
                           worked out amounts of ecological water flow required for sustaining aquatic ecosystems. At
                           present, MENRP is in the process aligning the national environmental legislation with the guiding
                           principles adopted in the EU. The new Water Law is in works, and MENRP is striving for the
                           adoption of conventional new methodology for establishing ecological water flow in surface water
                           bodies. It is expected that by the time of expiry of the licenses held by the UASCG, more
                           advanced rules of licensing will be in place, and will apply from 2015 onwards. The same is
                           expectation holds for regulation of discharged water quality.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The Project was designed to make interventions only to those irrigation schemes, rehabilitation of
                           which would not lead to the increase of water abstraction as compared to the originally designed
                           capacity of schemes. This choice was made to ensure that the Project financed activities would not
                           result in adverse environmental and social impacts, because increased water intake might result in
                           deterioration of aquatic ecosystems of rivers and/or increased competition for water use.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The borrower developed an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and for
                           Component 1 - a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to lay out guiding principles for carrying
                           out environmental and social screening of the proposed sub-projects, assessing their potential
                           impacts, selecting measures for mitigating negative impacts, and monitoring application of these
                           mitigation measures. Three site-specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) were also
                           produced for the schemes already identified for rehabilitation under the Project. All of these
                           safeguard documents were shared with and approved by the Bank. ESMF carries instructions for
                           works providers on the course of action in an unlikely case of chance finds during earth works.
                           RPF provides guidance on the development of Resettlement Action Plans (RPFs) if rehabilitation
                           of irrigation canals cannot be undertaken without temporary or permanent restriction of the land

                                                                    Page 11 of 15
                          use by its private owners, or if any other possible types of impacting private property occur. For
                          Component 2, the client will develop the LRSAP and the OM so that it meets OP 4.12
                          requirements. The appropriateness of the legal/policy framework and the effectiveness of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          institutional structures and performance will be assured by the WB's direct involvement in
                          developing and deploying them. In addition, a legal covenant under the project will state that
                          LRSAP and Operations Manual are to be satisfactory to the Bank and to contain policies and
                          procedures of equivalence with OP 4.12.

                          Because some of the schemes to be rehabilitated under the ILMD Project depend on the dam-
                          supported reservoirs, the borrower agreed to include assessing of dam's safety and addressing
                          outstanding issues, if found, into the Project design. The borrower is committed to establish a dam
                          safety panel, following the guiding principles of OP/BP 4.37, by the time when designing of the
                          TA and possible delivery of works and/or goods for the improvement of dam safety commences
                          according to the Project implementation plan.

                          Some agricultural areas, which had been out of irrigation due to deteriorated infrastructure, will be
                          brought back to irrigation as a result of ILMD Project implementation. This is likely to stimulate
                          agro-production, and subsequently – the use of pesticides. The borrower is committed to explore
                          synergies with other projects and to provide its own support to water user associations in the
                          promotion of sound pesticide use practices, including Integrated Pest Management (IPM).

                          For Component 1, the MoA will be the Project implementing agency. It has acted in this capacity
                          for several Bank-supported projects in the past. This Ministry also has vast experience of
                          collaborating with other multilateral and bilateral development agencies. It is expected that a
                          Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established within the MoA for Component 1 and will
                          be responsible for fiduciary management, monitoring and evaluation. Key technical partners will
                          be the Amelioration Policy Department and the Land Department of the MoA, Because the
                          previous Bank-financed projects implemented by the MoA closed several years ago and the
                          Ministry underwent series of institutional reforms since then, MoA currently has no in-house
Public Disclosure Copy




                          capacity of safeguards management and will have to create in within the PIU, once established.
                          Either staff members or consultants of PIU shall be designated for facilitating development of
                          safeguards documents for the Project investments, overseeing adherence of the Project-financed
                          works to the safeguard policies, conducting environmental and social monitoring of the Project
                          implementation, and reporting on the monitoring outcomes. Creating institutional capacity of PIU,
                          satisfactory to the Bank, will be a condition for the Project effectiveness and its maintenance will
                          be mandatory throughout the Project life.

                           For Component 2 the Ministry of Justice (MOJ) will be the implementing agency. The key
                           implementing partner will be the National Agency for Public Registry (NAPR) which will act as
                           the Project Implementation Unit for this component. NAPR will hire consultants with relevant
                           experience in management of Bank project, given that they have no recent experience of
                           managing Bank projects.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           MoA, MoJ, NAPR, Ministry of Regional Development and Infrastructure, UASCG, municipalities
                           of farmers' settlements that use irrigation services, Water User Associations, and individual users
                           of irrigation services are the Project stakeholders.



                                                                    Page 12 of 15
                           MoA prepared ESMF and RPF in a participatory manner, receiving inputs from key stakeholders.
                           These documents, along with the three site-specific EMPs, while in draft, were publicly disclosed
                           through the MoA's web page. Hard copies of EMPs in Georgian language were made available at
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the local municipalities. Public consultation meetings were held in Tbilisi, to discuss ESFM and
                           RPF with the national stakeholders, including governmental and non-governmental sectors.
                           Consultations with the Project affected people were held on the site-specific EMPs in Kvemo
                           Kartli Schem❅ (Kakheti region), Tbisi Kumisi Scheme (Kvemo Karti region), and Zeda Ru
                           scheme (Shida Kartli region). The documents were finalized afterwards and the minutes of public
                           consultation meetings were attached. The same procedures will be applicable to all site-specific
                           EMPs and RAPs, if required, throughout the Project life.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 19-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              29-Jan-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Georgia                                                     29-Jan-2014
                           Comments: Disclosed on MOA website and verify by Bank team. Letter of confirmation from
                                         MOA received.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 07-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              29-Jan-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Georgia                                                     29-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: Disclosed on MOA website and verify by Bank team. Letter of confirmation from
                                         MOA received.
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?              NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              NA
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment



                                                                   Page 13 of 15
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?



                                                                    Page 14 of 15
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Peter Goodman
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                          Date: 30-Jan-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Suzy H. Yoon-Yildiz (SM)                     Date: 31-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    Page 15 of 15
