INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA1200
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Jan-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Kenya                      Project ID:  P151816
Project Name: Financial Sector Support Project (P151816)
Task Team       Smita Wagh
Leader(s):
Estimated       10-Feb-2015                Estimated    30-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFMDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General finance sector (100%)
Theme(s):       Other Financial Sector Development (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      37.00            Total Bank Financing:   37.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                37.00
Total                                                                      37.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project's development objective is to strengthen the legal, regulatory and institutional
environment for improved financial stability, access to and provision of affordable and long term
financing.
3. Project Description
World Bank support to financial sector development in Kenya over the last decade was delivered
Page 1 of4


﻿largely, but not entirely, under the umbrella of the Financial and Legal Sector Technical Assistance
project (FLSTAP). FLSTAP was approved in October 2004 as a technical assistance loan with an
IDA credit of USD 18 million and DFID co-financing of USD 10 million. The overall development
objective (PDO) of the project was to create a sound financial system and strengthened legal
O
U         framework and judicial capacity that would ensure broad access to financial and related legal
services. When the Project closed in March 2013 almost all of the PDO indicators have been
achieved and in some cases even exceeded expectations.
The new operation will build on the gains realized through FLSTAP. It will take into account the
progress made on the stability and access front by the financial sector over the duration of the project
and the evolving needs of the financial and real sector. The Project will support the Kenyan
authorities in further developing regulatory and supervisory frameworks that continue to be effective
in mitigating the new risks associated with the financial sector's rapid development, deepening and
expansion across sectors and across borders. It will support the upgrade of the supervisory,
regulatory and institutional framework to keep pace with more complex markets and products with
the overall objective of cementing stability.
In addition, Kenya's financial sector is also now at the stage where it would benefit from a more
targeted approach that supports solutions to specific constraints that curtail the growth and job
creation potential of the Kenyan private sector. These constraints include:
(a)    availability of "affordable" credit to businesses especially SMEs
(b)    scarcity of term finance to address Kenya's development needs
The four main thematic areas/components proposed are as follows:
a.     Component 1 - Strengthening Institutions: This component will focus on the overarching
reform, modernization, and capacity support to the financial sector institutional framework. This
component will deliver technical assistance to the various beneficiaries, mostly in the form of
consultancies, to design roadmaps and action plans, and implementation support to realize the
planned reforms. It will also support the upgrade of IT systems and deliver capacity support to ensure
a more effective functioning of the financial architecture.
b.     Component 2 - Enabling Efficient Financial Intermediation: This component will move
forward the financial inclusion agenda in Kenya with a focus on strengthening and making more
transparent the pricing of financial intermediation (savings and lending) so that more businesses and
a        individuals have access to affordable financial products.
c.     Component 3 - Mobilization of Long-term Finance: This component will focus on
strengthening the demand for and supply of long-term funds so that Kenya's growing development
finance needs for long-term projects in infrastructure, housing, etc. can be met.
d.     Component 4- Supporting Project Management: Funds will be allocated for the purposes of
project management.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Kenya-nationwide
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Edward Felix Dwumfour (GENDR)
Svetlana Khvostova (GENDR)
Page 2 of 4


﻿6. Safeguard Policies  Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental          No           The project screening did not identify any proposed
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               activities with adverse direct or indirect environmental or
U                                 social impacts. It is proposed that the project is assigned
the EA Category C.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36     No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural      No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP   No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed   No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
0
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
o          and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
N/A
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A
B. Disclosure Requirements
Page 3 of 4


﻿If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
N/A
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ x ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
O
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Smita Wagh
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name:                                      Date:
*         Practice Manager/      Name:                                      Date:
Manager:
Page 4 of 4


