                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6379
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Ghana                              Project ID:    P145741
                            Project Name:     Ghana Secondary Education Improvement Project (P145741)
                            Task Team         Deborah Newitter Mikesell
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         21-Mar-2014                        Estimated   20-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTEW                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Secondary education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (50%), Education for the knowledge economy (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       155.00                Total Bank Financing:       155.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              155.00
                              Total                                                                                    155.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to increase access to upper secondary education in
                           underserved school districts and improve quality in low-performing senior high schools in Ghana.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project would support senior secondary education through a five-year US$155 million
                           Investment Project Financing (IPF) instrument using a results-based-funding approach.

                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         Component 1: Support to Increase Access with Equity and Quality in SHS (estimated cost US$140.4
                         million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1 uses a results-based financing (RBF) modality. Disbursements up to a capped absolute
                         amount will be made against specific line items in the Education sector annual budgets, referred to as
                         eligible expenditure programs (EEPs). These disbursements will be conditioned on achievement of
                         specified results, as measured by disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs). A matrix of indicators has
                         been developed to measure performance annually and monitor the results achieved.

                         Policies and interventions to be supported under the first component of SEIP are grouped into two
                         pillars: (i) increasing access with equity (geographic, gender, poverty, etc.); and (ii) enhancing
                         quality of low performing SHS.

                         Pillar 1: Increase Access with Equity: The objective of this pillar is to improve access to senior
                         secondary education and improve equity in underserved districts and subsidize students especially
                         girls and those from low income households. This pillar will support and monitor key activities to
                         accomplish these goals through the construction of new schools and the improvement and expansion
                         of existing schools where demand is high and the schools have inadequate facilities to absorb and
                         retain students.

                         The SEIP is expected to finance results of the Government’s program to expand space through the
                         construction of new senior secondary schools in underserved areas, rehabilitation and expansion of
                         existing low performing schools and through support for SHS attainment of disadvantaged students.
                         The Government plans include new construction in the 14 districts where there are no current
                         operating public SHS. In addition, using the agreed selection criteria for eligible student population
                         compared with available school capacity (effective demand) combined with district level poverty
                         indicators, an additional number of districts have been identified for new construction. The ultimate
                         objective is to create new spaces for those demanding seats in SHS and to fill these spaces with new
Public Disclosure Copy




                         students coming from previously underserved communities. In addition to new schools, this
                         component would focus on improving existing SHS, particularly those with capacity for expansion,
                         meeting criteria of school age population not attending SHS, and poverty criteria in addition to a
                         needs assessment which will determine level of deficiency (bathrooms, science labs, computer
                         facilities, etc.). This pillar will improve the government’s targeting of resources to support increased
                         access focusing on the first several years of the longer term secondary education strategy (which
                         aims for universal access). Demand side investments to encourage girls’ attendance and subsidize
                         poorer students will also be expected to contribute to improving access and equity.

                         Given the operation’s focus on under-served areas and promoting access with equity, disbursement
                         will be linked to indicators (disbursement linked indicators) that measure increases in seat
                         availability in these targeted locations for new construction. In addition a second indicator would be
                         used to measure progress of utilization of existing schools where new seats are made available in
                         selected schools. Targeting resources for girls and students from low income families in underserved
                         communities would strengthen equity reforms. The release of IDA credit funds will be linked to
                         achievement of the following DLIs: (i) selection based on targeting of school expansion in
                         underserved school districts (DLI1); (ii) increasing new seats for SHS students in underserved school
                         districts (DLI 2); (iii) increasing utilized seats in existing low-performing schools (DLI 3); and (iv)
                         increasing enrolment in SHS in targeted districts (for girls and low-income students) (DLI 4).



                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         Pillar 2: Enhancing Quality in low-performing Senior High Schools: The objective of this pillar is to
                         improve the quality of SHS, with a focus on math and science education in selected low performing
                         schools. The SEIP would also strengthen school management, leadership and expansion of ICT in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         selected schools. The low performing schools typically have inadequate: infrastructure, management,
                         equipment, learning resources and sourcesof internally generated funding. In order to improve
                         quality, the Project will support the government’s program to (i) strengthen school management,
                         leadership and accountability; (ii) target interventions to improve the quality of science and math
                         education; and (iii) introduce School Performance Partnerships based on School Improvement Plans.
                         In addition to school-based quality inputs, training and financing, this pillar will support the
                         systematic collection and publication of school data for stakeholders, (i.e., parents, guardians and
                         wards to make better informed decisions about the choice of senior secondary school to attend.

                         The School Performance partnerships would develop mutual accountability between school
                         management and the MOE to improve learning performance with the commitment from government
                         agencies to provide the necessary resources and the responsibility of schools to implement quality
                         improvement activities with verifiable outcomes.

                         The focus on math and science subjects is aligned with the government strategy to encourage these
                         program areas throughout all education levels (STEM policy citation). The expansion of ICT
                         wireless connectivity would also allow strengthened science, math and other subject education
                         through digital content for teachers and students. Schools will have access to an education portal
                         where teachers and students can utilize multiple online resources that are expected to support
                         improved teaching and learning. ICT will be used for intensive in-service support to teachers to
                         improve content knowledge as well as lesson plan preparation, teaching and learning aids, and videos
                         on good teaching practices and classroom management. The portal could also serve as a platform for
                         knowledge exchange with national and international networks and for participation in relevant
                         discussion forums. The SEIP will provide connectivity to an additional 125secondary schools.

                         As an intermediate result, completion rates in the targeted schools would be expected to increase. A
Public Disclosure Copy




                         longer term impact would be an increase in student achievement as measured by performance in the
                         WASSCE which is a year 4 DLI. For this pillar, release of IDA credit funds would be linked to the
                         achievement of the following DLIs: (i) annual publication of School Performance Report (DLI 5);
                         (ii) School Performance Partnerships in 125 beneficiary schools (DLI 6); and (iii) improved learning
                         outcomes in low-performing beneficiary schools (DLI 7).

                         Component 2: Management, Research and Monitoring and Evaluation (estimated total cost US$14.6
                         million): This component aims to strengthen the implementation capacity of the Ministry of
                         Education and Ghana Education Service and its related implementing agencies and assist them to
                         achieve the objectives of the Government’s SHS strategy. This component will support monitoring
                         and evaluation, coordination, planning, communication, financial management, procurement, and
                         safeguards. In addition it will support an active and evolving research agenda to continue to inform
                         Government SHS policy, particularly with regard to financing, social targeting, quality initiatives,
                         teacher rationalization, and curriculum relevance. This component would complement
                         implementation of the program pillars with ongoing analyses, strengthening data collection for
                         school mapping, and establish priorities for new construction, renovations and maintenance. The
                         establishment of a web platform for school reporting and real time monitoring of all SHS
                         implementation activities would enhance and strengthen the Education Management Information
                         System (EMIS) and ongoing school mapping in order to help government report on achievement of
                         results. In addition, funding will be provided to support the independent verification of disbursement

                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                         linked indicators and achievement of results. Support would also be provided to help the MOE to
                         design and realize policy reforms, including piloting and evaluating innovative approaches. This
                         component would finance training, recruitment of short and long-term technical experts, procurement
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of goods needed for specific activities, and incremental operating costs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project supports the Government strategy to expand access to secondary education in
                         underserved communities by constructing new schools, expanding enrollment in under subscribed
                         and low performing schools, and targeting girls and students from low income families to attend
                         SHS. The project also aims to improve the quality of existing selected low performing schools. The
                         expected increases in enrollment and learning outcomes are targeted to previously underserved
                         communities and schools that are neediest.

                         Environment and social safeguards issues are addressed using an Environment and Social
                         Management Framework (ESMF). New school construction will be supported under the project and
                         the sites are not yet known. Therefore, a Resettlement Policy Framework is also prepared. Site
                         selection for school construction will seek to encourage equity targeting while avoiding resettlement.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Kenneth M. Green (OPSOR)
                         Paula F. Lytle (AFTCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              Potential environmental and social impacts
                          BP 4.01                                             resulting from project activities are related to
                                                                              school infrastructure rehabilitation, expansion and
                                                                              new construction. These planned activities
                                                                              trigger the Environment Assessment OP 4.10.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              Since the exact location of investments and/or
                                                                              services is not yet known, Government of Ghana
                                                                              has finalized an Environmental and Social
                                                                              Management Framework (ESMF) which was
                                                                              disclosed. Environmental and Social Management
                                                                              Plans will be prepared during project
                                                                              implementation.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No               This project does not involve or affect natural
                                                                              habitats.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No               This project does not involve or affect forests or
                                                                              forestry.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09            No               This project does not involve pest management.

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No               This project does not involve physical cultural
                          BP 4.11                                             resources.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No               There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                              areas.
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes              Resettlement policy will be triggered as school


                                                                      Page 4 of 7
                            4.12                                                  construction may require land acquisition. A
                                                                                  Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was
                                                                                  finalized by the government, consulted upon, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  disclosed in country and at the World Bank
                                                                                  Infoshop. Once sites are selected during
                                                                                  implementation, RAPs will be prepared in line
                                                                                  with the RPF, ans and when necessary. The
                                                                                  adoption of the RPF guidelines and procedures
                                                                                  will be validated during year 0 disbursement
                                                                                  linked indicators. Resettlement audits will be
                                                                                  conducted for sites which are already acquired or
                                                                                  in the process of acquisition between the Districts
                                                                                  and MoE.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No               N/A

                            Projects on International        No                   N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The components of the Ghana SEIP will be implemented by various organizations including
                              Government agencies, District Administrations, Architectural firms, and Construction Contractors.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The environmental concerns require that some aspects of project design and implementation and
                              tender and contractual document preparation should be environmentally sensitive. The
                              organization for the construction activities and implementation of the Ghana SEIP, will screen for
                              site selection; potential environmental and social impacts; mitigation of impacts; and to be able to
                              outline steps for monitoring of potential impacts, with a process for triggering subsequent
                              environmental and / or social assessments, where necessary.

                              There are no large scale, significant or irreversible impacts.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              There are no indirect and/or long term impacts due to any activities in the project area.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              For those new school subprojects, there will be screening and site selection provisions followed
                              that address negative environmental and social impacts applied on a one by one basis. Land
                              acquisition will be avoided, siting in low lying areas with potential flooding or in sensitive habitats
                              will be prohibited. The MoE also has in place an existing screening form to avoid land acquisition
                              where there are land disputes or where the land has cultural heritage or sacred sites.




                                                                          Page 5 of 7
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The MOE will be responsible for establishing a set of procedures in a to- be- developed Technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Planning Guidelines that covers all aspects for new school construction as well as rehabilitation
                           including the environmental clauses to be inserted in contractors’ bidding documents. In addition,
                           MOE has already updated its environmental and social due diligence processes with a site
                           selection screening form and clarified all EPA submission and permit requirements. These
                           procedures are integrated with the principles established in the RPF in terms of land allocation etc.
                           MOE is committed to improving its capacity across these procedures by hiring environmental and
                           social specialists, conducting training across national, district and contractor actors as well as other
                           key community stakeholders.

                           All school construction activities including design and site selection, community engagement,
                           construction etc. will be documented and tracked over time for satisfactory completion of all
                           environmental and social requirements via internal and external third party audits and reporting
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           A team consisting of the staff of Ministry of Education and representatives of the Environmental
                           Consulting Firm collected data for the consultations. Community opinion leaders such as
                           assemblymen/women, faith based organization leaders, youth leaders, chiefs, or headmen served
                           as key contacts to encourage meeting attendance. Meetings held at the community center were
                           interactive, with questions from the communities and answers and explanations from the
                           consultant and Ministry of Education Staff. The main issues discussed were regarding
                           compensations, job creation, and provision of schools.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           29-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        31-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           01-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        01-Apr-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                                                                       Page 6 of 7
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Deborah Newitter Mikesell
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                       Date: 03-Apr-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (SM)                         Date: 04-Apr-2014




                                                                        Page 7 of 7
