                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC7710

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                            Project ID:      P148071
                            Project Name:      Tongren Rural Transport Project (P148071)
                            Task Team          Holly Krambeck
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          16-Feb-2015                      Estimated        29-Sep-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        213.80                Total Bank Financing:         150.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      63.80
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        150.00
                              Total                                                                        213.80
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to improve transport accessibility in Dejiang and Sinan
                           counties in a sustainable manner.

                           This objective will be achieved through the upgrading of existing gravel/earth rural roads,
                           construction of new bridges, and implementation of rural road maintenance and management
                           activities. The project beneficiaries are rural road users and residents in the project area.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed Project is designed to improve rural accessibility in Dejiang and Sinan counties in
                           Tongren Municipality by upgrading of existing gravel/earth rural roads, construction of new bridges
Public Disclosure Copy




                           to connect villages separated by large rivers, and implementation of rural road maintenance and
                           management activities.

                           The Project proposal tentatively comprises four components:

                           Component 1: Rural Roads (USD 205.77million): Upgrading of 88 rural road segments to Class IV,
                           covering a total length of 705 km.

                           Component 2: Bridges (USD 5.78 million): Construction of bridges connecting existing roadways,
                           including: 12 medium-sized bridges with a total length of 631meters and 16 small bridges with a
                           total length of 359 meters.

                           Component 3: Rural Road Maintenance Stations (USD 2.00 million): Improvement and construction
                           of two rural road maintenance stations, one in Dejiang County and one in Sinan County.

                           Component 4: Capacity Building (USD 0.25 million): Training for 300 staff on management,
                           construction, and maintenance best practices.

                           These components will be further refined during Project preparation.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project is located in Dejiang and Sinan counties of Tongren Municipality in Guizhou Province,
                           southwestern China. The project region is dominated by mountainous terrain, with difficult and
                           inadequate accessibility to many townships and villages. The proposed Project will upgrade and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           renovate existing rural roads and construct medium and small bridges at ford locations of existing
                           rural roads.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           For construction and renovating rural roads, Tongren has experience in following well established
                           environmental assessment and land acquisition and resettlement procedures as per national laws/
                           regulations. However, this project is the first World Bank lending project in Tongren and the local
                           government has no prior experience with World Bank safeguard policies. To address this issue, the
                           PMO retained experienced environmental assessment (EA) and social assessment (SA) consultants
                           that have worked on previous World Bank projects in Guizhou Province for safeguards preparation,
                           and will engage environmental and social monitoring consultants to monitor implementation. The
                           Bank task team will provide training and guidance throughout the project preparation and
                           implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Peishen Wang (EASCS)
                           Jun Zeng (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                         Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          Component 1 of the Project will support
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                     upgrading of existing rural roads, i.e.,
                                                                     improvement of pavement on top of the existing
                                                                     road beds, with limited widening and curve
                                                                     straightening at locations where necessary.
                                                                     Component 2 will support construction of
                                                                     medium and small bridges at ford locations of
                                                                     existing rural roads, where vehicles currently
                                                                     traverse small rivers through shallow river beds.
                                                                     Component 3, road maintenance stations,
                                                                     includes expansion/upgrading of one existing
                                                                     road maintenance center in Dejiang and one
                                                                     new center in Sinan using an existing quarry
                                                                     site. It is envisaged that proposed project will
                                                                     have limited adverse environmental and social
                                                                     impacts due to limited civil works. These
                                                                     impacts are mostly construction related issues,
                                                                     e.g., nuisance of dust and noise, soil erosion,
                                                                     material borrow and waste spoil management,
                                                                     wastewater management, community impact,
                                                                     traffic disturbance and safety issues, etc. These
                                                                     impacts are site-specific and temporary in
                                                                     nature, unlikely to be significant and
                                                                     irreversible, and can be readily managed with
                                                                     known mitigation measures and good
                                                                     construction management. Therefore, this policy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     is triggered, and the Project is classified as a
                                                                     Category B project.

                                                                     The following EA documents will be prepared
                                                                     and submitted to the Bank:
                                                                     - An Environmental Impact Assessment Report
                                                                     to capture all relevant environmental impacts
                                                                     during both construction and operation stage;
                                                                     - A stand-alone Environmental Management
                                                                     Plan, which includes a set of generic
                                                                     Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP) for
                                                                     common issues of rural roads/bridges/
                                                                     maintenance centers, and sub-project specific
                                                                     measures (if any)
                                                                     - An Annex of compilation of individual EIA
                                                                     Forms for all rural roads, bridges and road
                                                                     maintenance centers.

                                                                     Among the potential environmental and social
                                                                     impacts, the EIA/EMP will give particular
                                                                 attention to the following issues:
                                                                 -        Environmental impacts of material
                                                                 borrow sites (sand pits, quarries where needed);
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 -        Location and operation management of
                                                                 mixing plants;
                                                                 -        Proper disposal of spoil material;
                                                                 -        Impacts on social sensitive receptors
                                                                 (such as villages and small towns with schools,
                                                                 hospitals, libraries, Government Offices, Old
                                                                 People’s Homes etc.) during both construction
                                                                 and operation;
                                                                 -        Alternative comparison for alignment
                                                                 selection, where applicable, to avoid geo-
                                                                 hazards locations with due consideration of
                                                                 environmental and social safeguards.

                                                                 The originally proposed Wenjiadian Bridge was
                                                                 removed from the Bank project due to design
                                                                 and financing concerns that could delay overall
                                                                 project preparation. Currently, there is no
                                                                 timeline for the bridge construction due to
                                                                 uncertainty of financing source. It is also not
                                                                 linked or near any rural roads under the Bank
                                                                 financed project. Therefore, no linkage or
                                                                 cumulative impact is envisaged.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   The project area is mountainous with rich
                                                                 vegetation, and the bridge construction will
                                                                 involve rivers. The EIA will need to carry out
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 ecological survey including sensitive areas to
                                                                 identify natural habitats in the project area. The
                                                                 determination of whether the policy is triggered
                                                                 or not will be done during preparation as part of
                                                                 the EIA preparation.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    Due to Project activities of upgrading existing
                                                                 rural roads and maintenance center sites, the
                                                                 project will not to affect any forests. The policy
                                                                 is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The Project does not involve the procurement or
                                                                 use of pesticides. The policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Screening of presence of Physical Cultural
                         BP 4.11                                 Resources will be conducted by detailed survey
                                                                 during EA and RAP preparation. Random
                                                                 survey procedures will be included in the EMP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    The Project will support the construction of
                                                                 rural roads in Dejiang County and Sinan County
                                                                 of Tongren Municipality of Guizhou Province.
                                                                Within Dejiang's population of 530,000,
                                                                432,000 are Tujia ethnic minority, accounting
                                                                for 82% of the total county population. Within
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                Sinan's 680,000 population, 150,000 residents
                                                                are Tujia ethnic minority, accounting for about
                                                                22% of the total county population. According
                                                                to the Project proposal, the Bank’s supported
                                                                project will be constructed in the area where
                                                                Tujia minority communities are present.

                                                                As required by the World Bank’s OP/BP 4.10,
                                                                the Bank task team Social Development
                                                                Specialist conducted a screening for Indigenous
                                                                peoples in the project area based on the
                                                                following 4 criteria and found no ethnic
                                                                minority groups that satisfy the description of
                                                                IPs as per Bank Policy OP 4.10: : i) self-
                                                                identification as members of a distinct
                                                                indigenous cultural group and recognition of
                                                                this identity by others; ii)collective attachment
                                                                to geographically distinct habitats or ancestral
                                                                territories in the project area and to the natural
                                                                resources in these habitats and territories; iii)
                                                                customary cultural, economic, social, or
                                                                political institutions that are separate from
                                                                those of the dominant society and culture; iv)
                                                                and an indigenous language often different from
                                                                the official language of the country or region.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                The results of the screening was confirmed by
                                                                consultations with local Ethnic Minority Affairs
                                                                Bureaus, discussions with local Tujia ethnic
                                                                minorities, site visits, and a desk review of
                                                                relevant documents and materials.

                                                                Based on this assessment, it is clear that the
                                                                Tujia ethnic minority communities in the
                                                                Project areas are for all intents and purposes are
                                                                indistinguishable from their Han neighbors. On
                                                                the whole, the Tujia ethnic minority does not
                                                                fall under the Bank definition of indigenous
                                                                peoples.

                                                                Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   Land acquisition and structure relocation will be
                         4.12                                   unavoidable for this project, although some of
                                                                the component-specific impacts may be minor,
                                                                                                                                 since the Project does not include any
                                                                                                                                 substantial greenfield development. Since
                                                                                                                                 project components will be finalized during
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 preparation, involuntary resettlement impacts
                                                                                                                                 will be determined during project preparation.
                                                                                                                                 Therefore, the Bank’s OP 4.12 on Involuntary
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement is triggered for the project, and a
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared in
                                                                                                                                 both Chinese and English for each county. An
                                                                                                                                 experienced social consulting team from Wuhan
                                                                                                                                 University has been hired by the client to assist
                                                                                                                                 RAP preparation. The team is familiar with
                                                                                                                                 domestic land regulations and had prior
                                                                                                                                 experience working on Bank-financed projects
                                                                                                                                 to assist clients to prepare the required RAP.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The Project doesn’t involve any dams. The
                                                                                                                                 policy is not triggered.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The Project doesn’t involve any international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways. The policy is note triggered.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The Project is not located in any disputed area.
                                 7.60                                                                                            The policy is not triggered.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Nov-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      Studies were launched during the Identification mission, held January 5-9, 2014 and are expected
                                      to be completed prior to Pre-Appraisal, November 1, 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Holly Krambeck

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (RSA)                                                                                           Date: 02-Apr-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 03-Apr-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
