                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA8746
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Colombia                          Project ID:    P144271
                            Project Name:      Forest Conservation and Sustainability in the Heart of the Colombian Amazon
                                               (P144271)
                            Task Team          Adriana Goncalves Moreira
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       24-Sep-2014                          Estimated   20-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GENDR                                 Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                               Biodiversity
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Forestry (74%), Central government administration (13%), Sub-national
                                              government administration (13%)
                            Theme(s):         Biodiversity (54%), Environmental policies and institutions (23%), Participation
                                              and civic engagement (14%), Land administration and management (9%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      43.35           Total Bank Financing:                  0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  32.95
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                         10.40
                              Total                                                                                     43.35
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)


                                                                      Page 1 of 11
                         The project's global environmental objective (GEO) is the same as the project's development
                         objective (PDO), namely, to improve governance and promote sustainable land use activities in order
                         to reduce deforestation and conserve biodiversity in the Colombian Amazon forests.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          3. Project Description
                         This Project is designed to improve governance, preserve and sustainably manage over nine million
                         hectares of land, in the Heart of the Colombian Amazon. The Project is inserted in the GoC’s “Low
                         Deforestation Development Vision for the Colombian Amazon”, which calls for the construction of a
                         partnership model between Colombia and the international community to promote low-carbon
                         development models in all of its forested areas. The Project intends to avoid millions of tons of CO2
                         emissions per year, preserve a biological corridor between the Andes and the Amazon, promote
                         sustainable development and improve the livelihoods of local campesino families and indigenous
                         peoples in the Project area.

                         A.      Project Components

                         The Project includes four components:

                         Component 1: Protected Areas Management and Financial Sustainability
                         A.       Strengthen the management effectiveness of the PNNSC and its buffer zone through, inter
                         alia, the design and implementation of a management plan for the PNNSC.
                         B.       Increase the financial sustainability of the management of about 2.7 million hectares of
                         protected areas in the Project Area.

                         Component 2: Forest Governance, Management and Monitoring.
                         A.      Enhance the institutional capacity and financial sustainability of relevant stakeholders for
                         sustainable landscape governance, management, and monitoring of the Project Area.
                         B.      Enhance the institutional capacity of relevant stakeholders to monitor GHG emission
                         reductions, in accordance with the NSFCM, in the Project Area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Enhance the capacity of indigenous peoples’ authorities for sustainable land-use practices and
                         forest governance within indigenous territories in the Project Area.
                         D. Support the disclosure of data on reduction of deforestation in the Project Area.

                         Component 3: Sectoral Programs for Sustainable Landscape Management.
                         A.      Support improvement of cross-sectoral policy coordination and consistency to achieve long
                         term-reductions in deforestation in the Project Area.
                         B.      Support the development and adoption of guidelines and programs in, inter alia, the
                         agriculture, extractive industries and infrastructure sectors, aimed at reducing pressures on forests
                         and biodiversity, and GHG emissions and restoring ecosystems in the Project Area.
                         C. Support the promotion of sustainable land-use and natural resource management practices that
                         contribute to the restoration of vegetation, reduce pressure on forests and advance the livelihoods of
                         local communities in the municipalities of San Jose del Guaviare, Calamar and Cartagena del Chaira.

                         Component 4: Project Coordination, Management, Monitoring and Evaluation.
                         Strengthen the PCU to ensure coordination, management, monitoring, evaluation, and
                         communication for the implementation of the Project.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                         The Project seeks to address the conservation of an area of over nine million hectares in the Heart of
                         the Colombian Amazon, which is a vast area of humid tropical forest that spans the neighbouring
                         provinces of Amazonia and Guyana. The Project aims to avoid million tons of CO2 emissions per
Public Disclosure Copy




                         year, while helping promote peace and sustainable development in that region in southern Colombia.

                         The Project Direct Intervention Area (PDIA) spans the departments of Caquetá, Meta, Guaviare and
                         Amazonas and is in the jurisdiction of the following municipalities: San Vicente del Caguán,
                         Cartagena del Chairá and Solano (in Caquetá Department); San José del Guaviare y Calamar (in
                         Guaviare Department); La Macarena (in Meta Department); and in Mirití-Paraná—an area that is not
                         yet within a municipality (in Amazonas Department). Legally speaking, these territories encompass
                         the following areas:

                         (a)     The Natural Chiribiquete Mountain Ridge National Park (PNNSCH), a Protected Area,
                         which occupies 2,782,353 hectares. The area was created in 1989 by Resolution 120 of the Ministry
                         of Agriculture and expanded in 2013 through Resolution 1038 of the Ministry of Environment and
                         Sustainable Development (MADS).
                         (b)     An area known as the Ariari-Guayabero District of Integrated Management of Natural
                         Renewable Resources (also known as “Restoration Zone for Southern Production”), located in San
                         José del Guaviare and Calamar (Guaviare Department).
                         (c)     Seven indigenous peoples reserves (resguardos). Six of the reserves occupy an area of
                         2,387,939 hectares, and are located along the Caquetá river between the departments of Caquetá and
                         Amazonas. They are: (i) Puerto Zábalo-Los Monos, (ii) Monochoa, (iii) Aduche, (iv) Nonuya de
                         Villazul, (v) Mesay and (vi) Miriti-Paraná. The seventh reserve, Yaguará II, occupies 146,500
                         hectares and is spread over three municipalities in two departments, namely La Macarena, San
                         Vicente del Caguán and San José del Guaviare.
                         (d)     Areas located inside the Amazon Forest Reserve in the Caquetá and Guaviare Departments.
                         (e)     Areas removed (“areas sustraidas”) from the Amazon Forest Reserve in Cartagena del Chairá
                         and Calamar municipalities (in Caquetá Department) and San José del Guaviare municipality
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (Guaviare Department).
                         The PNNSC represents the core of the Project area and features extensive tepuis—towering rock
                         formations—belonging to the Guyana biogeographic province, surrounded by undisturbed rainforest
                         of highly difficult access due to the lack of roads and presence of rapids that impede navigation. The
                         park includes the upper reaches of the Apaporis and Yarí rivers, major tributaries of the Caquetá
                         River, which empties into the Amazon River. The Apaporis River is the second longest river entirely
                         within Colombia and is of enormous cultural significance for indigenous peoples in the Amazon.

                         The park is also known for its abundant rock paintings in 32 archaeological sites. Colombia is
                         considering nominating the area as a World Heritage site. PNNSC will conserve 41 different
                         ecosystems, including vàrzea forests and savannahs, terra firme forests, and savannahs and
                         shrublands associated with tepuis. Eight of these ecosystems are not represented in existing protected
                         areas. The area is an important centre of endemism, and while its fauna and flora are still far from
                         having been studied extensively, 300 species of birds have been reported, as well as 72 species of
                         beetles, 313 species of butterflies, 261 species of ants, seven species of primates, three species of
                         otters, four species of felines, 48 species of bats, two species of dolphins and 133 species of fish.
                         There are 43 threatened, species including the Harpy Eagle Harpia harpiya and the only bird species
                         endemic to the Colombian Amazon, the hummingbird Chlorostilbon olivaresi (PNNC, 2012).
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Kristyna Bishop (GSURR)

                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                         Marcelo Hector Acerbi (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment OP/    Yes           This is a category “B” project. The proposed
                         BP 4.01                                       investments seek to protect critical natural habitat
                                                                       through consolidating the expansion of an
                                                                       existing protected area (Chiribiquete National
                                                                       Park) and by supporting governance (institutions,
                                                                       zoning, action plans, carbon monitoring, dialogue
                                                                       and policies) for the entire area in order to reduce
                                                                       and avoid deforestation. While the Project will
                                                                       not finance civil works or other activities with a
                                                                       physical footprint, some of the activities related to
                                                                       protected areas management, land use planning
                                                                       and forest management could have social and
                                                                       environmental implications.
                                                                       The Project is designed to generate positive
                                                                       environmental impacts through protection of
                                                                       critical natural habitats and improved land-use
                                                                       planning. Nevertheless, some activities in the
                                                                       buffer-zone through improved enforcement,
                                                                       changes in land-use provisions, and promotion of
                                                                       financial mechanisms linked to emissions
                                                                       reductions could be sensitive from a social
                                                                       standpoint.
                                                                       An Environmental and Social Management
                                                                       Framework (ESMF) has been prepared by the
                                                                       Recipient and co-executants. This describes the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       process and criteria to consolidate the expanded
                                                                       protected area, land-use plans in the buffer zone
                                                                       and development of enforcement capacity, as well
                                                                       as other activities to be financed by the Project.
                                                                       The ESMF analyzes gaps in existing systems,
                                                                       best practices in different sectors and how can
                                                                       sustainability practices be improved. It also
                                                                       addresses any livelihood activities to be supported
                                                                       through the GEF or counterpart-funded activities
                                                                       when they go beyond activities included within
                                                                       the Process Framework for restrictions in access.
                                                                       The ESMF incorporates consultation processes
                                                                       with private sector, ranchers, and indigenous
                                                                       communities among others. The ESMF has
                                                                       sought consistency with the activities surrounding
                                                                       the FCPF/REDD+ process in Colombia presently
                                                                       supported by the Bank.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04     Yes           This policy is triggered given that the decisions
                                                                       made in terms of land management planning will



                                                               Page 4 of 11
                                                                         affect critical natural habitats. Policy, land-use
                                                                         and enforcement activities could accelerate
                                                                         deforestation processes if not approached
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         correctly with proper social engagement and
                                                                         consultation. The ESMF includes a description of
                                                                         the process to engage with the different
                                                                         stakeholders during the Project to avoid or
                                                                         minimize any conversion or degradation that may
                                                                         result from human activity induced by the Project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes           This policy is triggered given that the decisions
                                                                         made in terms of land management planning
                                                                         including forest management plans will affect
                                                                         forests. The ESMF includes the process for
                                                                         development of sustainable management plans
                                                                         and other forestry-related policies orenforcement
                                                                         activities. The ESMF also reviews the regulations
                                                                         in light of the Bank policy requirements for
                                                                         sustainable forest management.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           Livelihood activities might include sustainable
                                                                         agriculture or reforestation activities that may
                                                                         require pest management. The necessary
                                                                         provisions to meet policy objectives have been
                                                                         incorporated in the ESMF.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           This policy is triggered as the project will support
                         BP 4.11                                         changes in the acceptable use and access to areas
                                                                         with potential cultural significance (sacred sites)
                                                                         for communities living within and around the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         protected areas and management zones. The
                                                                         principles of this policy have been integrated into
                                                                         the planning processes described in the ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           This policy is triggered as there are indigenous
                                                                         peoples living in the Project area. During
                                                                         preparation, a social assessment, seven
                                                                         Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) and an
                                                                         Institutional Guide for Avoiding Contact and
                                                                         Negative Impact on Indigenous Peoples Living in
                                                                         Voluntary Isolation or Initial Contact were
                                                                         prepared and disclosed per the requirements of
                                                                         OP 4.10. The IPPs were prepared with the full
                                                                         collaboration of the Indigenous Traditional
                                                                         Authorities of the resguardos (AATIs) and reflect
                                                                         the agreements made with them during the
                                                                         process of free, prior and informed consultation
                                                                         carried out by the National Parks Agency (PNN)
                                                                         during the expansion of the Chiribiquete Park last
                                                                         year. Drafts of the IPPs were shared and



                                                                 Page 5 of 11
                                                                             discussed with the respective communities and
                                                                             Actas from each community have been attached
                                                                             to the instrument as evidence of their broad
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             community support for their respective Plan. The
                                                                             Institutional Guide for Avoiding Contact and
                                                                             Managing Negative Impacts on Indigenous
                                                                             Peoples Living in Voluntary Isolation was
                                                                             prepared based on international best practice and
                                                                             was peer reviewed by the Amazon Conservation
                                                                             Team. It was not be subject to a consultation
                                                                             process with these communities but was
                                                                             presented during the general consultation of the
                                                                             ESMF. The final versions of the IPPs were
                                                                             disclosed on the websites of the PNF, PNN and
                                                                             the Bank’s Infoshop prior to appraisal. Please see
                                                                             section B of this ISDS for the specific dates of
                                                                             disclosure.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             Physical relocation or land acquisition will not be
                            4.12                                             required for project activities but a Process
                                                                             Framework (PF) has been prepared in order to
                                                                             screen for and manage any involuntary
                                                                             restrictions on access to natural resources in the
                                                                             forest buffer zone during the process of
                                                                             identifying new regional protected areas. The
                                                                             Process Framework does not cover the voluntary
                                                                             process that will be managed using a voluntary
                                                                             agreement with SINCHI under Component 3. A
                                                                             social assessment to identify some of these
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             potential impacts and their scope as well as the
                                                                             stakeholders that might be affected was
                                                                             completed during preparation and a summary of
                                                                             the results is included in the Process Framework.
                                                                             The Process Framework was disclosed per the
                                                                             requirements of OP 4.12. Please see section B of
                                                                             this ISDS for the specific dates of disclosure.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No              This project will not finance any dams nor will
                                                                             rely on the operations of existing dams.
                            Projects on International        No              This project will not finance activities that impact
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                             any international waterways as defined by the
                                                                             policy.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No              This project will not finance activities in disputed
                            7.60                                             areas as defined by the policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify


                                                                     Page 6 of 11
                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           The proposed investments seek to protect critical natural habitats through consolidating the
                           expansion of an existing protected area (Chiribiquete National Park) and supporting governance
Public Disclosure Copy




                           arrangements (institutions, zoning, action plans, carbon monitoring, dialogue and policies) for the
                           entire area in order to reduce and avoid deforestation. While the Project will not finance civil
                           works or other activities with a physical footprint, some of the activities related to of protected
                           areas management, land-use planning and forest management could have social and environmental
                           implications. These potential impacts would be of limited scope and will not be significant or
                           irreversible. The Recipient and partners prepared an ESMF including the analysis, screening and
                           measures to manage and mitigate these potential impacts.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The Project is designed to generate long term positive environmental impacts through protection
                           of critical natural habitats and improved land-use planning. It is intended to improve the
                           sustainability of some of the agricultural activities of small landholders, improve the protection of
                           indigenous peoples living in voluntary isolation or initial contact and strengthen indigenous
                           management of natural resources in their traditional territories. Nevertheless, the expansion of the
                           protected area as well as increased regulation of activities in the buffer-zone, changes and
                           improved enforcement of land-use provisions and the promotion of financial mechanisms linked to
                           payment for results may lead to indirect impacts. The ESMF includes the measures to prevent and
                           manage these eventual implications. The Institutional Guide for Avoiding Contact and Managing
                           Impact on Indigenous Peoples Living in Voluntary Isolation or Initial Contact provides
                           information regarding best practices for avoiding contact and guidance regarding what to do if
                           there is unavoidable contact with these vulnerable groups.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           This Project does not involve an analysis of alternatives. The situation without the project would
Public Disclosure Copy




                           lead to negative environmental impacts induced by an increase in the deforestation rate. This
                           Project has been prepared assuming it is designed to generate long-term indirect positive
                           environmental impacts through protection of critical natural habitats and improved land-use
                           planning. Most project activities have been prepared under a participatory scheme and with
                           different instances of consultation. The ESMF describes the approach to be followed in each
                           component and identifies the measures to avoid adverse impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared for the Project.
                           It defines the screening procedures and criteria that the Recipient and the co-executants will use to
                           identify any impacts related to Project activities, determine whether any specific environmental
                           and/or social analysis will be required in order to identify these impacts or mitigation measures
                           and defines the specific EA procedure to be followed during Project implementation. The Project
                           is expected to generate many positive benefits both for the protection of the resources and
                           biodiversity in the Project area and for the people living there. It should be noted that the
                           protected area actions followed by PNN to date have been shown to be effective in conserving
                           forest and watershed resources. Existing protocols and regulations for the expansion of the
                           Chiribiquete National Park included studies of ecological and social conditions, opportunities, and
                           risks, and measures for enhancing positive outcomes and mitigating risks. A process of free, prior
                           and informed consultation was undertaken with the seven resguardos that are located in the area of


                                                                     Page 7 of 11
                          influence of the Park and agreements were reached with these communities regarding activities
                          that will help them contribute to its management and protection, as well as to the management of
                          their territories, which are on the periphery of the Park. These agreements were incorporated into
Public Disclosure Copy




                          the seven IPPs that were prepared and will ensure that PNN fulfill its obligations under the Law on
                          Prior Consultation and comply with the requirements of OP 4.10. The ESMF includes guidelines
                          to enhance management plans and monitoring systems that provide for detecting and addressing
                          environmental and other impacts in real time. All Project activities are subject to the
                          environmental procedures defined in the ESMF and in compliance with the requirements (as stated
                          in the ESMF) of the national and subnational legal frameworks.

                          Participation by campesino families in agro-ecology and sustainable forestry productive
                          arrangements will be on a voluntary basis.

                           From a technical point of view, SINCHI, PNF and PNN (the three agencies with direct exposure to
                           safeguards instruments) have a good level of capacity to manage environmental and social issues.
                           During preparation, they undertook and managed a very complex approach to social safeguards
                           that went far beyond basic compliance. For OP 4.10, for example, they built upon the relationships
                           and agreements developed during the robust consultation process with the indigenous territories
                           (resguardos) prior to the expansion of the Chiribiquete Park in order to prepare IPPs that will
                           fulfill the agreements made during the consultation process but that are also mainstreamed into the
                           project activities and annual planning processes. It was clear during preparation that the
                           implementing agencies are cognizant of the security risks associated with the project area and
                           measures to mitigate these risks will be included in the Operations Manual. The Project will
                           include measures to ensure that all the participating institutions have a good level of presence in
                           the field by funding additional staff, incremental costs for transportation, etc.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Specifically, direct beneficiaries of the Project include:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          (a)      An estimated 3,485 indigenous peoples, including their tradition authorities (AATI), living
                          in the seven indigenous reserves (Resguardos of Mirití-Parará, Nonuya de Villazul, Aduche,
                          Mesay, Yaguará II, Monochoa and Puerto Zábalo-Los Monos);
                          (b)      Campesino families in Cartagena de Chairá, San José de Guaviare and Calamar
                          (approximately 200 families involving 800 people);
                          (c)      Agricultural and rural producer associations;
                          (d)      The municipal and regional governments of Caquetá and Guaviare Departments; and
                          (e)      Regional environmental authorities (i.e. CDA and Corpoamazonia).

                          During implementation, the Project will involve stakeholders from civil society including the
                          Indigenous Peoples Traditional Authority Associations (AATI), social and environmental NGOs
                          working in the area, government agencies such as the Colombian Institute of Rural Development
                          (INCODER), the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR), the Ministry of Mines
                          and Energy, the Oil and Hydrocarbons Agency (ANH), the National Roads Institute (INVIAS), the
                          National Environmental Licensing Authority; and the municipalities of San José del Guaviare,
                          Calamar, San Vicente del Caguán, Cartagena del Chairá, and La Macarena. Given the nature of the
                          activities to be financed, these are all deemed key Project stakeholders although they are not all
                          direct beneficiaries.



                                                                    Page 8 of 11
                           The adoption of sectoral programs in critical sectors such as cattle ranching, agriculture, oil and
                           roads to improve practices that reduce pressures on forests and biodiversity will also benefit the
                           governance process as a whole and, in particular, the implementation of sustainable land and other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           management practices that will provide more stable support for biodiversity-friendly activities.
                           Therefore, the outputs produced during this Project are expected to benefit governmental and non-
                           governmental decision makers in the long run, improving management effectiveness of
                           biodiversity in general terms, while also benefiting the local population, including indigenous
                           communities, through improvements in their livelihoods.

                           The safeguards documentation is available on the PNF, PNN, and SINCHI websites. All safeguard
                           instruments have been widely disclosed in the country since August 21, 2014 and sent to the
                           Bank’s Infoshop for publication. Public consultation meetings took place between May and
                           August 2014. No significant issues were raised during the consultation process and the project
                           design was not changed. Feedback provided has been taken into account in the final versions of
                           the documents.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        21-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     24-Sep-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Colombia                                                           21-Aug-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        21-Aug-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     23-Sep-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Colombia                                                           21-Aug-2014
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        21-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     23-Sep-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Colombia                                                           21-Aug-2014
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        21-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     24-Sep-2014




                                                                     Page 9 of 11
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Colombia                                                          21-Aug-2014
                           Comments: Pest management issues are considered as part of the Project's Environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         Social Management Framework.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         Pest management issues are considered as part of the Project's Environmental and Social
                         Management Framework.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?



                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Adriana Goncalves Moreira
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                             Date: 30-Sep-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Emilia Battaglini (PMGR)                          Date: 30-Sep-2014
                            Manager:



                                                                       Page 11 of 11
