                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC1009

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Pakistan                         Project ID:      P130193
                            Project Name:       Punjab Skills Development (P130193)
                            Task Team           Scherezad Joya Monami Lat
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           15-Jan-2015                      Estimated        25-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GEDDR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Vocational training (80%), Tertiary education (10%), Secondary education
                                                (10%)
                            Theme(s):           Education for the knowledge economy (75%), Education for all (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     60.00                      Total Bank Financing:          50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            10.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   50.00
                              Total                                                                         60.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           To support institutional reform of the skills sector, and the improvement of access, quality and
                           relevance of skills training programs in priority sectors in the Punjab.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Project would be implemented over a five year period. It would have three parts. The first,
                           consisting of Component 1, would be disbursement linked (DLI) where funds would be disbursed
                         against agreed results to the Finance Department of Punjab. Components 2 and 3 would follow a
                         traditional reimbursement mode based on statements of expenditures after the completion of
                         activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Institutional reform for delivery of high quality skills training for all. This component
                         will address much needed institutional reform which would underpin the potential success of any
                         skills related interventions, and support areas identified in the NSS and complement ongoing donor
                         activities . Exact DLIs, sequencing and pricing would be worked out during Project preparation.
                         Initial areas identified for support through this component include:
                         (i)       Support to effective regulation of the skills and training sector in Punjab. Actions include the
                         separation of the Punjab Technical Education and Vocational Training Authority’s (P-TEVTA)
                         regulatory function from training provision, and strengthening and consolidating quality assurance
                         systems, namely the Punjab Board of Technical Education (PBTE) and Trade Testing Board (TTB).
                         (ii)      Institutionalize industry and private sector participation in the development and planning of
                         skills and training programs. This reform area would pilot the creation of Industry Advisory Groups
                         starting with one to two growth sectors identified by GoPunjab in their Growth Strategy. It is likely
                         that IAGs would be piloted in sectors where support is being provided by the proposed Project
                         through Component 2 to ensure coordination, complementarity and maximum benefits for Project
                         interventions.

                         Component 2: Increasing quality, relevance and access. This component would consist of two parts:
                         (1) competitive grants for Technical Education; and (2) access to training for the disadvantaged.

                         Component 2.1 Increasing quality and relevance of technical education in specific growth sectors of
                         the Province with a view to increasing the employability of graduates. This sub component would
                         focus on improvements in the quality and relevance of technical education and training that is
                         provided by the public and private sector in prioritized sectors. Priority sectors would be defined by
                         the provincial Growth Strategy and could include those schools that are part of the GoPunjab’s
                         Centers of Excellence—also identified as areas of support in the National Skills Strategy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The objective of the subcomponent would be achieved through the implementation of a competitive
                         grants mechanism at the institutional level to improve the “supply side” of technical education
                         training. Through competitive grant, eligible Training Providers (TPs), both public and private, could
                         fund critical quality inputs identified by the institutions themselves such as training of trainers,
                         teaching and learning materials (including equipment), and partnerships or twining arrangements
                         with institutions abroad as well as institutional and formal linkages with the private sector such as
                         internship or OJT programs for its trainees.

                         Component 2.2: Increasing access to vocational training for the poor and disadvantaged. This sub
                         component would aim to increase the employability of the poor and disadvantaged especially women
                         through increasing access to short-term market relevant vocational training in priority sectors. The
                         Project at concept stage envisages achieving this objective by providing funds to the Punjab
                         Vocational Training Council (PVTC) to fund additional students in selected sectors in its existing
                         Vocational Training Institutions (VTIs). This component could be expanded to include in addition to
                         the PVTC, any other organization with a similar mandate and proven track record. Reimbursement to
                         implementing agencies would be contingent (in part) on their performance, measured by the
                         employment of their graduates over a 3-6 month period after graduation (from the training program).

                         Component 3: Monitoring, Evaluation and Project Management. This component would finance
                               Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E). The overarching responsible agency for
                               the proposed Project would be the Punjab Planning and Development Department and the
                               implementing agency of the Project would be the Industries Department, GoPunjab. A coordination
Public Disclosure Copy




                               and implementation cell for the Project would be set up in the Industries Department to manage the
                               various components and carry out all M&E activities.
                               D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                               analysis (if known)
                               The Project will be implemented in the province of Punjab. Project activity will take place in mostly
                               urban or semi-urban areas with no expected activities in any pristine environments. The project does
                               not involve any physical works, civil works or rehabilitation and thus have no interactions with
                               physical environment relevant to safeguards analysis.
                               E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                               Since the project does not involve any physical works and no safeguards issues are envisaged to arise
                               from project activity, no additional capacity assessment or capacity building is needed to ensure
                               compliance with safeguards.

                               Guidance on social safeguards aspects of the Project will be provided by the Social Safeguards team
                               at and after the PCN Review.
                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Fouad Muhammad Khan (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No                            No physical works, construction, reconstruction
                                 BP 4.01                                                                                         or rehabilitation activity is envisioned as part of
                                                                                                                                 the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 17-Oct-2014
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Further guidance to be sought at PCN Review.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:     Name: Scherezad Joya Monami Lat

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                     Date: 16-Oct-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Practice Manager/   Name: Halil Dundar (PMGR)                          Date: 16-Oct-2014
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
