                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC2582

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Morocco                        Project ID:      P128654
                            Project Name:     MA-Partnership for Market Readiness (P128654)
                            Task Team         Andrew Michael Losos
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                        Estimated        30-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    MNSEE                          Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Energy and mining (50%), Public administration-
                                              Industry and trade (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (50%), Environmental policies and institutions (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      3.96                  Total Bank Financing:          0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                  0.61
                              Partnership for Market Readiness                                          3.35
                              Total                                                                     3.96
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to assist the Government of Morocco in developing a
                           GHG crediting mechanism and a monitoring, reporting and verification system in one or more
                           targeted sectors.
                           C. Project Description
                           Objectives and main implementation phases of the PMR
                         As the world seeks to enhance global GHG mitigation efforts post-2012, countries are exploring
                         innovative and cost-effective ways to scale up emission reductions and foster financial flows,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         including through carbon market instruments. The Durban outcome led to the definition of a new
                         market-based mechanism and an invitation to Parties for submissions on modalities and procedures.
                         The Parties emphasized that such a mechanism must meet standard that deliver real, permanent,
                         additional and verified mitigation outcomes, avoid the double counting of effort and achieve a net
                         decrease or avoidance (or both) of GHG emissions. New market-based mechanisms could expand the
                         scope of the conventional CDM beyond project levels to sector levels. In addition, mechanism
                         options under discussion could include among other options the crediting of Nationally Appropriate
                         Mitigation Actions (NAMAs). The establishment of new market mechanism remains dependent on
                         the outcome of the next rounds of negotiations, and once an agreement on general design has been
                         achieved, the needed time needs to factor in the setting up operational rules.

                         To support, facilitate and build “readiness” for such instruments, the World Bank established the
                         Partnership for Market Readiness (PMR). The PMR is a grant-based, capacity building multi-donor
                         trust fund that provides funding and technical assistance for the collective innovation and piloting of
                         market-based instruments for greenhouse gas emissions reduction. The PMR Secretariat recently
                         reached its US$100 million funding target (donor pledges) during the PA4 in October 2012 in
                         Sydney, Australia. The Partnership brings together developed countries (i.e. the Donor countries
                         Australia, Denmark, EC, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Switzerland, United
                         States, and United Kingdom) and developing countries (i.e. the fifteen Implementing Countries
                         Brazil, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Colombia, India, Indonesia, Jordan, Mexico, Morocco, South
                         Africa, Thailand, Morocco, Ukraine and Vietnam), as well as other key experts and stakeholders.

                         The PMR provides a platform for technical discussions on market instruments, fostering South-South
                         exchange, facilitating collective innovation for pilot efforts and harnessing financial flows for
                         implementation and scale up. Decisions in the PMR are made by the Partnership Assembly,
                         including criteria for and allocation of funding (consisting of both the PMR Donors and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Implementing Countries). The PMR supports four core objectives: (i) provide grant funding for
                         building market readiness components, (ii) pilot and test new concepts for market instruments (e.g.,
                         domestic ETS and new crediting mechanisms), (iii) provide a platform for technical discussions,
                         South-South exchange and collective innovation on new market instruments, and (iv) share lessons
                         learned and best practices.

                         The PMR is a country-led initiative tailored to each implementing country needs. It provides
                         systemic support to enhance countries’ technical and institutional capacities in order to implement
                         market-based instruments, such as a domestic emissions trading system (ETS) or a scaled-up
                         crediting mechanism. As the Implementing Countries are at different stages of development and
                         market readiness, each will approach the use of market instruments in a different way. Some will
                         focus on building core “readiness” components, such as new systems for MRV, data collection,
                         baseline setting, and establishing regulatory institutions; others will go further and pilot an
                         appropriate domestic or international market-based scheme. Regardless of a country’s choice,
                         capacity building and piloting can have cross-cutting benefits relevant to implementing non-market
                         based mitigation actions, designing low emission development strategies, and identifying areas of
                         low cost mitigation potential.

                         PMR activities involve a preparation phase and an implementation Phase. Preparation Phase: With a
                         benefit of a US$350,000 preparation grant, each PMR Implementing Country formulates a Market
                         Readiness Proposal for review and endorsement by the PMR Partnership Assembly. The
                         Implementing Country may also use the preparation grant for activities that continue into and overlap
                         with the Implementation Phase. Implementation Phase: The Implementing Country enters into the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         PMR Implementation Phase once the PMR Partnership Assembly has reviewed and endorsed its
                         Market Readiness Proposal (MRP) and awarded an Implementation Grant to it. Each Implementing
                         Country is required to present its draft Market Readiness Proposal (see step 3 below) within two
                         years after the award of the preparation grant (with a possibility of extension of six months in
                         extraordinary circumstances). With the benefit of the Implementation Grant, which will range
                         between US$3 - $8 million per country, the Implementing Country puts in place the readiness
                         components outlined in the Market Readiness Proposal, including, where applicable, piloting the
                         proposed market instrument. The size of the funding is determined by the Partnership Assembly in
                         accordance with a set of criteria and availability of funding. The criteria for evaluation of the Market
                         Readiness Proposals include (i) the scope of the proposal and sound rationale behind the choice of
                         the instrument and sectors, (ii) comprehensiveness of the proposal with regard to planning for a
                         implementation/piloting of a Market-based Instrument (scaled up GHG Crediting instrument or
                         domestic emissions trading), (iii) estimate of GHG mitigation potential, (iv) identification of
                         milestones and the timetable for implementation, and (v) ratio of co-financing. First Implementation
                         Grants may be awarded by the Partnership Assembly in late 2012.

                         Morocco’s expected PMR activities

                         Morocco submitted its Expression of Interest (EoI) and Organizational Framework (OF) to join the
                         PMR respectively in May 2011 and March 2013, and was subsequently confirmed a PMR
                         implementing country. The extraordinary meeting of the PMR Partnership Assembly (PA) held on 14
                         March 2012 in Shenzhen, China approved the allocation of the preparation phase funding in the
                         amount of $315,000 to Morocco to prepare its MRP. The Government of Morocco requested the
                         PMR Partnership Assembly to approve the World Bank (WB) as its Delivery Partner in preparing its
                         MRP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         An inter-ministerial task force was set up to coordinate the project preparation and implementation
                         phases. The Ministry of General Affairs and Governance (MAGG) and the Ministry of Economy and
                         Finance (MEF) and the Department of Environment of the Ministry of Energy, Mines, Water and
                         Environment (DE/MEMEE) form the PMR Steering Committee (PMR-SC). The inclusion of the
                         Ministry of Finance within the PMR-SC aims to lend support to enhancing the country’s
                         preparedness to grasp the future climate finance opportunities and to ensure consistency and
                         adequate monitoring of project funding. MAGG will be responsible for the needed stakeholders’
                         coordination. Finally, the Department of Environment will assume a lead role in technical
                         implementation.

                         The GoM has defined a precise focus for the preparation phase activities. Activities financed by the
                         project will consist in studies, consulting services, and other technical assistance activities with no
                         negative environment and social impacts. These activities include (i) a market readiness assessment
                         and rationale for the choice of sectors, technical and institutional/regulatory market readiness
                         components for each sector, and assessment of the appropriate market based instruments for the
                         sector, as well as on (ii) the preliminary design of a scaled-up GHG crediting instrument for each
                         sector, taking into account its technical and policy components (crediting baseline, registry/tracking
                         tools, MRV system), its potential emission reduction, its investment plan, its regulatory and
                         institutional framework as well as its implementation schedule. The Market Readiness Proposal will
                         further detail the technical readiness activities to be funded by the PMR Grant and to be realized
                           during implementation. It is envisaged that PMR Implementation Phase activities would run from
                           June 2014 through June 2017.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           PMR preparation is based on a broad based consultative process including public, private and NGO
                           actors. The consultation process has been conducted in three complementary stages: an information
                           workshop, direct interviews with potentially involved institutions, and a restitution workshop
                           presenting the proposed PMR Organizational Framework. This preliminary consultation process held
                           by the Team allowed to confirm stakeholders’ interest, as well as to identify high potential sectors,
                           and to shed some light on several key technical and institutional questions (New Market Mechanism
                           model to follow, sectors to target, institutional framework to adopt, private and public actors to
                           include, capacity building needs, resources required...). In order to be able to prepare its Market
                           Readiness Proposal, the Department of Environment, jointly with MEF and MAGG, will organize
                           consultations and utilize the Preparation Phase grant to organize such meetings, training events and
                           outreach to stakeholders, as well as to establish effective project management capacity. It may also
                           commission background studies (that may continue or be complemented during the Implementation
                           Phase).
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will only finance technical assistance activities limited to studies, assessments, training
                           programs, consultations aimed at helping Morocco enhance its capacities to set up carbon crediting
                           mechanisms and benefit from opportunities to engage in post-CDM regime. The activities will
                           essentially take the form of consulting services. As such the project will not have any direct adverse
                           impacts on the environment and society. By helping Morocco develop its capacities for carbon
                           crediting, the project aims to support the Government's low carbon growth objectives.

                           Delivery of the technical assistance activities, including training, capacity building, assessments, may
                           be carried out in various locations throughout Morocco, but primarily in Rabat and Casablanca.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Department of Environment (Ministry of Energy, Mines, Water and Environment) is the
                           institution responsible for environmental assessment policies in Morocco and has the necessary
                           institutional capacity to address safeguard issues.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Suiko Yoshijima (MNSEE)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                           BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Sep-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      N/A
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Andrew Michael Losos

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                                                                                            Date: 13-Mar-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (SM)                                                                                          Date: 13-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
