                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA7241
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Belize                              Project ID:    P127338
                            Project Name:      Climate Resilient Infrastructure (P127338)
                            Task Team          Yoonhee Kim
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          07-May-2014                         Estimated   05-Aug-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSDU                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Flood protection (30%), Urban Transport (30%), Central government
                                              administration (20%), Irrigation and drainage (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (50%), Natural disaster management (25%), Land administration
                                              and management (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      30.00           Total Bank Financing:                   30.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       30.00
                              Total                                                                                       30.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the Project is to enhance the resilience of critical road infrastructure
                           against flood risk and impacts of climate change and to improve the Borrower’s capacity to respond
                           promptly and effectively in an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, as required.



                                                                        Page 1 of 13
                         3. Project Description
                         The government of Belize (GoB) developed a National Climate Resilient Investment Plan (NCRIP)
                         to address the impacts of climate change on social and economic development. This plan was
Public Disclosure Copy




                         elaborated with support from the Bank and financial support from the Africa Caribbean Pacific
                         (ACP) European Union (EU) Natural Disaster Risk Reduction Program, received through the Global
                         Facility for Disaster Recovery and Reconstruction (GFDRR). Adopted on October 2013, this multi-
                         sectoral plan lays out priority investments by sector, integrating physical interventions with capacity
                         building activities and policy actions, to quantifiably reduce vulnerability and build climate resilience
                         in the country. In the past, Belize’s legislation and policy measures to mainstream disaster risk
                         management (DRM) were fragmented and lacked ownership and participation of ministries. To
                         address this disconnect, the NCRIP engaged all relevant stakeholders from the beginning to devise
                         holistic and participatory approaches to address climate resilience. Through the NCRIP, the GoB has
                         articulated a plan that seeks to fully integrate climate change adaptation, climate variability and
                         comprehensive disaster management into national development planning processes and actions.

                         The BCRIP investment framework in the four selected areas is based on the NCRIP. As the
                         investment portfolio articulated in the NCRIP exceeds the project’s financing envelope, additional
                         criteria will be used to select the specific investments under the BCRIP. The criteria for sub-project
                         selection are: (i) take an integrated and comprehensive approach to address climate resilience in the
                         transport infrastructure incorporating hazard mapping, flood risk management and data-informed
                         decision making; (ii) have high impact on socio-economic activities in Belize, increasing both
                         productivity and service delivery; (iii) take into account ongoing or planned investments by the GoB
                         or other International Financial Institutions or bilateral donors; (iv) meet safeguards screening to
                         ensure compliance with the environmental safeguards category; and (v) demonstrate economic
                         viability through an economic analysis. These additional criteria for sub-project selection were
                         determined by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (MoFED), the Ministry of Works
                         and Transport (MoWT) and other key ministries, and endorsed by Cabinet on February 2014. The
                         MoWT and MoFED have identified a section of the Philip Goldson Highway, from the Philip
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Goldson International Airport Junction to Mile 20 (just beyond the Junction with the Old Northern
                         Road), as the first potential sub-project site.

                         Project Components. The BCRIP will finance climate resilience activities under the following four
                         mutually reinforcing components:

                         Component 1: Climate Resilient Infrastructure.
                         This component will reduce physical vulnerability of critical infrastructure through the retrofitting
                         and rehabilitation of existing infrastructure within the primary and secondary road network including
                         associated drainage and flood mitigation systems in order to strengthen their resilience to natural
                         hazards and the anticipated impacts of climate variability. Activities will be comprehensive in nature
                         and include key risk reduction investments such as river bank strengthening and small scale flood
                         mitigation improvements, rehabilitation and replacement of critical small-scale bridges, and road
                         improvements . It may also include the reinforcement of embankments and slopes. This component
                         will also finance studies required to support engineering design options and final detailed designs
                         solutions. For example, in-land flood studies related to the design of specific river defenses,
                         hydrologic/hydraulic investigations, geotechnical investigations and other associated design studies
                         will be supported under this Component.

                         Component 2. Technical Assistance for Improved Climate Resilience Management.


                                                                       Page 2 of 13
                         This component aims to strengthen the capacity of relevant technical line ministries, MoWT and
                         Ministry of Natural Resources and Agriculture (MNRA), to mainstream climate resilience
                         considerations into core physical and investment planning. The component will aim to strengthen
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the human resource capacity available to the MNRA and MoWT through targeted training, and
                         equipment and knowledge acquisition. Specifically, the proposed component will support:

                         Component 2A – Support to the Ministry of Natural Resources and Agriculture (MNRA). This
                         component will provide technical support for improved land-use and territorial planning, as well as
                         the development of an information baseline and complimentary data management platform. It will
                         target relevant technical staff within the MNRA - notably the Land Information Center (LIC) and the
                         Physical Planning Unit (PPU) - and include technical and gender training to enhance human
                         capacity. This component builds on the technical assistance under the GFDRR/EU-ACP grant to
                         support the recently approved National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI) Policy. Component 2A
                         will include assistance to the LIC in the following areas; listing, and consolidation of existing GIS
                         databases, establishment of data sharing protocols and development of training programs tailored to
                         the needs of LICs and other government staff. In addition, the proposed component will support the
                         PPU to promote the use of geospatial information and open-source technology in land-use and
                         territorial planning processes for the new Land Use Policy Framework. In particular, it will enhance
                         the use of hazard maps and disaster-informed decision making tools. This will help to visualize
                         current and future hazards and amplified impacts associated with climate change.

                         Component 2B – Support to the Ministry of Works and Transport (MoWT). Targeted technical
                         assistance and training will be financed under this component to strengthen the ministry’s
                         infrastructure maintenance and asset management capacities. In particular, Component 2B will
                         support the implementation of the road maintenance strategy (RMS), recently adopted by the MoWT.
                         The Bank will support the creation and operationalization of the road maintenance unit (RMU). It
                         will also provide technical support for a road maintenance fund. In addition, this component will
                         finance the development of improved road design standards that take into account climate risk and
                         incorporate appropriate mitigation strategies, which would be applied to all publicly financed capital
Public Disclosure Copy




                         investments. The road design standards would take into consideration measures to build resilience in
                         the infrastructure looking at the cost and benefits of varying resilience levels and technical standards.

                         Component 3: Project Management and Implementation Support.
                         This component will finance activities that relate to institutional support and capacity development
                         for project management and execution to ensure compliance with fiduciary controls, supervision,
                         monitoring and reporting, and compliance with social and environmental safeguards. The component
                         will fund the provision of technical advisory services, training, operating costs, and acquisition of
                         goods. Activities will include training, staffing and development activities associated with project
                         execution such as coordination, evaluation, supervision and implementation. The component will
                         also support the strengthening of BSIF’s fiduciary capacity. In particular, mainstreaming sustainable
                         public procurement functions and setting up a department with adequate staff.

                         Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response.
                         This component will enable the rapid disbursement of funds and allow the GoB to request a
                         reallocation of project funds to partially cover emergency response and recovery costs , following an
                         adverse natural or man-made event that causes a major disaster. This component was included in the
                         proposed Project since a CAT-DDO is not feasible at the moment for the country given its limited
                         fiscal space. This component will be triggered if the following conditions are met: (i) major disaster
                         occurs; (ii) state of emergency is declared; (iii) causal relationship is established between an adverse

                                                                       Page 3 of 13
                         event and the need to use CERC; and (iv) submission and approval of an updated Operations Manual
                         (OM) that includes an agreed upon action plan of activities. Disbursements would be made either
                         against a positive list of critical goods, both domestic and imported, and/or against the cost of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         procuring goods, works, consultant services, and emergency operations required to support the
                         immediate response and recovery needs. All expenditures under this component, should it be
                         triggered, would be appraised, reviewed, and found to be acceptable to the Bank before any
                         disbursement is made. A specific OM would apply to this component, detailing financial
                         management, procurement, safeguards, and any other necessary implementation arrangements. While
                         Components 1, 2 and 3 focus on pre-crisis disaster risk mitigation and climate resilience
                         enhancement measures, Component 4 will help to strengthen the GoB’s capacity to respond
                         effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The NCRIP road prioritization analysis identified four main geographical areas for potential BCRIP
                         investments that represent both socio-economic importance and high susceptibility to disaster risk:
                         Greater Belize City area, west of Belmopan, northern area aroundCorozal, and southern area around
                         Independence. Poverty levels in the last three areas reach above 40 percent, with 50 percent of the
                         population living in extreme poverty in the southern area around Independencia.
                         1) Greater Belize City area: The primary and secondary road network ranked high in both the socio-
                         economic importance and the flood susceptibility. The high priority area includes the George Price
                         Highway from Belize City to Mile 20, the Philip Goldson Highway from Belize City to just beyond
                         the junction with the Old Northern Road in San Hill Village, and the Bermudian landing Road from
                         the Junction with the Burrel Boom Road to Ranch Dolores.
                         2) West of Belmopan: The roads with high socio-economic importance and flood susceptibility
                         include the George Price Highway from Mount Pleasant Creek west towards San Ignacio and the
                         Guatemalan border; the La Gracia Road, the Valley of Peace Road, The San Antonio Road, and the
                         Pine Ridge Road starting at the Georgeville Junction.
                         3) Northern area around Corozal: In this area, the roads with the highest socio-economic importance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and flood susceptibility include roads near San Narciso Village, the road to Consejo Village and the
                         road to Sarteneja.
                         4) Southern area around Independence: The roads in this area have medium socio-economic
                         importance and medium to high flood susceptibility. These include the Southern Highway from
                         Maya Centre to Bladen, the Trio Road, the Independence Road, and the road to Monkey River.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Noreen Beg (LCSEN)
                         Kimberly Vilar (LCSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             Potential adverse environmental impacts on
                          BP 4.01                                            human populations or environmentally important
                                                                             areas are site-specific, and are related to small-
                                                                             scale retrofitting and rehabilitation works which
                                                                             are expected to be mainly localized, temporary
                                                                             and readily manageable. Since the exact location
                                                                             and/or nature of potential small investments to be
                                                                             financed under this project have not yet been



                                                                     Page 4 of 13
                                                                         determined, an Environmental Management
                                                                         Framework has been prepared to conform to Bank
                                                                         safeguard policies. This will provide the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         framework within which EIAs and/or EMPs will
                                                                         eventually be developed.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           OP 4.04 - Natural Habitats will be triggered. The
                                                                         EMF provides a screening mechanism for screen
                                                                         sub-projects to ensure that no significant
                                                                         degradation or conversion of natural habitat will
                                                                         occur. In cases where sub-projects are located in
                                                                         the vicinity of natural habitats (without imposing
                                                                         significant degradation or conversion) appropriate
                                                                         mitigation measures will be adopted, and will be
                                                                         described in the EMF and subsequent EAs.

                                                                         This project will help protect degraded critical
                                                                         ecosystems, which are important to preserve local
                                                                         biodiversity and the quality of water resources.
                                                                         The EMF will explicitly forbid any project
                                                                         activities in areas supporting critical natural
                                                                         habitats or inducing significant conversion or
                                                                         degradation of critical natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            Based on site visits to potential sub-projects, and
                                                                         discussions held during preparation missions, it
                                                                         seems unlikely that sub-projects would have an
                                                                         impact on the health and quality of forests, affect
                                                                         the rights and welfare of people living in forests,
                                                                         or would bring about changes in the management,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         protection, or utilization of natural forests or
                                                                         plantations. Hence, there is therefore no need to
                                                                         trigger OP 4.36. The EMF will explicitly forbid
                                                                         any project activities that would lead to the
                                                                         destruction, degradation or conversion of forests
                                                                         and key forest ecosystems.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            During project preparation, the team confirmed
                                                                         that this safeguard policy is not triggered because
                                                                         the project will not support activities that require
                                                                         the use or procurement of pesticides. Any land
                                                                         clearing for rehabilitation works will be
                                                                         undertaken manually.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The project is not expected to have negative
                         BP 4.11                                         impacts on cultural property, including movable
                                                                         or immovable objects, sites, structures, groups of
                                                                         structures or natural features or landscapes with
                                                                         archaeological, paleontological, historical,
                                                                         architectural, religious, aesthetic or other cultural



                                                                 Page 5 of 13
                                                                        significance. However, “chance findings” during
                                                                        implementation of activities could be possible.
                                                                        During implementation, possibility that the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        Project in the context of potential sub-project
                                                                        affect known archaeological sites or chance finds
                                                                        will be assessed. In the event that such sub-
                                                                        projects are contemplated, project implementation
                                                                        will include an archaeological survey of all
                                                                        potentially affected area by qualified
                                                                        archaeologists and the local authorities
                                                                        responsible for the protection of Belize's cultural
                                                                        heritage will be consulted. . Chance finds
                                                                        procedures will be incorporated into EMPs and
                                                                        construction contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes           The main communities to be affected by the
                                                                        project are those that are located on or next to the
                                                                        primary and secondary roads considered as
                                                                        critical in each of the four target areas. All of
                                                                        these communities with the exception of
                                                                        Belmopan are considered rural communities.
                                                                        Indigenous communities that have been identified
                                                                        have been included because they all fall within
                                                                        the projects zone of influence. Of all the
                                                                        communities that are likely to be affected by the
                                                                        project, seven are considered to be indigenous
                                                                        communities. Six are made up predominantly by
                                                                        indigenous Mayas and one by the Garifuna. These
                                                                        are all found in the Stann Creek and Toledo
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        districts. For this reason, a Culturally
                                                                        Appropriate Planning Framework was developed.
                                                                        Direct impacts on these communities are unlikely
                                                                        given that there are no community members
                                                                        living on the road reserve. However, in the
                                                                        unlikely case that impacts are foreseen in the
                                                                        subproject design, action plans will be prepared
                                                                        by which the GoB will ensure that communities’
                                                                        free, prior and informed consultation leading to
                                                                        broad community support is achieved before
                                                                        subproject implementation.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           The project is not expected to have major impacts
                         4.12                                           on private land or livelihoods, especially given its
                                                                        focus on rehabilitation of existing infrastructure.
                                                                        However, it is possible that works such as river
                                                                        defense, drainage improvements, the
                                                                        rehabilitation and replacement of critical bridges
                                                                        and road improvements, could possibly elicit
                                                                        impacts such as (1) loss of property and assets


                                                                Page 6 of 13
                                                                  due to displacements and relocation of
                                                                  individuals/families occupying road reserves
                                                                  related to road widening, diversion of existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                  road and/or drainage purposes. Most of the
                                                                  encroachments on road reserves, and thus the
                                                                  highest proportion of related impacts, are in
                                                                  Greater Belize City Area; and (2) Loss of land
                                                                  and other assets (buildings, fences, crops, vendor
                                                                  stalls, driveways, signs etc.) from appropriation,
                                                                  removal, acquisition and demolition.

                                                                  The project’s involuntary resettlement policy
                                                                  framework has been prepared to guide the
                                                                  preparation of resettlement plans in order to
                                                                  mitigate these impacts. As soon as subprojects
                                                                  are identified and feasibility studies commence,
                                                                  the exact types and number of impacts will be
                                                                  estimated and a resettlement plan(s) will be
                                                                  prepared and implemented based on the
                                                                  framework’s guidelines.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No           Since two of the four priority areas of the BCRIP
                                                                  are located within the Belize River Watershed
                                                                  area, where the country’s three hydroelectric
                                                                  facilities are situated, Safety of Dams (Policy OP/
                                                                  BP 4.37) was initially triggered as a precaution,
                                                                  and a Dam Safety Framework prepared and
                                                                  disclosed as an Annex to the Environmental
                                                                  Management Framework (EMF).
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                  During preparation of the Dam Safety
                                                                  Framework, information on dam safety
                                                                  management was gathered from the Belize
                                                                  Electric Company Limited (BECOL), which is
                                                                  responsible for Hydroelectric Facilities
                                                                  comprising the Macal River Upstream Storage
                                                                  Facility (Chalillo), and the Mollejon and Vaca
                                                                  Hydroelectric Facilities, located along the Macal
                                                                  River in the Cayo District. These three dams,
                                                                  while primarily constructed to generate
                                                                  electricity, also lessen the impacts of natural
                                                                  disasters from the Macal River.

                                                                  However, in an expanded discussion of the nature
                                                                  of potential sub-projects with the Regional Safety
                                                                  Advisor and the Bank’s Dam Safety Advisor, the
                                                                  Task Team clarified that none of the proposed
                                                                  civil works rely on the operation or performance



                                                          Page 7 of 13
                                                                        of the upstream dams. Proposed works are not
                                                                        hydraulic structures that include extraction/
                                                                        pumping of water (as would be the case in an
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        irrigation system or water supply system) but
                                                                        rather involve embankment and road protection
                                                                        measures such as strengthening of embankments,
                                                                        straightening of ox-bows, replacement of culverts
                                                                        with small bridges, and so forth. Therefore,
                                                                        paragraph 7 of OP 4.37 does not apply in this
                                                                        instance and OP 4.37 will not be triggered. All
                                                                        Project Documentation will be altered to reflect
                                                                        this change, and the EMF will be re-disclosed
                                                                        without the annex comprising the Dam Safety
                                                                        Framework.
                         Projects on International       No             Benque Viejo del Carmen and Belmopan are
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                           located along the international waterway, which
                                                                        originates in Guatemala (the Mopan River) and
                                                                        flows downstream into Belize (where the Mopan
                                                                        flows into the Belize River). The Belize River in
                                                                        turn discharges into the Caribbean Sea. The
                                                                        BCRIP’s investment will likely include the
                                                                        following:
                                                                        Hydrological improvements such as Small-scale
                                                                        creek alignment, straightening of ox-bows, cut-
                                                                        and-fill, retaining walls along embankments,
                                                                        sizing of culverts to manage water flow better
                                                                        along the primary and secondary road networks,
                                                                        some replacement of culverts with small bridges;
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        as well as road rehabilitation, widening and
                                                                        shoulder improvement.
                                                                        The Project will not include any diversion dams,
                                                                        and will not include hydraulic structures
                                                                        involving pumps. In addition, the project will not
                                                                        extract or use (for irrigation or electricity or water
                                                                        supply or flood control) any water from the
                                                                        waterways. The purpose of the civil works is to
                                                                        improve water flow to avoid flooding of roads,
                                                                        (by maintaining smooth flow of the river through
                                                                        the measures described above). Disturbance
                                                                        caused by civil works (removal of construction
                                                                        waste, dust, etc.) will be addressed through
                                                                        mitigation measures in the EMF.
                                                                        Based on the nature of work supported by the
                                                                        Project, the team received guidance from LEGLE
                                                                        that the Policy is not applicable to the BCRIP.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP Yes           The Policy was triggered due to the territorial
                         7.60                                           dispute between Belize and Guatemala.


                                                                Page 8 of 13
                                                                                 Guatemala maintains a long-standing territorial
                                                                                 claim over the territory of Belize. In compliance
                                                                                 with the OP/BP 7.60, a memorandum was sent to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 the Executive Director representing Guatemala
                                                                                 providing all relevant information regarding the
                                                                                 project and requesting that Guatemala provide a
                                                                                 no objection for the project in writing within a 30-
                                                                                 day period. There was no further response from
                                                                                 the Government of Guatemala. The Country
                                                                                 Director further arranged a meeting with the
                                                                                 respective Executive Directors (ED) to discuss
                                                                                 the issues. In line with OP/BP 7.60, the World
                                                                                 Bank team will prepare another memorandum to
                                                                                 update the RVP of the outcome of the follow-up
                                                                                 discussions of the EDs before the Project
                                                                                 Negotiations.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Potential adverse environmental impacts on human populations or environmentally important
                              areas are site-specific, and are related to small-scale retrofitting and rehabilitation works which are
                              expected to be mainly localized, temporary and readily manageable. The EMF provides a
                              screening mechanism for screen sub-projects to ensure that no significant degradation or
                              conversion of natural habitat will occur. In cases where sub-projects are located in the vicinity of
                              natural habitats (without imposing significant degradation or conversion) appropriate mitigation
Public Disclosure Copy




                              measures will be adopted, and will be described in the EMF and subsequent EAs.

                              Regarding the project’s social impacts, the main permanent adverse impacts will be specifically
                              the (1) loss of property and assets due to displacements and relocation of individuals/families
                              occupying road reserves related to road widening, diversion of existing road and/or drainage
                              purposes. Most of the encroachments on road reserves, and thus the highest proportion of related
                              impacts, are in Greater Belize City Area; and (2) Loss of land and other assets (buildings, fences,
                              crops, vendor stalls, driveways, signs etc.) from appropriation, removal, acquisition and
                              demolition.

                              Works under the BCRIP are not expected to affect community lands or those lands that the Mayas
                              of Toledo are laying claim to, based on traditional use and occupancy. Consequently, the project is
                              unlikely to prejudice the outcome of the land rights case before the Caribbean Court of Justice in
                              any way, unless significant community lands are required for the project, which is not expected to
                              occur given the nature of the project and its focus on major roads only and these roads already
                              exist.

                              Temporary social impacts will include possible delays in transportation, disruption of access to
                              properties (homes, businesses and public facilities) from main road during construction, increased
                              stress and anxiety resulting from road works (dust and air pollution from road works, noise


                                                                         Page 9 of 13
                           pollution from heavy machinery and equipment), open borrow pits and quarries risking safety of
                           small livestock and children, and increased chances of work-related accidents, injuries and
                           illnesses.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           There are no indirect or long term environmental impacts expected as a consequence of future
                           activities in the proposed project area.

                           As far as potential social indirect/long term impacts, these include:
                           •        Influx/Outflows of temporary workers causing disruption of social order by migrant work
                           crews coming from diverse cultural and geographic backgrounds.
                           •        Increase in road traffic accidents from high speeds and high traffic volume.
                           •        Gender disparities (economic, political power, social benefits) are further entrenched.
                           •        Potential deepening of distrust in governmental institutions stemming from resentment of
                           authorities from land acquisition or displacement actions.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Sub-projects based in natural reserves or protected areas have been excluded from the project,
                           unless adequate mitigation measures have been put in place, based on consultations with local
                           conservation and environmental NGOs.

                           During implementation, feasibility studies on different road alignment design options or
                           alternatives will include social criteria related to physical impacts to influence the final decision of
                           which works will be financed.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           A high quality EMF, Involuntary Resettlement Policy Framework and Culturally Appropriate
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Planning Framework have been prepared for the project, which provide a comprehensive set of
                           guidelines for the preparation and monitoring of sub-project environmental social plans. While
                           both the environmental specialist and social specialist will still need to be hired, BSIF has
                           experience of the Bank’s safeguards policies and compliance through BMDP. The new safeguards
                           specialist will be provided with training on the Bank’s environmental and social management
                           practices.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Consultations on the EMF were held in February 2014 with key stakeholders including: Sarteneja
                           Alliance for Conservation and Development, Corozal Sustainable Future Initiative, the Belize
                           Audubon Society, TIDE, the Cayo District Association of Village Councils. Their concerns and
                           suggestions will be incorporated into the selection of sub-projects (for example, public awareness
                           campaigns, sustainable management of construction camps, need to avoid or take appropriate
                           mitigation measures in RAMSAR sites, etc.

                           Consultations on the IRPF and the CAPF were held on February 25th and March 29th specifically
                           with Mayan leaders from the Maya Mopan Village Council, San Pablo Village Council and Santa
                           Rosa Village Council, and on Feb. 18th and March 26th with the National Association of Village
                           Councils (NAVCO), Ministry of Natural Resources and Agriculture, Sr. Valuation officer and
                           several Rural Development Office. Consultation participants’ comments have been taken into


                                                                      Page 10 of 13
                           account especially those related to lessons learned from past experiences with similar
                           infrastructure projects, such as their desire to encourage employment of local workers and
                           technical staff, fluent communication throughout the project cycle, and participation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           communities in the project’s monitoring system.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Belize                                                           21-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Apr-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Belize                                                           15-Apr-2014
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Apr-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Belize                                                           15-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?


                                                                    Page 11 of 13
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                          Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                          be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                          issue, been prepared
                          Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the OP?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?




                                                                     Page 12 of 13
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Yoonhee Kim
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Anna Wellenstein (SM)                     Date: 19-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 13 of 13
