INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR1 106
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Dec-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Turkey                     Project ID:  P081880
Project Name: Municipal Services Project (PO81880)
Task Team       Elif Ayhan
Leader:
Estimated       23-Mar-2005                Estimated    23-Jun-2005
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Water supply (43%), Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (17%), Wastewater
Collection and Transportation (16%), Solid waste management (16%), Sub-
national government administration (8%)
Theme:          Pollution management and environmental health (50%), City-wide Infrastructure
and Service Delivery (50%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
O
U         Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:     570.65            Total Bank Financing:  515.00
o        Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                         5.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          515.00
Municipalities of Borrowing Country                             50.65
Financing Gap                                                    0.00
Total                                                          570.65
Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
Page 1 of 7


﻿2. Current Project Development Objectives
The objective of the project is to support sustainable environmental services in selected
municipalities. This objective will be met through: (a) development o
f municipal infrastructure; (b) strengthening the financial position and operati
onal efficiency of the selected municipalities and municipal utilities; and (c)
institutional strengthening of IB.
o         The municipalities that have been proposed by Iller Bank (IB) to be included in the project are:
Antalya, Bergama, Cankiri, Gumusova-Duzce, Elbistan, Erzurum, G
elibolu, Ilica, Kutahya, Mersin, Mugla, Odemis, Polatli, Samsun, and Serik. The
se municipalities were proposed based on a demand survey. The State Planning Or
ganization and Treasury were consulted by Iller Bank on preparing the list of pr
oposed municipalities which have to meet the project's Sub-Borrower and Sub-Proj
ect eligibility criteria to receive financing under the Bank loan. No new munic
ipalities will join the project without prior approval of the Bank.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The objective of the project is to support sustainable environmental services in selected
municipalities. This objective will be met through: (a) development o
f municipal infrastructure; (b) strengthening the financial position and operati
onal efficiency of the selected municipalities and municipal utilities; and (c)
institutional strengthening of IB.
The municipalities that have been proposed by Iller Bank (IB) to be included in the project are:
Antalya, Bergama, Cankiri, Gumusova-Duzce, Elbistan, Erzurum, G
elibolu, Ilica, Kutahya, Mersin, Mugla, Odemis, Polatli, Samsun, and Serik. The
se municipalities were proposed based on a demand survey. The State Planning Or
ganization and Treasury were consulted by Iller Bank on preparing the list of pr
oposed municipalities which have to meet the project's Sub-Borrower and Sub-Proj
ect eligibility criteria to receive financing under the Bank loan. No new munic
ipalities will join the project without prior approval of the Bank.
3. Project Description
The project will have three components: (a) municipal development investments (water, wastewater,
solid waste); (b) technical assistance to municipalities; and, (c) Iller Bank institutional strengthening.
Component 1: Municipal Development: This component would support investments in the water,
wastewater, and solid waste sectors, including but not limited to, complementary investments for
municipal borrowers under the Municipal Services Project. Investments are being defined through
feasibility studies. IB will carry out the due diligence on appraising each sub-project and will also be
responsible for supervision.
Component 2: Municipal Technical Assistance: The component will support the following activities
by the municipalities: (a) preparation of feasibility studies; (b) preparation of design and bidding
documents; (c) preparation and implementation of the operational improvement plans related to
institutional, technical and financial matters, including financial risk management; and (d)
construction supervision.
Page 2 of 7


﻿Component 3: Iller Bank Institutional Strengthening: This component would finance technical
assistance to Iller Bank so that it is able to implement the project in a satisfactory manner. Eligible
expenditures under this category will be: (a) increasing technical capacity; (b) incremental operating
costs; and (c) audits.
o
This restructuring will introduce the following changes to the Project: a) extending the Additional
Financing (AF) loan closing date by 23 months till November 30, 2016; b) reallocation of funds
between sub-borrowers; c) revising the Results Framework to enhance results monitoring so as to
reflect cancellation of Istanbul Water and Wastewater Administration (ISKI) sub-project and
reallocation of the corresponding amount to Denizli Water and Wastewater Administration (DESKI),
as well as update intermediate targets for the extended Project implementation period; and d) update
thresholds for National Competitive Bidding (NCB) procedures in the procurement plans of
municipalities with ongoing project activities to ensure consistency with usual portfolio practices.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The municipalities included are: Antalya, Izmir, Kahramanmaras, Canakkale, Mugla, Denizli,
Kutahya, Polatli, Kirsehir, Beypazari and Kayseri for water, waste water, sewage, and landfill
investments. Characteristics of project locations vary for each sub-project. None of the projects
selected for inclusion in this project would have an impact on international waterways.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (GSURR)
Esra Arikan (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes
BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No
a
Forests OP/BP 4.36             No
Pest Management OP 4.09        No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  Yes
4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No
Projects on International      Yes
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
7.60
Page 3 of 7


﻿II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
)           Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is supporting the following types of subprojects: (a) rehabilitation and construction of
O
water supply treatment facilities and water supply networks, (b) rehabilitation and construction of
6 wastewater treatment facilities and sewerage networks, and (c) rehabilitation and construction of
*           solid waste landfills. Generic environmental issues associated with the construction and operation
of each type of subproject have been elaborated in Annexes of the Environmental Framework (EF)
document prepared by IB and approved by the World Bank. Similarly, involuntary resettlement
requirements of the Bank and the responsibility of Iller Bank have been outlined in the Land
Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework (LARPF). Site-specific issues/impacts are be
determined by IB during the screening process as described in the EF and LARPF.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The project does not pose risk for indirect or long term environmental or social impacts. Iller
Bank screens sub-projects for such potential impacts in accordance with the EF and LARPF
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
An analysis of alternatives is required in the preparation of feasibility study reports and
environmental management plans for the site specific sub-projects. For any site specific sub-
project screened as Category A according to procedures specified in the EF, the resulting EIA
document includes a section on Analysis of Alternatives. Iller Bank and the municipalities try to
minimize involuntary land acquisition in all sub-projects.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An EF was prepared by Iller Bank and approved by the World Bank for the original Municipal
Services Project. This was updated in 2009 during preparation of the additional financing loan, for
use on both the original project and the additional loan. Consultations on the updated EF were
conducted on December 2009 and records of the consultation process have been included in the
EF as an annex. The final updated EF has been disclosed on the Iller Bank public website and at
the World Bank Infoshop on March 2010.
In accordance with the updated EF, Iller Bank is responsible for screening projects based on the
World Bank's environmental categories of A, B, and C. The municipalities are responsible for
carrying out the environmental assessments (including social) for any site specific sub-projects
they propose for financing. For sub-projects which are determined to require preparation of EIA
(Annex I under Turkish EA regulations and/or Category A under World Bank screening criteria)
Iller Bank submits necessary information to the World Bank to seek formal no-objection for
financing for these investments. For the remaining Category B investments, the relevant Turkish
environmental report (Project Information File for Annex 2, no documentation for 'No Annex')
and Environmental Management Plan/Partial EA is submitted to WB for review and clearance.
The updated EF outlines the procedures for public consultation and information disclosure for
individual sub-projects.
Similarly, a LARPF was prepared and approved by the World Bank for the original project. This
Page 4 of 7


﻿was revised and re-disclosed for the additional financing in 2010. Consultations on the LARPF
were conducted on December 2009 and records of the consultation process were included in the
LARPF as an annex. The final LARPF was disclosed on the Iller Bank public website and at the
World Bank Infoshop on March 2010.
o
In accordance with the LARPF, Iller Bank screens sub-projects and prepares Resettlement Action
Plans as necessary. In addition, Iller Bank reports any issues regarding implementation to the
World Bank through bi-annual reports, according to the reporting format outlined in the LARPF.
The World Bank reviews and clears Action Plans and reporting, and supervises the sub-projects
for compliance with Bank standards through site visits.
Iller Bank has gained experience in working with the World Bank and applying its safeguard
policies. They have assigned specific staff for dealing with environmental and social safeguards
issues, and the technical staff attended several safeguards training programs provided by the
World Bank.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include the Treasury, Iller Bank, the participating municipalities and their
associated utilities, and municipal residents. Drafts of the EF and LARPF, both updates of
frameworks developed for the original Municipal Services Project, have been disclosed and
consultations have been held at various stages. Consultation and disclosure of the appraisal stage
EF and LARPF has also been completed. Moreover, the updated EF and LARPF have also been
consulted with stakeholders and disclosed during the Additional Finance preparations in 2010.
Public consultation and disclosure requirements of individual subprojects are fully described in the
EF and the LARPF. Consultation and disclosure of the Framework document itself has used media
accessible by all stakeholders as well as the World Bank InfoShop.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                30-Jan-2009
Date of submission to InfoShop                             02-Mar-2010
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
a          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Turkey                                                     02-Mar-2010
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                28-May-2009
Date of submission to InfoShop                             02-Mar-2010
"In country" Disclosure
Turkey                                                     02-Mar-2010
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
Page 5 of 7


﻿If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
0
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?  Yes [  ] No [ ]      NA [ X ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [  ] No [   ]   NA [ X ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                 Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [ X ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader: Elif Ayhan
Page 6 of 7


﻿Approved By
Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)               Date: 16-Dec-2014
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/   Name:                                   Date:
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


