                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA8281
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Philippines                        Project ID:    P145391
                            Project Name:      Studies for Sustainable Flood Mgmt. (P145391)
                            Task Team          Joop Stoutjesdijk
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Apr-2014                        Estimated   31-Dec-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASPS                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Flood protection (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (70%), Natural disaster management (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          7.00             Total Bank Financing:        0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                      0.00
                              Philippines - Free-standing Trust Fund Program                                                7.00
                              Total                                                                                         7.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed development objective is to prepare priority projects that aim to improve flood
                           management and resilience in the Greater Metro Manila Area.
                            3. Project Description
                           The recently approved Metro Manila Flood Management Master Plan proposes a large program of
                           priority infrastructure to safely manage and control major flood events in the Greater Metro Manila

                                                                       Page 1 of 11
                         Area that comprises Metro Manila and Laguna de Bay and its shore areas. Among the main large-
                         scale priority interventions that have been identified in the Master Plan are: (i) a high dam in the
                         upper Marikina River catchment area to reduce the peak flows entering the city during typhoon and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         other extreme rainfall events; (ii) flood protection works in the Marikina River, upstream of the
                         proposed Phase IV of the Pasig-Marikina River Channel Improvement Program; (iii) land raising or
                         another similar development along the western shore of Laguna de Bay to protect the population
                         against high water levels in the lake (as the designed solution will most likely involve land raising, as
                         also proposed in the Master Plan, this is referred to in the rest of the text, although there is still a
                         possibility that a more preferred option is selected at the feasibility stage under this project); and (iv)
                         further development of a comprehensive flood forecasting system and monitoring and early warning
                         system for the Greater Metro Manila Area, with maximum participation of local communities.

                         The Government of the Philippines (GoP) intends to start the implementation of the Master Plan with
                         substantial investments as soon as possible. It is therefore necessary to prepare some of the large
                         high priority investments, both structural and non-structural, as well as develop improved
                         institutional arrangements for flood management. Such investments will be essential to make
                         substantial improvements to flood management in large parts of the Greater Metro Manila Area.

                         This project will finance two components, the main one related to the carrying out of feasibility and
                         design studies and preparation of tender documents of priority infrastructure that, when implemented,
                         will lead to substantially increased safety of the population during flood events. A small second
                         component relates to project management and administration.

                         Component A – Preparation of feasibility and design studies for priority flood management
                         infrastructure. Feasibility and design studies will be prepared for: (i) a high dam in the upper
                         Marikina River catchment area; and (ii) land raising along the western shore of Laguna de Bay (in
                         parallel a US$3 million PHRD grant will finance the preparation of the other major interventions
                         mentioned above). Multi-disciplinary teams of consultants, including expertise in civil engineering,
                         dam engineering, resettlement, hydrology, economics, social science, environment, urban renewal,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         etc., will be recruited to prepare detailed feasibility and design studies for the above mentioned
                         proposed interventions. The feasibility studies will review, as needed, the various options for flood
                         management improvements in the study areas, including a quick assessment of related social and
                         resettlement impacts in terms of magnitude, costs, and risks, to be followed immediately by design
                         studies and preparation of tender documents of the selected option. The design phase will include
                         the technical and engineering studies, economic studies, and social and environmental studies, all in
                         compliance with the relevant World Bank Operational and Safeguard Policies and government
                         requirements, and up to a level ready for appraisal/financing by the government, possibly with the
                         assistance of international organizations such as the World Bank and JICA. It is envisaged that
                         separate consulting firms will be hired for the technical studies for the dam and for the Laguna de
                         Bay land raising. One consulting firm/institute will be hired for the social and environmental
                         assessments related to both interventions, including the social surveys that will target the
                         communities that are affected by the potential projects. Social surveys will be conducted with active
                         involvement of the communities themselves. NGOs could be hired to carry out the dialogue with the
                         people that live in the high-risk areas. A Panel of Experts on Dams will be established as per OP on
                         Dam Safety.

                         Component B – Project management and administration. Operational expenses for the Department
                         of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) will be financed to manage the implementation of the grant
                         and monitor the consultants and the outputs of the services. Fixed costs, such as staff costs, will be

                                                                       Page 2 of 11
                         paid for by DPWH. The government's Commission on Audit (COA) will conduct the annual audit of
                         the grant.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The project location is the Greater Metro Manila Area, in particular a dam site in the upper
                         catchment area of the Marikina River and the western shore of Laguna de Bay.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (EASPS)
                         Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (EASPS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             While the project only supports the preparation of
                          BP 4.01                                             engineering designs of two priority investments
                                                                              identified in the Metro Manila Flood
                                                                              Management Master Plan, i.e. a high dam in the
                                                                              upper Marikina River catchment area and the
                                                                              raising of low-lying areas along the western
                                                                              shores of Laguna de Bay, and the conduct of
                                                                              environmental and social assessments for these
                                                                              priority investments, including resettlement
                                                                              studies, the policy is triggered since these studies
                                                                              are expected to lead to investments expected to
                                                                              have positive but also potentially adverse
                                                                              environmental and social impacts, including
                                                                              resettlement of mostly informal settlers, if not
                                                                              managed adequately.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              Part of this project is the conduct of
                                                                              environmental and social assessments and
                                                                              resettlement (rehousing) studies to precisely
                                                                              assess impacts and put forward options and
                                                                              mitigation measures to be considered in the
                                                                              engineering designs of the proposed two main
                                                                              investments. The environmental and social
                                                                              assessments will be carried out by DPWH with
                                                                              technical assistance and support from qualified
                                                                              consultants to ensure that the Bank's and the
                                                                              National Government's environmental and social
                                                                              safeguard policies are being followed and
                                                                              complied with. The environmental and social
                                                                              impact assessments (ESIA, one for the dam and
                                                                              another one for the Laguna de Bay land raising)
                                                                              will carefully assess the environment and social
                                                                              impacts of the priority investments, including
                                                                              impacts from ancillary facilities as well as
                                                                              cumulative impacts, and lay out detailed plans for



                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                                                                         mitigation in the Environmental and Social
                                                                         Management Plan (ESMP), including a
                                                                         monitoring and reporting program. An
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         institutional assessment and capacity building
                                                                         plan for DPWH's Environmental and Social
                                                                         Safeguards Division (ESSD) will be prepared as
                                                                         well. The ESMP will be properly costed to
                                                                         ensure that the costs to fully implement it get
                                                                         incorporated into any future civil works contract.
                                                                         The various options in terms of sites, alignments,
                                                                         resettlement (rehousing) will also be analyzed as
                                                                         part of the ESIA.

                                                                         A Grievance Redress Mechanism will be
                                                                         developed and be detailed in the ESMP and be
                                                                         presented to the communities during public
                                                                         consultations.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           The ESIA will identify natural habitats and other
                                                                         ecologically sensitive areas that may be affected
                                                                         by the priority investments. The project will not
                                                                         support activities that would significantly convert
                                                                         or degrade critical natural habitats consistent with
                                                                         the policy. If the ESIA indicates that a project
                                                                         would significantly convert or degrade non-
                                                                         critical natural habitats, the project would include
                                                                         acceptable mitigation measures in the ESMP.
                                                                         Such mitigation measures could include, as
                                                                         appropriate, minimizing habitat loss (e.g. strategic
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         habitat retention and post-development
                                                                         restoration) and establishing and maintaining an
                                                                         ecologically similar protected area.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes           The ESIA will confirm the project impacts on
                                                                         forests and forest-dependent communities,
                                                                         particularly in and around the proposed dam site.
                                                                         As needed, the ESMP will include measures to
                                                                         address impacts on forests, forest health, and
                                                                         forest-dependent communities.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project will not support directly or indirectly
                                                                         any investments that would trigger the policy.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The ESIA will closely assess the various
                         BP 4.11                                         alternative technical options to determine any
                                                                         possible cause of disturbance and negative
                                                                         impacts to historical areas, architectural land
                                                                         marks, and other cultural property, which may
                                                                         need to be mitigated. During construction, the
                                                                         landscape of the sites may also be affected and



                                                                 Page 4 of 11
                                                                        structural damage to old structures may occur due
                                                                        to vibrations and excavation of adjacent areas.
                                                                        The ESIA will confirm impacts of priority
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        investments on physical cultural resources (PCR),
                                                                        and where needed a PCR management plan will
                                                                        be formulated as part of the ESMP, including
                                                                        chance find procedures that will be followed
                                                                        during construction.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes           The whole of Metro Manila does not have
                                                                        ancestral domains and/or Indigenous Peoples (IP)
                                                                        communities. However, a study done in early
                                                                        2000s for another project found that there are IP
                                                                        communities in the upland areas of 8 LGUs of
                                                                        Rizal Province. Initial investigations have shown
                                                                        that there are no settlements in and around the
                                                                        proposed reservoir area of the Marikina Dam.
                                                                        The area is, however, part of the ancestral domain
                                                                        of the indigenous Dumagat-Remontados people.

                                                                        The five cities/municipalities where land raising
                                                                        is expected to be done do not have IP
                                                                        communities. These are Taguig, Paranaque,
                                                                        Pateros, Muntinlupa, and Pasig.

                                                                        Further screening of this will be carried out by the
                                                                        social and environment consultants early on
                                                                        during the implementation of the studies and if
                                                                        the screening confirms their presence in and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        around the proposed reservoir area, and area for
                                                                        land raising along the western shore of Laguna de
                                                                        Bay, social assessment to comply with the policy
                                                                        will be incorporated in the ESIA and an
                                                                        indigenous peoples (IP) Framework and/or IP
                                                                        Plan will be developed, as needed.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           The Master Plan has indicated that thousands of
                         4.12                                           families, both formal and informal, are living
                                                                        along the western shore of Laguna de Bay. It is
                                                                        not expected that people live in the possible
                                                                        reservoir area of the dam. The priority
                                                                        investments may cause both temporary and
                                                                        permanent physical and economic displacement
                                                                        of people occupying the flood plain of the lake.

                                                                        A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and/or
                                                                        Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared.
                                                                        The RPF and/or RAP will be guided by a series of
                                                                        rehousing studies that are currently under


                                                                Page 5 of 11
                                 preparation. The RPF and/or RAP will assess
                                 various alternatives/options that will have the
                                 least impacts on people living in danger flood
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 zones and factor these findings in the engineering
                                 designs. In addition, impacts to potentially
                                 affected persons and planning for mitigation of
                                 the same to their housing and livelihood
                                 conditions are important aspects of the studies to
                                 be made. The outcomes of these studies will
                                 influence the decision on the final configuration
                                 of the investments, including alignments.
                                 Resettlement action plans, where needed, will
                                 thus be prepared together with the preparation of
                                 the detailed engineering design of the
                                 infrastructure to be built as soon as the final sites
                                 for the priority investments are known.

                                 The RPF or RAP will provide a sufficiently
                                 detailed analysis of the resettlement/rehousing
                                 impacts, social impacts, and the institutional
                                 aspects in order to be able to provide detailed
                                 recommendations on how these should be taken
                                 into account during implementation. Particular
                                 attention will be given to the key institutions and
                                 different government entities involved in the
                                 resettlement/rehousing. Interventions may
                                 include institutional strengthening activities,
                                 development of Peoples Plans, and the possible
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 implementation of a rental voucher scheme. The
                                 terms of reference (ToR) for the preparation of
                                 the RPF or RAP will be cleared by the Regional
                                 Safeguard Adviser (RSA) prior to their beginning.

                                 An independent Panel of Experts will be
                                 established to oversee inter alia the preparation of
                                 the RPF and/or RAP and provide guidance, where
                                 needed. The Panel will include expertise in
                                 social, resettlement, and urban planning and
                                 development. This Panel is different from the
                                 Panel of Experts on Dams (see below).

                                 Identification of potentially linked activities/
                                 projects such as those implemented by DPWH,
                                 Metro Manila Development Authority and LGUs
                                 will also be carried out at the beginning of project
                                 preparation and if it is established that some of
                                 the activities and projects are related, the



                         Page 6 of 11
                                                                                preparation of appropriate safeguards instrument
                                                                                will be discussed with the counterparts. The
                                                                                identification of linked activities/projects will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                done as one of the first activities in the ESIA and
                                                                                will be carried out by the consultants, in
                                                                                cooperation with government counterparts, the
                                                                                Bank’s task team supported by the regional
                                                                                safeguards adviser, and the Panel of Experts.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           Yes             Since the project will entail the design of a high
                                                                                dam as one of its priority investments, this policy
                                                                                is triggered. OP 4.37 requires that experienced
                                                                                and competent professionals design and supervise
                                                                                construction, and that the borrower adopts and
                                                                                implements dam safety measures through the
                                                                                project cycle. A Panel of Experts on Dams with
                                                                                the needed technical expertise will be established
                                                                                by the time the studies start.
                            Projects on International        No                 There will be no sub-projects in international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 There will be no sub-projects in disputed areas.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The project itself is meant to produce design studies. While by itself the project is not expected to
                              have social and environmental impacts, the studies will identify impacts related to future
                              construction of the design interventions and incorporate mitigating measures in ESMPs and the
                              design of the civil works. The future implementation of the identified priority projects may cause
                              temporary and/or permanent displacement of people especially along the western shores of Laguna
                              de Bay. It may also affect the Remontados in the uplands of Antipolo City and Rodriguez Rizal.
                              These issues will have to be carefully taken into account already during the preparation of the
                              studies.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Improved flood management in the Greater Metro Manila Area is the anticipated result of
                              expected future activities. This will help improve the quality of life and socio-economic well-
                              being of communities that currently are perennially subjected to flooding as well as the overall
                              environmental quality in the Greater Metro Manila Area. The implementation of the proposals for
                              the Laguna de Bay flood plain would cause temporary displacement of up to 50,000 households,
                              many of whom are now informally residing along the western shores of Laguna de Bay. The Bank
                              is studying various forms of support for such people, such as voucher schemes. The results of
                              these studies will form an important input into the project activities.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.


                                                                        Page 7 of 11
                           An analysis of alternatives, in terms of type of civil works and locations, was carried out as part of
                           the master plan preparation. A more detailed analysis will be carried out early on during the
                           implementation of this project to determine in detail which of the infrastructure investments will
Public Disclosure Copy




                           have the least environmental and social impacts. The selected option will then be worked out up
                           to design level, including tender documents.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           DPWH is familiar with the Bank Safeguards Policies. It has an Environment and Social
                           Safeguards Division, primarily dedicated to the environmental and social impact management of
                           their different projects. It maintains separate sets of safeguard standards depending on the funding
                           source of the project it implements. The performance of ESSD, based on the recent World Bank
                           thematic review for the Philippines, points to the need of putting in place a capacity building
                           program if it is to be in charge of handling safeguard issues during the future implementation of
                           the designs prepared under this project. ESSD will benefit by strengthening its capacity to manage
                           and coordinate the safeguards principles and procedures especially related to the preparation of the
                           environmental and social assessment studies and for resettlement/rehousing of affected
                           communities living in the flood plain of Laguna de Bay. The consultants that will prepare the
                           ESIA, ESMP, and RAP, as needed, will work closely with ESSD during the preparation of the
                           studies.

                           An independent Panel of Experts will be established to provide overall advice and guidance during
                           the implementation of the studies and endorse key proposals and to oversee the implementation of
                           the social and resettlement studies and how they integrate with the technical studies. The Panel
                           will include expertise in social, resettlement, and urban planning and development. A Panel of
                           Experts on Dams will be established as per OP on Dam Safety.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The key stakeholders of the project are the people that live in high risk areas along the western
                           shore of Laguna de Bay and local officials of the five impacted Local Government Units (LGU).
                           There will be extensive formal (through workshops) and informal consultations with the affected
                           communities, non-governmental organizations (NGO) and civil society organizations (CSO) that
                           work with these communities, LGUs, government agencies, etc. to ensure that the social aspects
                           and rehousing/resettlement proposals will be understood and acceptable to all parties. The Bank
                           task team in close cooperation with DPWH and other agencies will implement an information
                           campaign that emphasizes expectations and transparency.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          29-Feb-2016
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       31-Mar-2016
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive          31-Mar-2016
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                      Page 8 of 11
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                         31-Mar-2016
                           Comments: The safeguard instruments will be prepared as part of the project, during the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         preparation of the studies to be funded under the project. Thus safeguard instruments
                                         cannot be disclosed prior to appraisal.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         29-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      31-Mar-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                         31-Mar-2016
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         29-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      31-Mar-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                         31-Mar-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?



                                                                    Page 9 of 11
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Indigenous Peoples?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                             Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                             Bank?
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Joop Stoutjesdijk

                                                                       Page 10 of 11
                         Approved By
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)      Date: 19-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Advisor:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Ousmane Dione (SM)       Date: 20-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            Page 11 of 11
