                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA4103
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                              Project ID:    P131235
                            Project Name:      Uttarakhand Decentralized Watershed Development II Project (P131235)
                            Task Team          Edward William Bresnyan
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          08-Nov-2013                        Estimated   27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDA                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Agricultural extension and research (40%), Forestry (25%), General agriculture,
                                              fishing and forestry sector (15%), Irrigation and dr ainage (10%), Agro-industry,
                                              marketing, and trade (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (49%), Participation and civic engagement
                                              (18%), Land administration and management (13%), Water r esource
                                              management (13%), Rural policies and institutions (7%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     170.00           Total Bank Financing:                 121.10
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        46.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              121.10
                              LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                                        2.90
                              Total                                                                                    170.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                                                       Page 1 of 12
                         To use participatory watershed development to improve the productive potential of natural resources
                         and rainfed agriculture and to support the GoUK in providing effective response in the targeted areas
                         to an eligible crisis or emergency, if required.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         Agriculture accounts for around 16 percent of India’s GDP. Some 60 percent of Indians depend on
                         agriculture as their primary livelihood, mainly in rainfed agriculture. India cultivates 86 million
                         rainfed hectares, which is among the largest in the world. The incidence of poverty is high in these
                         rainfed areas due to low land and labor productivity and limited employment opportunities. Of the
                         total state population of 8.5 million, 37 percent live below the poverty line, as compared to the
                         national average of 26 percent.
                         In Uttarakhand, about 80 percent of population in the hills depends on agriculture. Main crops are
                         subsistence cereals, for which productivity is as low as 1.2 to 1.4 ton/ha. On average, the crop yields
                         in the plains are 50 percent higher than those of the hills, due mainly to limited availability of
                         irrigation water, poor in-situ rainwater conservation, and loss of fertile topsoil. In the hills,
                         conventional irrigation practices are not feasible. Moreover, there has been an overall reduction in
                         the discharge rate of spring and stream water sources. About 10 percent of these water sources have
                         dried up over the last decade. Annual rainfall is high (1,523 mm) and more than 90 percent is
                         received during the July-September monsoon months, resulting in severe soil erosion and average
                         soil loss of 40 tons/ha/year. Rapid water runoff from the undulating hills during monsoon months
                         also adversely impacts downstream valley and plains regions. These are major constraints to
                         enhancing rainfed agronomic practices and increasing agricultural productivity. The degraded lands
                         are owned by poor households, and their land holdings are small and scattered. As a consequence,
                         household incomes are low and over 24 percent of the population out-migrates. Improving water
                         availability through watershed treatment is the only way forward for enhancing agriculture
                         productivity and improving livelihoods in the rainfed areas of Uttarakhand.
                         The Gramya I supported the Government of Uttarakhand (GoUK) in improving productivity and
                         livelihoods in the hills by enhancing natural resource management and strengthening capacity of the
                         targeted Gram Panchayats (GPs). Financed by an IDA credit of US$ 77.6 million equivalent and a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Global Environment Facility (GEF) grant of US$ 7.5 million Gramya I treated 234,000 ha in 76
                         micro-watersheds, built capacity of 468 GPs, and benefited 285,000 persons. With active community
                         participation and adoption of improved water conservation techniques, the Gramya I areas showed an
                         increase in the discharge rate from 5-8 liter per minute (lpm) to about 18 lpm. The project provided
                         renewable water for irrigation and domestic use. It is estimated to have created an additional
                         irrigation potential of 11,609 ha by converting about 13 percent of rainfed areas into irrigated areas.
                         In addition, Gramya I has helped in enhancing the productive potential of natural resources through
                         catchment treatment and forestry activities in project areas. This includes new forestry plantation of
                         16,363 ha.

                         The proposed Uttarakhand Decentralized Watershed Development II Project (Gramya II) would
                         focus on watershed treatment and source sustainability at the micro-watershed level, rainfed
                         agriculture development, and agribusiness strengthening. The following key lessons were drawn
                         from the Gramya I (P041264), which was financed by an IDA credit (US$77.6 million) and a Global
                         Environment Facility (GEF) grant (US$7.5 million):

                         •       Watershed development through a participatory approach can enhance the capacity of
                         targeted GPs and ownership and sustainability of the project investments. In support of the GoUK
                         decentralization strategy, Gramya I promoted a participatory approach to build GP capacity in
                         preparing and implementing WDPs. The project's targeted training on project management and

                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                         fiduciary and safeguards compliance resulted in a 30 percent increase in GP administrative capacity.
                         The participatory approach also fostered ownership among water users in targeted GPs, which
                         ensured the sustainability of project investments. As such, the proposed Gramya II would continue to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strengthen targeted GPs and VPs in developing micro-watershed development plans.
                         •        Comprehensive watershed treatment at the micro-watershed level has proven effective. The
                         GEF grant under Gramya I engaged GPs and VPs in treating 20 micro-watersheds, including inter-
                         GP areas and reserve forests, ensuring full benefits of reduced soil erosion. A Government Order was
                         issued to authorize VPs to work in the reserve forests. The proposed Gramya II would scale up
                         treatment at the micro-watershed level to cover the entire landscape, from ridge to valley.
                         •        The watershed treatment tools, such as rainwater conservation and harvesting, can
                         effectively support rainfed agriculture. The Gramya I installed almost 21,500 water harvest tanks in
                         targeted GPs and demonstrated the effectiveness of rainwater conservation and harvesting in rainfed
                         areas. The proposed Gramya II would continue to promote synergy between watershed treatment and
                         rainfed agriculture development by adopting appropriate resource-conserving and productivity-
                         enhancing technologies.
                         •        The Gramya I-financed agribusiness pilot forged market linkages and enabled inclusive
                         growth through value addition. The agribusiness pilot effectively leveraged key Gramya I
                         investments, which increased water availability and production of high-value crops in the targeted
                         areas. Gramya I successfully established 27 farmer federations (FFs) with an annual gross revenues
                         of about Rs 430 million (about US$ 9.5 million). This made a substantial contribution to the 15
                         percent increase in rural income over the baseline in the targeted GPs. The proposed Gramya II
                         would strengthen these FFs as sustainable producer companies and build and support new
                         federations.
                         •        Gramya I effectively engaged women and youth in project implementation. The project
                         provided multiple channels to ensure participation and social accountability for women, such as
                         women's Aam Sabha (assembly) and participatory monitoring and evaluation (PME). The Aam
                         Sabha has substantially improved women's GP participation, from 11 to 45 percent, while PME has
                         evolved into a channel for grievance redress. The Gramya I also engaged youth as accounts
                         assistants, who ensured 100 percent submission of GP audit reports. Such engagement would be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         expanded under the proposed Gramya II.
                         •        Local NGOs enhanced the quality of project implementation through much-needed technical
                         support. The engagement under Gramya I of two partner NGOs complemented the project staffing
                         and supported overall project implementation with a direct reporting line to the Chief Project
                         Director. Moreover, the NGOs supported the project's innovations, in designing and implementing
                         the PME, women's Aam Sabha, and agribusiness development.

                         Four core principles would guide the Gramya II: (a) the project will promote bottom-up preparation,
                         implementation, and monitoring of WDPs, which would build GP and VP institutional capacity and
                         develop community-based organizations; (b) WDPs will cover the entire landscape from ridge to
                         valley floor, including arable and non-arable lands, reserve forests and inter-GP areas; (c) watershed
                         treatment is an integral part of rainfed agriculture development, as it supports increased productivity
                         of rainfed crops by enhancing in-situ water retention and improving rain water and natural resource
                         conservation; and (d) watershed treatment will bring new areas under irrigation and improve water
                         availability currently irrigated areas, where the project will support cultivation of high-value
                         vegetable crops.
                         The proposed project would target 509 Gram Panchayets (GPs), which are contiguous to the Gramya
                         I GPs, to maximize the impact of the micro-watershed level treatment and scale-up agribusiness
                         development. The proposed project would have five components: (a) Social Mobilization and
                         Participatory Watershed Planning; (b) Watershed Treatment and Rainfed Area Development; (c)

                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                         Enhanced Livelihood Opportunities; (d) Project Management; and (e) Contingent Emergency
                         Response.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Social Mobilization and Participatory Watershed Planning (US$30 million) would
                         support mobilization of 509 targeted GPs and VPs in selected micro-watersheds to prepare Water
                         Development Plans (WDPs) at both the GP and micro-watershed levels, with facilitation from local
                         partner NGOs. The WDPs would focus on effective land use and water resource management to
                         improve ground water recharge and reduce farm runoff. The WDPs would also include agriculture
                         development and income generation activities for the landless and the poor. In addition, this
                         component would develop comprehensive water treatment plans for critical water sources in the
                         targeted areas, such as springs, streams, and key drainage lines through satellite imaginary and other
                         digital data. These treatment plans would guide WDP preparation and implementation at GP and VP
                         levels.

                         Component 2: Watershed Treatment and Rainfed Area Development (US$90.5 million) would
                         improve source water discharge, enhance biomass production, and increase productivity of rainfed
                         and irrigated crops through support to GPs and VPs to implement their WDPs. There are two sub-
                         components: (a) Watershed Treatment and Water Source Sustainability; and (b) Rainfed Agriculture
                         Development.

                         Sub-component 2a - Watershed Treatment and Water Source Sustainability - would increase the
                         productive potential of natural resources on about 219,000 ha of non-arable land. It is also expected
                         to expand irrigation to about 7,000 ha of arable rainfed land in targeted GPs. The subcomponent
                         would support GPs in: (a) constructing and rehabilitating check dams, ponds, irrigation channels and
                         tanks, and roof water harvesting structures; (b) repairing agriculture terraces and vegetative field
                         boundaries; and (c) rehabilitating bridle paths, small bridges and culverts. Water source sustainability
                         would include the following activities: (a) construction and rehabilitation of soil conservation
                         structures (e.g., recharge pits, ponds, vegetative structures, vegetative trenches, stone and crate wire
                         check dams, retaining walls, and spurs and diversion drains); (b) perimeter r ehabilitation with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Napier and other grasses; (c) forestry activities (e.g., plantations and nursery development); and (d)
                         promotion of alternate energy sources (e.g., biogas plants, solar cookers, water mills, and pine
                         briquette production).

                         Sub-component 2b - Rainfed Area Development - would support both rainfed and irrigated areas by
                         providing improved seeds and demonstrating new technologies developed by universities and
                         research institutions. In the rainfed areas, the improved seeds would promote rainwater conservation,
                         climate-smart agricultural practices, and on-farm integrated crop management. In the irrigated areas,
                         the project would promote diversification to high-value off-season vegetable crops, adoption of
                         innovative agronomic practices, establishment of greenhouses and tunnels, productivity enhancement
                         of irrigated maize, wheat and other crops, and production of bio-fertilizers and vermi-compost. The
                         project will also provide support in the horticulture and livestock sectors, including new orchard
                         development, orchard rehabilitation, fodder production, and livestock genetic upgrading.
                         Implementation of the technical support packages would be led by the GoUK Water Management
                         Directorate, in coordination with the State Departments of Forestry, Agriculture, and Livestock.

                         Component 3: Enhancing Livelihood Opportunities (US$18.7 million) would improve rural
                         livelihoods by building on the previous two components and reaching out to target farmers,
                         vulnerable groups, and farmer federations (FFs) formed by the Gramya I. Component 3 has three
                         sub-components: (a) Agribusiness Support; (b) Support for Vulnerable Groups, and (c) Consolidation

                                                                      Page 4 of 12
                         of Gramya I activities.

                         Sub-component 3a - Agribusiness Support - would facilitate agribusiness development in high-value
Public Disclosure Copy




                         vegetable crops for targeted farmers. The support would include: (a) formation of Farmer Interest
                         Groups (FIGs) and their federations, building on project-supported water user groups; (b) building
                         capacity of FIGs and federations in business planning and supply chain development, including input
                         supply (e.g., quality seed production) and value addition (e.g., setting up collection and processing
                         centers); and (c) providing market-oriented extension services and marketing support, including
                         market intelligence and brand creation. Agribusiness support would be provided by local NGOs.

                         Sub-component 3b - Support for Vulnerable Groups - would establish vulnerable group funds to
                         provide seed capital to finance entrepreneurial activities for vulnerable groups in the targeted GPs,
                         including landless, vulnerable women, and transhumant, who will not directly benefit from the major
                         project investments under Component 2. The project has a dedicated transhumant action plan, which
                         will have an emphasis on livestock support.

                         Sub-component 3c - Consolidation of Gramya I activities - would strengthen the business planning
                         and management capacity of 27 farmer federations formed under Gramya I to develop them as
                         sustainable producer companies. The support for agribusiness development will be provided by local
                         NGOs.

                         Component 4: Project Management (US$30.8 million) would finance institution building, knowledge
                         management, dissemination, communication, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and project
                         operational costs. The component would set up a center of excellence in watershed development,
                         which will be a knowledge hub of participatory watershed development, natural resource
                         conservation, rainfed agriculture development, and agribusiness development. Training and
                         dissemination activities will target local institutions (e.g., GPs, VPs, water user groups, and FIGs),
                         state-level stakeholders (e.g., NGOs, universities, and research institutions), and the GoI-supported
                         programs, such as the Integrated Watershed Management Program (IWMP) and Mahatma Gandhi
Public Disclosure Copy




                         National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MNEREGA). The component will also introduce an
                         ICT-based management information system (MIS) to effectively monitor project activities and build
                         a comprehensive baseline dataset at micro-watershed level. It will strengthen social accountability at
                         the GP and VP levels though participatory monitoring exercises (PMEs), social audits, and grievance
                         redress mechanisms.

                         Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response (US$0 million) would finance, as needed, GoUK
                         requests to the Bank to re-allocate project funds in support of response and reconstruction from
                         adverse natural events that result in major natural disasters, such as the flash floods of June 2013.
                         This component would draw upon resources from the unallocated expenditure category and/or allow
                         GoUK to reallocate financing from other project components to defray emergency response and
                         recovery costs. This component could also be used to channel additional funds should they become
                         available as a result of an emergency.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed Gramya II would focus on watershed catchment treatment of 219,000 ha of non-arable
                         lands, located in the middle Himalayas ranging from 700m to 2,500m above sea level.
                         Approximately 25 percent of this area would be in forested areas. This catchment treatment would
                         contribute to increased agricultural productivity on some 45,050 ha of adjacent arable land.


                                                                     Page 5 of 12
                         Degraded forest areas would be treated to improve source sustainability as part of the catchment
                         treatment plan and in conformity with the forest working plan of the Government of Uttarakhand.
                         The project area has been selected from the as yet untreated micro-watersheds incorporated in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         State Perspective and Strategic Plan and submitted to the Government of India. Erosion intensity,
                         remoteness and the socio-economic status of communities were among the criteria used to identify
                         the areas to be treated. The proposed project would also re-visit selected areas financed under
                         Gramya I for consolidation.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDI)
                         Miki Terasawa (SASDS)
                         Sharlene Jehanbux Chichgar (SASDI)

                         6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              The activities under the project are likely to be
                         BP 4.01                                            mostly environmentally benign. However, some
                                                                            local adverse impacts would be created due to the
                                                                            project activities. Since the actual activities to be
                                                                            supported under the project will be determined in
                                                                            the respective Gram Panchayat meetings in each
                                                                            village, an Environmental and Social
                                                                            Management Framework (ESMF) has been
                                                                            endorsed by the Government of Uttarakhand to be
                                                                            used to identify and manage environmental
                                                                            impacts.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        Yes              The ESMF specifically requires protected areas
                                                                            – National Parks, Wildlife Sanctuaries – to be
                                                                            excluded from the project. However, some forest
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            areas could be havens for wildlife even outside
                                                                            these areas.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                 Yes              The project does not support any form of
                                                                            logging or management of Non-Timber Forest
                                                                            Products (NTFP). It primarily focuses on
                                                                            catchment treatment that may be undertaken in
                                                                            either degraded reserve forest areas or in
                                                                            demarcated forest areas. Therefore, the project by
                                                                            design attempts to mitigate the existing degraded
                                                                            forest areas. In addition, the project has made a
                                                                            conscious attempt not include protected areas for
                                                                            interventions.

                                                                            While the project does not foresee any adverse
                                                                            impacts, it cannot rule out any abiotic pressure
                                                                            affecting the local biodiversity and also the
                                                                            overall forest management due to project
                                                                            interventions.
                                                                            Considering that some of the degraded forest



                                                                    Page 6 of 12
                                                                         patches are reserve forest areas, adequate
                                                                         safeguard measures have been put in place–
                                                                         which has been captured in ESMF and Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Operation Manual. If required, quick assessment
                                                                         will be undertaken confirming compliance with
                                                                         the National and Bank policies governing the
                                                                         forestry sector.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes            The IPM and INM strategies developed during
                                                                         Gramya I have been adopted and augmented for
                                                                         this project. A list of banned pesticides that the
                                                                         project would not finance is provided. In addition,
                                                                         movement toward natural-based pesticides and
                                                                         away from the synthetic/chemical-based ones is
                                                                         also encouraged. The IPM and INM strategies are
                                                                         integrated into the ESMF to ensure that all
                                                                         stakeholders, including GPs, have one
                                                                         consolidated document for reference and verify
                                                                         whether their activities are in line with the project
                                                                         requirements.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes            While no important cultural resources have been
                         BP 4.11                                         identified in the project area, increased activities
                                                                         to support agribusiness may lead to more
                                                                         construction close to settlements. ESMF includes
                                                                         procedures to handle chance finds which reflects
                                                                         Government of Uttarakhand’s requirements in
                                                                         case of such finds.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes            Two nomadic groups (Bhotiya/Anwal and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Gujjars) travel through the project target area. A
                                                                         Transhumant Action Plan has been developed and
                                                                         would support livelihoods improvement, in
                                                                         particular, livestock health and extension.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No             No land acquisition is foreseen. All planned
                         4.12                                            project interventions would be on private or
                                                                         community lands.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No             The project does not finance check dams higher
                                                                         than 10 m. These dams and their safety measures
                                                                         will be designed by qualified engineers, as done
                                                                         in the Gramya I. The project will ensure risk of
                                                                         significant adverse impacts to local communities
                                                                         and assets due to potential failure of the structure
                                                                         would be negligible to none. As per BP 4.37,
                                                                         these safety measures are included in the ESMF
                                                                         under 4.01.
                         Projects on International         No             This policy is not applicable as the project
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            focuses on water source management in spring
                                                                         and streams in different catchments. The project



                                                                 Page 7 of 12
                                                                                does not envisage any interventions relating to
                                                                                basin management, flood management or
                                                                                activities that critically alter the discharge rate in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                the basin. It primarily focuses on a decentralized /
                                                                                local spring and stream water source management
                                                                                with various conservation approaches.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The project will support watershed interventions
                            7.60                                                in 10 districts of the state of Uttarakhand, which
                                                                                do not include any disputed territory.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Activities as envisaged under the project aim to reverse watershed degradation and develop rainfed
                              agricultural practices. Given the marginal land holding and subsistence agricultural practices in
                              Uttarakhand, the subprojects are unlikely to exert any significant negative impact on the social and
                              physical environment. The principle aim of the watershed development and management activities
                              under the proposed project is to enhance the natural resource base. No significant adverse or
                              irreversible impacts are foreseen under the project, and impacts are manageable within the existing
                              institutional and technical framework.

                             The social and environmental activities would be implemented in accordance with the agreed
                             Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which addresses the relevant Bank
                             safeguard policies. Under Gramya I, the ESMF served as a decision-making tool to promote
                             environmentally- and socially-sound subprojects; this would also be the case for the proposed
                             project. The ESMF includes Environment and Social Screening Criteria and Procedures to exclude
Public Disclosure Copy




                             subprojects that have significant adverse impacts. As the proposed activities under the proposed
                             Gramya II are of the same nature as those under the Gramya I, the project would continue to apply
                             the same agreed environmental and social management guidelines, frameworks and monitoring
                             formats. Environmental and social screening criteria for subprojects have been mainstreamed
                             effectively into the project with all GP Watershed Development Plans (GPWDPs) screened for any
                             adverse environmental and social impacts. Key impacts that need to be managed properly include
                             the handling of chemicals used to improve crop yields, management of construction of small
                             structures, and possible increased pressure on natural resource base of the project area.

                             The ESMF has been modified and expanded to include inter-GP area treatments and agribusiness
                             strengthening. Chance find procedures for physical and cultural properties have been incorporated
                             into the Gramya II ESMF, which are in line with local laws. If there are any negative impacts
                             which emerge during project implementation, appropriate mitigation actions would be developed.
                             The implementation process would retain focus on targeting key stakeholders that have a
                             significant impact on the natural resources and communities would be encouraged to participate in
                             sustainable natural resource management practices through capacity-building activities financed
                             by the Project. These stakeholders are primarily water user and farmer interest groups that will
                             manage and maintain the GP-level project investments under the supervision of Panchayat
                             members. If funds are required under the Contingent Emergency Response Component, the ESMF
                             would be reviewed and updated accordingly.


                                                                        Page 8 of 12
                           The institutional arrangements required for the proposed Gramya II have been developed and are
                           in place. These include the responsibility of confirmation that the ESMF has been applied in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           development of the respective GPWDP by the respective field office director, and a dedicated
                           Environmental Specialist at the Watershed Management Directorate Head Office in Dehradun.
                           Several new reporting formats have been developed to provide timely feedback regarding the
                           progress on implementation of environmental measures identified in the GPWDP. In the proposed
                           project, efforts will be made to further strengthen the institutional capacity of the implementing
                           agency to enhance implementation effectiveness of the ESMF and mainstream monitoring into the
                           project MIS.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The project does not involve any potential indirect and/or long-term adverse environmental or
                           social impacts due to anticipated future physical activities in the project area.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           No specific alternatives (from a safeguards perspective) have been considered since the proposed
                           project builds on the Gramya I with earlier identified and continuation of overall same
                           interventions.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Watershed Management Directorate (WMD) – the GoUK implementing agency for the
                           proposed project - has built on its experience of implementing environmental and social
                           management measures in several watershed projects in the past years. The Recipient is familiar
                           with the Bank’s social/environmental safeguards requirements, having implemented Gramya I. As
                           described above, there are no long-term adverse impacts (neither environmental nor social)
                           expected from project activities. As part of project preparation an ESMF has been prepared which
Public Disclosure Copy




                           provides a menu of options for environmental management of impacts of activities from which
                           GPs would make their choice, depending on the conditions on the ground and resources at their
                           disposal, following the transhumant action plan, and IPM strategy. The project mainstreams
                           environment and social criteria to assess safeguard issues at all levels of decision making to
                           promote environmental sustainability and social equity which are the envisaged project outcomes.
                           Using the ESMF to inform the GPWDP preparation aims to replace the concept of post-design
                           mitigation. This decision-making process not only applies to a particular intervention but also
                           helps in understanding the cumulative or composite effect of several inter-related interventions in
                           the watershed area.

                          The institutional arrangements for implementing the Transhumant Action Plan (TAP) include the
                          project staff with the support of social development facilitators. The TAP would support
                          livelihoods improvement, in particular, through providing livestock health and extension services
                          and facilitating linkages with public and private sector service providers. These would be
                          monitored through the project MIS. The TAP would also promote cohesion with the target GPs by
                          increasing project awareness.

                          An IPM strategy integrated into the ESMF is in place and publicly disclosed that complies with
                          the World Bank. It seeks to reduce dependence on chemical pesticides through alternative means,
                          addresses both crops and livestock issues, and also addresses integrated plant nutrient


                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                           management. The strategy has identified some of the provisions of IPM that are simple to
                           implement and practiced under the Gramya I within the framework of agricultural practices in the
                           mid hills.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           As a part of the environmental assessment, wide ranging stakeholder consultations were
                           undertaken, including state government line departments (Rural Development, Panchayati Raj,
                           Animal Husbandry, and Forest), universities, NGOs, and future project beneficiaries,including
                           vulnerable groups, such as women, scheduled castes, scheduled tribes, and landless. Disclosure
                           requirements will be fulfilled by organizing disclosure workshops and include in-country
                           disclosure; translation of key documents in local languages; newspaper announcements for
                           disclosure, etc. The ESMF is available online. Strategies developed (Transhumant Action Plan and
                           IPM) were shared with stakeholders.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Nov-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            10-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            10-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Nov-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            10-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level


                                                                   Page 10 of 12
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information




                                                                     Page 11 of 12
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Edward William Bresnyan
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (SM)                      Date: 07-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
