                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA4179
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Lebanon                           Project ID:    P133226
                            Project Name:     Lebanon Fiscal Management Reform 2 (P133226)
                            Task Team         Wael Mansour
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         01-Aug-2013                       Estimated   05-Nov-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    MNSPS                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Central government administration (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Debt management and fiscal sustainability (25%), Macroeconomic management
                                              (25%), Public expenditure, financial management and procur ement (25%),
                                              Other public sector governance (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       5.20           Total Bank Financing:                5.20
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   5.20
                              Total                                                                                   5.20
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of FMR 2 is to build fiscal policy analysis capacity, strengthen debt
                           management, improve the budgetary allocation of public resources, enhance the efficiency of the
                           government financial management systems, and tighten the control environment for more effective


                                                                      Page 1 of 7
                         use of public resources.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         16.      The proposed operation builds on the reform areas initiated by the EFMIS project,
                         consolidates the outcomes already achieved under this project, and deepens the reform process with
                         more focused, specialized and institutionalized activities. Moreover, the MoF – with support from
                         EFMIS - has developed strategies and action plans for further reforms in the PFM areas. These
                         include a comprehensive PFM reform strategy (2013-2017), a budget execution reforms
                         implementation plan, the FMIS implementation strategy and a comprehensive IT system audit. These
                         plans constitute the basis for the improvement in core PFM functions within the upcoming 5 years.
                         The proposed FMR 2 project is expected to support most of the key reform and change management
                         activities.

                         17.      The activities of FMR 2 are geared primarily towards building the capacity of the
                         administration. FMR 2 activities focus on capacity building for civil servants and provide technical
                         assistance to support the review and implementation of processes, procedures and practices related to
                         the budget cycle. As such, the project is not contingent on policy decisions and is less exposed to the
                         complex political context of Lebanon. The project empowers staff to provide more sound technical
                         input for decision makers and hence adopts a bottom-up approach in that sense to improve policy
                         making. Once politically conducive settings with no gridlocks at the legislative and the executive
                         levels are ensured, the tools and capacity to perform further structural reforms in the PFM area will
                         be ready.

                         18.      FMR 2 comprises two broad complementary components. First, a Macro-fiscal Analysis and
                         Public Debt Management component that focuses on building the policy functions at MoF. This
                         component is divided into a macro-fiscal analysis and a debt management sub-component. Second, a
                         Public Expenditure Management component that focuses on reforms of various practices and
                         processes within the budget cycle. This component is divided into four sub-components: (i)
                         expenditure programming and budget preparation reforms, (ii) budget execution, (iii) procurement
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reforms, and (iv) internal control and internal audit. A summary on the objectives and outcomes of
                         these sub-components can be found below. Further background information and details on the
                         activities supported by each sub-component are in Annex 2.

                         Component 1: Macro-Fiscal Analysis and Public Debt Management (US$0.968 million)

                         Sub-component 1.1: Macro-Fiscal Analysis (US$0.615 million)

                         19.     Macro-fiscal analysis was absent from the core functions of MoF prior to the creation of the
                         Macro-Fiscal Department (MFD) in March 2012. With support from EFMIS, the MFD produced a
                         Medium Term Fiscal Framework (MTFF) that was incorporated in the 2014 budget circular, using a
                         macro-fiscal model developed in-house. Going forward, FMR 2 intends to support MoF in expanding
                         the scope and the depth of operations to transform the MFD into a policy analysis unit within the
                         Ministry. This requires long-term systemic capacity building . The aim is to enable MFD to acquire
                         the required skills to deliver the needed policy analyses and reports (e.g., impact analysis of fiscal
                         measures on macroeconomic indicators) and ultimately become a self-reliant unit.

                         20.     To achieve the stated objectives, a number of activities are envisioned and grouped along
                         four main initiatives: (i) upgrading the empirical modeling and testing it with various policy
                         scenarios and maintaining a larger disaggregated database that covers economic sectors beyond the


                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         central government; (ii) revisiting and updating the existing MTFF on a regular basis , leading to the
                         preparation of a Medium Term Budget Framework (MTBF); (iii) preparing a budget framework
                         paper to be incorporated as part of the annual budget preparation cycle and develop capacity to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         formulate policy reports for senior management on various economic and fiscal issues; and (iv)
                         developing an institutionalized macro-fiscal specific training program aligned with the target
                         institutional and regulatory framework of the MFD and the budget directorate.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Public Debt Management (US$0.353 million)

                         21.      The activities under the Public Debt Management sub-component reflect the progress made
                         under EFMIS, specifically the creation of the Public Debt Directorate (PDD), the drafting of a
                         medium term debt management strategy, and the upgrade and strengthening of the relevant back
                         office function. Going forward, the objective of FMR 2 is to consolidate capacity, gradually expand
                         the scope and functions for debt management, and strengthen the operational aspects of the
                         department.

                         22.       To achieve these objectives, activities under this sub-component will focus on the following
                         areas: (i) debt management strategy development and cost-risk analysis, including building tools to
                         analyze risk, (ii) debt management strategy implementation, including supporting the development of
                         an effective and transparent primary market for government securities, (iii) organization and staffing
                         of PDD, including operational risk management, strengthening the front office function, and the
                         development of detailed and targeted training programs, (iv) reporting, both internal and external,
                         and the establishment of a dedicated investor relations function, (v) management of contingent
                         liabilities, and (vi) a review of the legal framework for debt management.

                         Component 2: Public Expenditure Management (US$3.248 million)

                         Sub-component 2.1: Expenditure Programming & Budget Preparation (US$0.595 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         23.      The MoF has adopted new budget preparation guidelines , and introduced the GFS 2001
                         classification and a MTFF in the budget circular . The MoF has taken a decision to implement these
                         changes to the budget process starting from the 2014 budget rounds. As a result FMR 2 will provide
                         hands-on training on budget preparation techniques to support implementation. The sub-component
                         would also support further enhancements to the budget preparation practices including refining the
                         guidelines and parameters of budget circulars, engaging line ministries on implementation, and
                         revisiting the budget calendar.

                         24.      The sub-component proposes to revisit the institutional framework of the budget directorate,
                         design a new organization structure, and implement such restructuring as to align the functions of the
                         directorate with the new legal framework (i.e. the new draft budget systems law, GFS 2001
                         Classification ) and its primary role in expenditure programing and budget preparation. This further
                         entails providing extensive training for budget officers to work with line ministries on the envisaged
                         reforms to adopt the new system and work towards minimizing irregularities and widening the
                         comprehensiveness of the budget. A focused engagement plan will be developed and carried-out with
                         line ministries, on pilot basis, to ensure proper implementation of these budget preparation new
                         processes.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Budget Execution (US$1.996 million)



                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                         25.      On-going challenges for budget execution include (i) inefficient (or sometimes lack of)
                         processes and procedures; (ii) certain capacity constraints in MoF and inadequate capacity to
                         implement budget execution reforms in line ministries; (iii) lack of information systems capability
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and capacity to support either existing and/or new functions; (iv) substantially understaffed and
                         insufficiently equipped IT department; and (v) lack of automation of data flows between MoF units
                         internally. As part of the implementation of the PFM reform strategy and building on the outputs
                         from EFMIS, FMR 2 activities will address the aforementioned gaps. This will be done through the
                         provision of technical assistance, mentoring and training, and limited IT hardware.

                         26.      FMR 2 will provide technical advisory support and training for the MoF to enhance the
                         budget execution processes and practices notably treasury and cash management, transition to
                         centralized Treasury Single Account operations, enhanced commitment controls and liquidation, and
                         improved accounting practices and reporting based on new budget classification and a new chart of
                         accounts. Through MoF, technical assistance will also be provided to selected line ministries to
                         improve cash planning and enhance the control environment.

                         27.     These activities will be complemented by a two-tracked approach for strengthening the IT
                         systems. The first track focuses on stabilizing the existing IT system through providing training on
                         COBIT IT governance framework, procuring a basic data warehouse system to improve reporting
                         capabilities, and supporting “quick fix? solutions for programing the implementation of IPSAS cash-
                         based accounting standards, BdL transfer data on cash figures to MoF, and other data flow stabilizing
                         applications. The second track provides technical assistance for the production of technical and
                         functional requirements and a complete bidding package for the eventual procurement of a modern
                         integrated GFMIS .

                         Sub-component 2.3: Public Procurement Reforms (US$ 0.305 million)

                         28.      The Council of Ministers has endorsed a new draft law in November 2012 tasking the
                         Central Tender Board (CTB) with managing public procurement. The CTB new tasks include
Public Disclosure Copy




                         proposing public procurement legal and regulatory texts, preparing standard bidding documents,
                         training competent personnel for conducting public procurement, and creating and managing a
                         database on all public procurement contracts and render the information available to all parties
                         falling under its jurisdiction . FMR 2 will support CTB to deliver some of those tasks. The objective
                         is to support public procurement reforms initiatives as to modernize and improve the transparency of
                         budget execution and preparation functions. The proposed assistance focuses primarily on improving
                         procurement planning and cost estimates, improving data collection to support budget forecasting,
                         simplifying access to public procurement opportunities, and compiling regulations and rules under
                         one platform. More precisely, activities under this component would include (i) supporting the
                         development of a website platform for procurement; (ii) revising procurement manual and standard
                         bidding documents and developing sector specific standard bidding documents; and (iii)
                         strengthening the CTB and concerned stakeholders’ capacity through specialized training on
                         procurement international best practices.

                         Sub-component 2.4: Internal Control and Internal Audit (US$ 0.352 million)

                         29.      Internal control and internal audit functions are currently absent in the public sector, leading
                         to increased risks for misuse of public funds. In response to government’s efforts to increase
                         transparency and accountability of the internal financial controls over budget execution, FMR 2 will
                         support the initiation of internal control and internal audit processes within MoF on a pilot basis.

                                                                        Page 4 of 7
                           This will be pursued through identifying and monitoring risk management practices, and creating an
                           independent and objective internal audit and assurance function. Such support is expected to reduce
                           the risks of improper utilization of public funds, fraud, waste and corruption. It is also expected to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           improve the overall efficiency and effectiveness of MoF budget operations.

                           30.      More precisely, activities under this sub-component include: (i) a consolidation of existing
                           diagnostic reviews, and mapping of the internal control framework at MoF, (ii) establishing a MoF
                           interdepartmental control and audit working group, (iii) piloting an operational Internal Audit
                           function within MoF, and (iv) raising awareness, knowledge, and training for civil servants. In this
                           respect, FMR 2 will coordinate with the EU twinning project on developing and implementing the
                           Public Internal Financial Control framework, applied in many EU-member countries.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                            6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               56.    FMR 2 is classified as a “Category C? project and does not trigger any environmental or


                                                                        Page 5 of 7
                           social safeguards. FMR 2 project aims to build fiscal policy analysis capacity, improve the
                           budgetary allocation of public resources, enhance the efficiency of the government financial
                           management systems, and tighten the control environment for more effective use of public
Public Disclosure Copy




                           resources. As such, the project finances capacity building, technical assistance, training, and
                           advisory services for the Ministry of Finance and other government stakeholders. These activities
                           do not include any physical infrastructure. No new building are to be constructed, only some
                           potential limited upgrades of existing computer rooms might be required before installing some of
                           the IT systems or equipment supported through project. Therefore, this is not expected to have any
                           environmental impact. Additionally, the project does not focus on any particular population group
                           or social programs, and does not call for any resettlement.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:

                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.

                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                          Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                          be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                          issue, been prepared
                          Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the OP?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies


                                                                      Page 6 of 7
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Wael Mansour
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Guenter Heidenhof (SM)                      Date: 06-Aug-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
