                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1105
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nepal                             Project ID:    P149606
                            Project Name:      ROAD SAFETY SUPPORT PROJECT (P149606)
                            Task Team          A.K. Farhad Ahmed
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          27-May-2014                       Estimated   18-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Other public sector governance (10%), Infrastructure services for private sector
                                              development (90%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       7.47           Total Bank Financing:                   0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   0.00
                              Global Road Safety Program                                                                 7.47
                              Total                                                                                      7.47
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To reduce the risk of roadway departure crashes on selected sections of the roads targeted under the
                           RSDP and to strengthen the Government of Nepal’s capacity for improving road safety.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project entails a Global Road Safety Phase 2 Multi-Donor Trust Fund (GRSP2 MDTF)

                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         grant of US$ 7.47 million (equivalent) that will fund investments in parallel to the IDA-supported
                         Road Sector Development Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         PROJECT COMPONENTS

                         Component A – Capacity strengthening for the Implementation of Road Safety Action Plan (US$
                         0.80 million equivalent)
                         Component A will support measures to strengthen capacity for improving road safety in Nepal with a
                         focus on Nepal’s Road Safety Action Plan. Specific themes under this component include: (i)
                         establishing the Nepal Road Safety Council & secretariat; (ii) legislation, regulation, and skills
                         development; and (iii) small scale road safety pilots to identify promising initiatives for later scaling
                         up. The Association and MoPIT have agreed to focus on these areas as they represent high priority
                         opportunities for making progress against the Nepal’s Road Safety Action Plan that cabinet approved
                         in 2013. Annex B includes a detailed breakdown of activities under Component A.

                         Component B – Improved physical safety of RSDP roads (US$ 6.67 million equivalent)
                         Component B will fund procurement and installation of roughly 70,000 m of crash barriers in high
                         risk sections of RSDP roads where steep drop-offs or other hazards make road departure crashes
                         particularly dangerous. Expenditures eligible for funding will also include those related to ancillary
                         costs of civil works such as site inspections, contract supervision, auditing, and engineering. Once in
                         place, crash barriers will help prevent vehicles that lose control from plunging off the road surface.
                         DOR’s Project Coordination Team (PCT) for the Road Sector Development Project has undertaken a
                         road safety audit of project roads and identified the specific locations where crash barriers can be
                         effective. The technical approach for crash barriers in a specific site will be determined on a case-by
                         case basis. In some instances where space is available, gabion style rock cages will be a suitable
                         technical solution. In other instances, ‘W’ section steel barriers or other technologies will be
                         preferred options.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will develop approximately 70km of crash barriers along sections of road developed
                         under the IDA-supported Road Sector Development Project (RSDP). The indicative length of crash
                         barriers by road is as follows:

                         Satbanjh-Baitadi-Tripurasundari Road: 4 km of barriers
                         Satbanjh –Gokuleshwor-Darchula Road: 10 km of barriers
                         Khodpe-Bajhang Road: 10 km of barriers
                         Surkhet- Kalikot-Jumla Road: 28 km of barriers
                         Tallodhungeswor-Dailekh Road: 4 km of barriers
                         Chinchhu -Jajarkot Road: 4 km of barriers

                         DOR's Environmental and Social Management Framework was applied under RSDP to the
                         development of these roads. Barriers will be within existing rights of way and will not require
                         additional land acquisition or resettlement.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Drona Raj Ghimire (GENDR)
                         Parthapriya Ghosh (GSURR)



                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes           The provisions of OP/BP 4.01 on environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                         assessment will apply to the project. Project
                                                                         activities are expected to classify as having low
                                                                         risk of adverse impacts and a simple site specific
                                                                         Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be
                                                                         adequate to manage associated impacts. DOR
                                                                         will manage environmental considerations in
                                                                         accordance with the project’s Environmental and
                                                                         Social Management Framework (ESMF).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            The project is not expected to impact on Natural
                                                                         Habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            The project is not expected to impact on forests
                                                                         and forest resources.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project is not expected to procure or use
                                                                         pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The project is not expected to impact on PCR.
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           The RSDP project sites, in which road safety
                                                                         works will be implemented, are located in the
                                                                         area inhabited by one or the other ethnic group.
                                                                         Hence, Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) will
                                                                         apply. For any works that are identified during
                                                                         project preparation in area inhabited by
                                                                         indigenous people, an Indigenous Peoples
                                                                         Development Plan will be prepared in accordance
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         with the Environmental Social Management
                                                                         Framework.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No            Activities under Component B of the project will
                         4.12                                            occur within the right of way of RSDP roads
                                                                         where RSDP has already managed resettlement
                                                                         activities. Similarly, road safety pilot
                                                                         interventions implemented under component A of
                                                                         the project are likely to be within existing rights
                                                                         of way (i.e. on the existing road surface or
                                                                         shoulder). The proposed project is therefore not
                                                                         expected to entail any additional land acquisition
                                                                         or resettlement. Hence OP 4.12 on involuntary
                                                                         resettlement has not been triggered.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No            Dam related activity is not part of the project
                                                                         scope.
                         Projects on International         No            The project scope does not include any activity
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            over or around an international waterway that
                                                                         could cause potential conflict.




                                                                 Page 3 of 7
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  No disputed area in the proposed project area.
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environment
                              The provisions of OP/BP 4.01 on environmental assessment will apply to the project. Some
                              common environmental issues that may arise under this project include: (i) dust pollution; (ii)
                              construction noise; (iii) minor disruptions to traffic along work routes; (vi) health and safety of
                              workers. Though the duration of works is likely to be relatively short, sanitation at labor camps is
                              a concern that DOR will need to manage through appropriate contract provisions and supervision.
                              Project activities are expected to classify as having low risk of adverse impacts and a simple site
                              specific Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be adequate to manage associated impacts.
                              DOR will manage environmental considerations in accordance with the project’s Environmental
                              and Social Management Framework (ESMF).

                              Social
                              Social issues under the project will be governed by the DOR’s Environmental and Social
                              Management Framework, which was recently been revised for RSSP works and disclosed by the
                              World Bank’s infoshop on June 27, 2014. The ESMF fulfills GON’s regulations/policy
                              requirements and the requirements of World Bank’s Operation Polices 4.12 and 4.10. Activities
                              under Component B of the project will occur within the right of way of RSDP roads where RSDP
                              has already managed resettlement activities. Similarly, road safety pilot interventions
                              implemented under component A of the project are likely to be within existing rights of way (i.e.
                              on the existing road surface or shoulder). The proposed project is therefore not expected to entail
Public Disclosure Copy




                              any additional land acquisition or resettlement. Hence OP 4.12 on involuntary resettlement has not
                              been triggered. The RSDP project sites, in which road safety works will be implemented, are
                              located in the area inhabited by one or the other ethnic group. Hence, Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP
                              4.10) will apply. For any works that are identified during project preparation in area inhabited by
                              indigenous people, an Indigenous Peoples Development Plan will be prepared in accordance with
                              the Environmental Social Management Framework.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The road safety works within the right of way is not expected to result long-term and indirect
                              adverse impacts. The impacts of the project are expected to be positive. The project activities are
                              likely to significantly benefit communities along RSDP roads as it has the potential to reduce the
                              accident related risks that community members might endure when accessing other regions of
                              Nepal via road transport. Road accidents, particularly those where multiple family members are
                              injured or killed, can contribute to households falling into poverty or becoming more severely poor
                              due to lost income, health related costs, etc. The proposed project therefore represents an
                              important intervention for helping to support communities in two of Nepal’s least developed
                              regions.

                              It is important to note that installation of crash barriers will help to avoid environmental damage


                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                           that often arises when hazardous substances leak from vehicles that have suffered large drops from
                           road surfaces (e.g. petroleum, oils, various chemicals carried as cargo, etc.). In many locations
                           along RSDP roads vehicle retrieval or environmental remediation following such an incident
Public Disclosure Copy




                           would not be practicable with technologies readily available in Nepal. Avoiding such incidents can
                           help prevent considerable damage to the environment and people living nearby / downstream from
                           hazardous sections of road.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The DOR is familiar with the Bank's social/environmental requirements and has been engaged
                           with the IDA funded projects such as ongoing the RSDP and BIMP operations. The department
                           has established a Geo-Environmental and Social Unit (GESU) to deal with environmental and
                           social aspects of roads: it has played an important role in mainstreaming environmental
                           consideration in road planning and development. DOR has prepared an Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework (ESMF) in 2007, which was recently revised by DOR. The revised
                           ESMF is acceptable to the Bank and is being applied to the ongoing RSDP. Social and
                           environmental issues under the proposed project will broadly be governed by the already agreed
                           road sector ESMF.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders are government officials (Ministry of Physical Infrastructure and
                           Transportation, Department of Roads, Ministry of Finance, Local Environmental authorities),
                           Ministry of Labour and Transport Management, population residing along the RSDP road,
                           transport operators and road users (vehicle drivers and passengers, pedestrians).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The ESMF clearly requires that potentially affected people participate throughout the various
                           stages of planning and implementation of the Program. Local communities will be consulted in
                           various phases of a project cycle; affected people will be pre-informed about the loss and damages
                           and possible benefits of the project.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       24-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    26-Jun-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nepal                                                             26-Jun-2014
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       24-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    26-Jun-2014



                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                            "In country" Disclosure

                              Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            NA
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:         Name: A.K. Farhad Ahmed
                            Approved By

                                                                        Page 6 of 7
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (PMGR)   Date: 19-Nov-2014
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Page 7 of 7
