INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 178
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Feb-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Burundi                    Project ID:  P150929
Project Name: Burundi - Emergency Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project (P150929)
Task Team       Noroarisoa Rabefaniraka
Leader(s):
Estimated       11-Feb-2015                Estimated    23-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (70%), Public administration-
Water, sanitation and flood protection (16%), Central governm ent
administration (14%)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), City-wide
Infrastructure and Service Delivery (25%), Trade facilitatio n and market access
(25%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
ci 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:     25.00             Total Bank Financing:   25.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
IDA Grant                                                                  25.00
Total                                                                      25.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The proposed Project's objective would be to enhance the climate resilience of key transport and
drainage infrastructure in Greater Bujumbura while strengthening the country's capacity to manage
Page 1 of 8


﻿and prevent natural disasters.
3. Project Description
1.     The proposed project's design has been streamlined as much as possible, and draws heavily
on the experience of: (a) preparing/implementing other emergency projects around the world to
ensure rapid response to urgent needs; and (b) preparing/implementing relevant projects in Burundi.
A.     Project Components
2.     The proposed Project will have the following three main components:
Component A. Rehabilitation of Roads and Urban Infrastructure (Estimated cost: US$21.6 million)
3.     The activities to be financed under this component are the rehabilitation or reconstruction of
transport and urban infrastructure, as identified in the post-disaster assessment report.
Sub-Component A. 1. Transport Infrastructure Rehabilitation (estimated cost: US$12.6 million)
4.     The works to be financed under this component would consist on the reconstruction or
rehabilitation of approximately 30 km of the Recipient's National Road 1 (NR-1) and related
structures, including, inter alia, installation of slope protection mechanisms, stabilization of
embankments, rehabilitation of drainage systems, and redirection of groundwater.
Sub-component A.2. Urban Infrastructure Rehabilitation (estimated cost: US$9 million)
5.     Strengthening of river channels and embankments. This will entail: (a) strengthening of
Nyabagere and Kinyankonge river channels for a length of about 7.5 km; (b) building of a channel
between the two parts of Camara neighborhood (serviced and non-serviced areas); (c) re-sizing of
water outlet to allow better water flow from the new main channel along NR9; (d) building of a
channel from Gasenyi River; and (e) the waste water treatment plant at the junction of the Nyabagere
and Kinyankonge rivers.
Component B. Capacity Strengthening in Disaster Risk Management (estimated cost: US$2 million)
6.     This component would focus on enhancement of capacity for response and management of
possible future natural disasters on main infrastructure, especially on roads and urban infrastructure.
Sub-component B. 1. Capacity Strengthening in Disaster Risk Management (estimated cost: US
$500,000)
7.     To prevent the recurrence of similar major impacts in relation with landslide and flooding
events in the project area, it is essential to strengthen the capacity of the government and
communities to manage disaster risks. Within this context, the project will finance: (a) an evaluation
and mapping of risks and underlying factors in the project area including their potential impacts on
infrastructure; (b) a strategic information system to prioritize structural and non-structural risk
mitigation activities, and take action regarding the location, orientation and design of infrastructure
under the project; (c) the establishment of a prevention, early warning and response system in areas
at risk of flooding and landslides to reduce losses to infrastructures and protect lives and livelihoods;
Page 2 of 8


﻿and (d) the development of risk evaluation and extreme event monitoring tools to be owned by the
communities and supported by the Red Cross volunteers, the local Committees for Civil Protection
and the hydro-meteorological service (IGEBU). This will also include advocacy, communication,
drills and training sessions (including crisis simulations) for targeted communities to ensure proper
O
U        monitoring of risks by residents.
Sub-component B.2. Disaster Risk Recovery Contingency Funds (estimated cost: US$1.5 million)
8.     This component could support emergency measures to reduce damage to infrastructure,
ensure business continuity, and enable early rehabilitation. Following an adverse event that causes a
major disaster, the Government of Burundi (GoB) may request the Bank to channel resources from
this sub-component into an Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM). An IRM coordinating unit and
expenditure management procedures will be defined during project implementation and reflected in
an 'Immediate Response Mechanism Operational Manual', to be prepared separately and approved
by the Bank, in line with the flexibility provided under paragraph 12 of OP 10.00. Eligible operating
costs may include incremental expenses incurred for efforts arising as a result of the natural disaster.
Component C. Institutional Support, Project Management and Coordination
(estimated cost: US$1.4 million)
9.     This component would pay for consultancy services, technical advisory services such as
technical studies and assessments, training, media Information, Education and Communication
(IEC), and financial audits.
10.    This component is also expected to finance project management and coordination costs,
including the Project Management Unit (PMU) operating costs.
11.    The proposed operation will continue the institutional support initiated in the road sector
under the Road Sector Development Project (RSDP) since the capacity of GoB to efficiently manage
and maintain the country's road network remains weak. Therefore, the project will finance a new
Transport strategy, including multi-years investment plans and maintenance program covering 10
years. It would also support the National Road Agency (NRA) to improve its performance in the road
network management through one or more of the following activities: (i) implementation of the
a        recommendations contained in the assessment of the road recurrent maintenance system with the
Community Development Association; (ii) implementation of recommendations of the NRA's
organizational and performance assessment; and (iii) the setting-up of a road database management.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The proposed Project is targeting regions along the National Road 1 and Greater Bujumbura.
Disaster risk management support would focus on institutional strengthening at the national level.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Antoine V. Lema (GSURR)
Paul-Jean Feno (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The proposed Project Safeguard Environmental
Page 3 of 8


﻿OP/BP 4.01                               category is "B" because of the relatively moderate
impact of its foreseen civil works. The Recipient,
through its two Implementing Agencies, the National
Road Agency (NRA) and the Burundi Agency for
Public Works (BAPW), would prepare an
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
(ESIA), which will include an Environmental and
Social Management Plan (ESMP), no later than six
months after the project effectiveness date, as
referred to in paragraph 53 of World Bank's BP
10.00.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No           The project will not affect or involve natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           The project will not affect or involve forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No           The project requires no Pest Management measures.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes         Instructions on how potential chance finds of
OP/BP 4.11                               physical cultural resources will be addressed in the
ESIA.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         Scheduled Civil works may require land acquisition.
BP 4.12                                  However, potentially adverse environmental or social
impacts are expected to be reversible and easily
mitigated as project activities are limited in scope
and confined to existing infrastructures. Land
Q)                                                  acquisition and involuntary resettlement are the
potential social safeguards issues identified. As
mitigation measure, OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary
Resettlement has been triggered. This policy
instrument will be prepared and disclosed within six
months after project effectiveness date, as stipulated
under the exceptional deferral paragraph 12 (a) of OP
10.00, and as explained in further details in the
following section. Compensation for involuntary
resettlement, if any, will be covered by government
funds.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No           The project does not involve dams.
Projects on International   No           N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No        N/A
BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Page 4 of 8


﻿A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
O
The RVP has concurred with the deferral of social and environmental safeguards instruments to
the implementation phase through the signature of the Memo submitted by the CD.
Project activities are not expected to induce large scale, significant, or irreversible environmental
or social impacts. The civil works of Component A (Rehabilitation of Roads and Urban
Infrastructure), will induce land acquisition and potential adverse environmental and social
impacts including involuntary resettlement. Potentially adverse environmental and social impacts
could lead to: soil erosion; soil and water pollution; loss of vegetation (tree cutting); noise; dust;
risk of accident, the generation of waste and land acquisition. These impacts are likely to be small-
scale and site-specific and thus remediable and reversible. Likewise, adverse social impacts are
also expected to be marginal and site-specific to the right of way. Isolated cases of involuntary
resettlement/rehabilitation are, however, likely but manageable. Considering the nature and the
limited scope of potential environmental and social impacts from the rehabilitation and
improvement works, the Emergency Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project is classified as a
Category "B". The following Safeguards policies are triggered: OP/BP 4.01, Environmental
Assessments; OP/BP 4.11, Physical Cultural Resources, to concur with OP/BP 4.01 and OP/BP
4.12, Involuntary Resettlement. Safeguards instruments will be prepared and disclosed no less than
sixth months after effectiveness date, as stipulated under the exceptional deferral paragraph 12 (a)
of OP 10.00; which has been triggered for this project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Future activities in the project area are not expected to generate indirect and/or long term adverse
impacts. Project civil works focus on pre-existing road and urban infrastructures. Future
utilization of the roads and the urban infrastructure are expected to enhance environmental and
social benefits, rather than reducing them. Likewise, the utilization of river channels and
strengthening of river banks, are expected to create environmental and social benefits.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not Applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project Implementing Agencies, the National Road Agency (NRA) and the Burundi Agency
for Public Works (BAPW), have each social, respectively, environmental focal points (SEFP)
operational to ensure safeguards compliance. Under the Burundi RSDP, financed by the Bank, the
SEFPs ensured the preparation and the implementation of the project safeguards instruments. The
SEFPS were also provided capacity building by the Bank. Under the current project, the SEFPs
will again ensure the preparation, monitoring and supervision of the project safeguards
instruments: Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs). The environmental and social
impacts of the activities of each subcomponent of component A (Road and Urban infrastructures)
will be monitored and documented by the SEFPs in monthly and quarterly reports. The
supervision engineers for the civil works, will ensure the day to day safeguards compliance as per
the environmental clauses of the civil works, including fiduciary responsibilities. As this operation
is subject to OP/BP 10.00, para 12 of Investment Project Financing and the guidance note for
Page 5 of 8


﻿crises and emergency operations for application of the World Bank safeguards and Public
disclosure policies, an Environmental and Social Action Plan has been prepared by the Task Team
and will also be subject to public consultation and disclosure by the Borrower during project
implementation.
The ESAP contains sample of TORs for Environmental and Social Impacts Assessments (ESIA)
that may be needed for Project-supported activities, as well as screening guidelines for contractors
hired to implement Project-supported works. Based on the outcomes of the screening process,
ESIAs/ESMPs and/or RAP would be prepared and implemented as necessary. As part of the
Project's aim is to improve the livelihoods of vulnerable communities, specific attention would be
paid to women and children/youth, as well as the elderly and other vulnerable groups.
The preparation of the safeguards instruments (ESIA, ESMP and potential RAPs) will be
conducted no later than six months after project effectiveness. As OP 4.11 is triggered for the
project, guidelines and procedures for chance finds will be incorporated into the ESIA/EMPs and
the civil works contracts. International, regional and national consultants will be recruited to carry
out the work, as need be. Public consultations will be part of the process. Once consulted upon and
cleared by the government and the Bank, the safeguards instruments will be disclosed in-country
and at InfoShop. The government of Burundi has and applies a legislation that defines
compensation rates and other dispositions relating to expropriations and compensation. Potential
resettlement rehabilitation will take into account, government and World Bank policies.
Infrastructure Resilience Emergency Project is prepared under OP/BP 10 paragraph 12,
Investment Project Financing, and the guidance note for crises and emergency operations for
application of the World Bank safeguards and Public disclosure policies. Due to the emergency
nature of the proposed emergency operation and the related need for providing immediate
assistance while at the same time ensuring due diligence in managing potential environmental and
social risks, the requirement to carry out the Environmental and Social Safeguards instruments
(ESIA/ESMP, RAPs, etc.) will be undertaken during project implementation in parallel with
subproject technical feasibility studies.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include: the national government, beneficiary municipalities, beneficiary
communities, civil society and individuals, also project affected persons. IDA funding will
support a number of subprojects classified as Environment and Social Category B to which the
public consultation and disclosure policy will apply. During implementation of the proposed
operations, the Environmental and Social Safeguards instruments (ESIA/ESMP, RAP, etc.) will be
prepared through a consultative and participatory process involving stakeholders at national,
provincial and local levels, including project affected persons. The implementing agencies will
initiate the public consultations as early as possible and will provide prior to the consultations, all
relevant material in forms and language(s) that are understandable and accessible to the groups
being consulted in a timely manner. The safeguard instruments will be disclosed in the project
areas, in-country at national level, and the World Bank's InfoShop, to the benefit of all
stakeholders: local, national and international.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                30-Jun-2015
Page 6 of 8


﻿Date of submission to InfoShop                           30-Jun-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  //
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Burundi                                                  30-Jun-2015
Comments: Not applicable
Due to the emergency nature of this project, and in compliance with OP/BP 10.00
paragraph 12, the completion and disclosure of the environmental and social
instruments were not required as a condition for project appraisal. Safeguards
instruments (ESIAs/ESMPs as well as the RAPs/ARAPs) will be prepared at the
subproject level depending on the findings of the preliminary technical studies. All
documents will need to be disclosed both in-country and at the Infoshop during
implementation and prior to the beginning of any civil works.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              19-Jan-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           19-Jan-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Madagascar                                               19-Jan-2015
Comments: Not applicable
Due to the emergency nature of this project, and in compliance with OP/BP 10.00
paragraph 12, the completion and disclosure of the environmental and social
instruments were not required as a condition for project appraisal. Safeguards
instruments such (ESIAs/ESMPs as well as the RAPs/ARAPs) will be prepared at
the subproject level depending on the findings of the preliminary technical studies.
All documents will need to be disclosed both in-country and at the Infoshop during
implementation and prior to the beginning of any civil works.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
a        Due to the emergency nature of this project, and in compliance with OP/BP 10.00 paragraph 12, the
completion and disclosure of the environmental and social instruments were not required as a
condition for project appraisal. Safeguards instruments (ESIAs/ESMPs as well as the RAPs/ARAPs)
will be prepared at the subproject level depending on the findings of the preliminary technical
studies. All documents will need to be disclosed both in-country and at the Infoshop during
implementation and prior to the beginning of any civil works.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]   NA [   ]
report?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes[  ] No[X]   NA [   ]
property?
Page 7 of 8


﻿Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes[X] No[   ]  NA[     ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [  ]  No [X]  NA [   ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ]  No [X]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ]  No [X]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
0
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Noroarisoa Rabefaniraka
Approved By
Regional Safeguards    Name:                                      Date:
Advisor:
Practice Manager/      Name:                                      Date:
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


