                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC2376

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Tajikistan                       Project ID:      P133449
                            Project Name:      Communal Services Development Fund (P133449)
                            Task Team          Toshiaki Keicho
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          17-Nov-2014                      Estimated        17-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSURR                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Sub-national government administration (40%), Water supply (30%),
                                               Wastewater Collection and Transportation (15%), Solid waste manage ment
                                               (15%)
                            Theme(s):          Urban services and housing for the poor (50%), Municipal finance (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     50.00                     Total Bank Financing:         30.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            2.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  30.00
                              European Bank for Reconstruction and Development                             15.00
                              Municipalities of Borrowing Country                                           3.00
                              Total                                                                        50.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           7.     The PDO of the proposed project is to improve basic communal services in participating
                           towns and rural areas. This will be achieved through i) mobilizing and harmonizing available
                           financing aimed at developing communal services infrastructure; and ii) enhancing the institutional
                         capacity of municipalities and local utilities responsible for providing these services. The Project
                         aims to establish a fund-based mechanism (Communal Serviced Development Fund - CSDF) to
                         channel funds to service providers based on certain eligibility criteria, focusing initially on basic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         infrastructure and services such as water supply, sanitation, and solid waste management (the project
                         may eventually include, to a limited extent, other selected municipal functions).

                         8.       Project beneficiaries: Direct beneficiaries are participating municipalities and service
                         providers that will qualify for financing and technical assistance under CSDF. The primary
                         beneficiaries are the inhabitants of participating towns in Tajikistan. Women and children (especially
                         girls) will also be the primary beneficiaries, given that the project will: i) reduce the burden of
                         fetching, storing and managing water for household use; ii) improve access to sanitation facilities in
                         residential areas, schools and commercial areas; iii) provide secure and better managed solid waste
                         dumps; and iv) carry out a gender and vulnerability survey that will enable project interventions to
                         better address gender-specific issues.
                         C. Project Description
                         The Proposed Project will consist of the following components:

                         Component A: Institutional Development

                         The project will finance the institutional development of central and local government institutions.
                         Within this component, two sub-components will respectively focus on the following activities:

                         Sub-component A1: Establishing the Communal Services Development Fund. This sub-component
                         will finance the establishment of the Communal Services Development Fund. It will focus on the
                         central government’s capacity to manage and operate the CSDF.

                         Sub-Component A2: Institutional Development at the national and municipal level. This sub-
                         component would provide TA and consultancy services for the following:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •       Local capacity building: finance TA and training for improving O&M of participating
                         service providers, meeting sub-project objectives and improving performance.
                         •       National Level institutional strengthening: finance and support implementation of
                         recommendations and or action plans of the Municipal and Communal Services Development
                         Strategy (MCSDS) being prepared under the on-going MIDP-Additional Financing

                         Component B: Physical Investments in Participating Localities

                         The project will finance demand-driven investments in participating towns and rural areas. The
                         selection process will be designed to ensure that municipalities that meet the selection criteria are
                         representative and have a high probability of successfully generating and implementing useful
                         development schemes that could be replicable and transferable to other municipalities and or utilities.
                         The following first level selection criteria would be applied:
                         (a)      Demonstrated willingness to reform and improve performance.
                         (b)      Basic financial and administrative capacity to implement development programs proposed.
                         Interested Municipalities/Utilities will submit a request to the CSDF stating its willingness to
                         undergo a Municipal/Utility Audit. The Audit will be carried out per the CSDF Operational Manual.
                         The objective of the audit is to arrive at a fair assessment of the overall performance and investment
                         execution capacity of the participating service providers.
                         (c)      Municipalities/Utilities meeting agreed upon performance criteria to qualify for funding.
                           (d)     Geographical distribution (at least one municipality per region)

                           This component will finance the following sub-components through the Communal Services
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Development Fund rules-based framework:

                           Sub-Component B1: Urban Investment Grant Window: This sub-component will finance the
                           following sub-projects water supply, sanitation, solid waste management and a limited list of eligible
                           municipal/communal services.

                           Sub-Component B2: Rural Investment Grant Window: (Some donors have a strong interest in having
                           CSDF include a rural investment window)

                           Sub-Component B3: Urban Loan/Credit Window: This sub-component would provide loans or
                           credits to utilities that are eligible to borrow. Investments to be financed under this window would be
                           mainly for revenue generating public services and other investments of high priority and with cost
                           saving potential. Sub-projects would therefore have to demonstrate either revenue generation or cost
                           savings to qualify.

                           Sub-Component B4: Technical Assistance Window: This sub-component will finance i) Sub-project
                           preparation support: feasibility studies and required financial, environmental and social assessments;
                           preparation of final designs and bidding documents; and implementation support for sub-project
                           financed under Component B; ii) institutional capacity building, iii) training, and iv) technical
                           studies. Funds under this window could potentially be available to more cities than those who will
                           undertake investments.

                           Component C: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation:

                           This component will support the project management unit (PMU) until such time as the roles and
                           responsibilities of financing sub-projects under CSDF are fully transferred to the Fund Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                           unit in the host institution. The component will finance the PMU’s incremental operating costs to
                           carry out its project management responsibilities. It will finance hardware and software which will be
                           transferred to the CSDF when the Fund becomes fully operational. The PMU will report to the
                           Ministry of Economy.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will be implemented in participating municipalities that will be geographically dispersed
                           and will be selected during the project design based on agreed criteria.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The project implementation arrangements for the proposed CSDF project will be further determined
                           and discussed with counterparts as project preparation proceeds. Respectively the borrower EA
                           capacities will be assessed at that time.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Roxanne Hakim (GSURR)
                           Arcadii Capcelea (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                         Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          The proposed project would support mostly
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                     water supply, sanitation, solid waste
                                                                     management, as well as other demand driven
                                                                     economically and socially justifiable local
                                                                     investments in municipal services delivery,
                                                                     which might generate environmental and social
                                                                     impacts. While the environmental issues
                                                                     associated with their implementation in most
                                                                     cases will be minor, short-lived, and primarily
                                                                     limited to the project sites (except for movement
                                                                     of equipment and materials to/from the site), it
                                                                     is possible they might be also significant and
                                                                     would affect the environment and health of
                                                                     population. These issues are primarily: dust,
                                                                     noise, water pollution, disposal of waste
                                                                     material and/or older equipment, some traffic
                                                                     disruption (depending upon specific location),
                                                                     worker safety (e.g. welding operations) etc. All
                                                                     these impacts can be addressed with good
                                                                     engineering and construction practices as well
                                                                     as with preparing and implementing adequate
                                                                     mitigation measures. The project will also bring
                                                                     positive social impacts as the proposed activities
                                                                     would improve social conditions for the
                                                                     population and would contribute to improving
                                                                     local population livelihoods.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     To address potential environmental and social
                                                                     issues the borrower will prepare an
                                                                     Environmental and Social Management
                                                                     Framework (ESMF) which would guide the EA
                                                                     process, providing: (a) the national and WB EA
                                                                     rules and procedures; (b) potential
                                                                     environmental and social impacts associated
                                                                     with the proposed investments: (c) guidelines on
                                                                     conducting sub projects EIA including
                                                                     mitigation measures and monitoring activities
                                                                     for different types of activities; roles and
                                                                     responsibilities in EA process and in
                                                                     supervision and reporting; (d) EMP and EMP
                                                                     Checklist to be applied within the EA process;
                                                                     and (e) capacity building activities to ensure an
                                                                     efficient ESMF implementation. Based on the
                                                                     ESMF for each proposed sub project it will be
                                                                     prepared an EMP and/or an EMP Checklist that
                                                                     will be disclosed in consulted in the selected
                                                                     municipalities as well as submitted to the State
                                                                 Ecological Expertise for its approval. Before
                                                                 appraisal the ESMF will be disclosed and
                                                                 consulted in the country and in selected
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 participating municipalities.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    No, as the project will be implemented within
                                                                 the municipality and rural settlement
                                                                 boundaries.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    No, as the project will be implemented within
                                                                 the municipality and rural settlement
                                                                 boundaries.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    N/A

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   It is possible that this OP is triggered, depending
                         BP 4.11                                 on the sub-project location. ESMF should
                                                                 address this issue if triggered.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    N/A

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The proposed sub-projects may have some
                         4.12                                    resettlement impacts but it is expected that these
                                                                 will be mitigated and not very large. A
                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework will hence be
                                                                 developed at this stage as exact project impacts
                                                                 will only be known at implementation stage. As
                                                                 sub-projects are screened and approved,
                                                                 Resettlement Action Plans will be developed
                                                                 and approved.
                                                                 The project will also conduct a gender and
                                                                 vulnerability study to identify poor and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 vulnerable sub-groups that the sub-projects
                                                                 should benefit. This study will also inform the
                                                                 screening and selection criteria for sub-projects
                                                                 to ensure that they benefit the targeted sub-
                                                                 groups.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No    N/A

                         Projects on International         Yes   AOP 7.50 is triggered because some water
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                    supply and wastewater sub-projects are likely to
                                                                 be on international rivers. While most of the
                                                                 water supply investments are expected to
                                                                 involve rehabilitation, and/or minor expansion
                                                                 of existing networks within the original
                                                                 boundaries and design parameters of the
                                                                 schemes, the team indicated that new small
                                                                 scale water supply schemes should not be
                                                                 excluded. Therefore, riparians will need to be
                                                                 notified: in a general way about the overall
                                                                                                                                 program at this time, and on a sub-project basis
                                                                                                                                 as needed during project implementation.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 13-Mar-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Before Appraisal the draft ESMF will be disclosed and consulted in the country and in selected
                                      participating municipalities.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Toshiaki Keicho

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 10-Sep-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Sumila Gulyani (PMGR)                                                                                                Date: 01-Oct-2014
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
