                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA9024
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Jul-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mexico                             Project ID:    P147185
                            Project Name:      Mexico School Based Management Project (P147185)
                            Task Team          Rafael E. De Hoyos Navarr
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          27-Jun-2014                        Estimated   22-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEDDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Primary education (90%), Public administration- Education (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (40%), Participation and civic engagement (40%), Managing
                                              for development results (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     785.00           Total Bank Financing:                  300.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   485.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      300.00
                              Total                                                                                      785.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project's development objective is to improve schools' managerial capacity and parental
                           participation to reduce dropout, repetition and failure rates among schools participating in programs
                           to strengthen school based management.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         The Mexican Secretariat of Public Education currently implements the constitutional mandate of
                         strengthening school based management through two programs: PEC and PETC. Starting in
                         academic year 2014-15, the amounts of the school grants and the co-responsibilities attached to them,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         defined in the operating rules or guidelines of PEC and PETC, will be the same under both programs.
                         In addition, the national strategy to strengthen school based management through an improvement of
                         schools’ managerial capacity (as defined by the Government's guidelines on school based
                         management) is applicable to schools participating in both programs. The Project would be
                         comprised of the following three components to support the strengthening of school based
                         management through PEC and PETC: i) school grants to eligible schools to support the
                         implementation of school improvement plans that have been agreed with the parents association; ii)
                         technical assistance to improve schools’ managerial capacity; and iii) Project monitoring and
                         evaluation.

                         Component 1: Increasing School Autonomy and Parent Participation (US$285 million)

                         Support for strengthening school based management through the provision of school grants to
                         eligible schools to implement school improvement plans (Ruta de Mejora) that have been discussed
                         and agreed with parent associations.

                         a.       School grants. The amounts of the school grants are defined by a resource allocation formula
                         taking two criteria into account: exogenous conditions and performance in quality indicators. The
                         resource allocation formula assigns an initial grant amount to all participating schools based on the
                         level of marginalization of the locality (or community) where the school is located and the total
                         number of students. After the first year, participating schools are eligible for additional resources
                         based on the schools’ average year-to-year variation in the national standardized test (until 2013
                         known as ENLACE) and their retention rate.

                         b.       Eligibility criteria. Under PEC, the Federal Education Authority (AEF) allocates to each
Public Disclosure Copy




                         State a total budget to finance the school grants based on the number of students in the State and the
                         average level of marginalization of schools. The State Education Authorities (AEL) are responsible
                         for issuing a call for applications to enroll in PEC. Schools are selected based on their school
                         improvement plans and their level of marginalization. Priority is now also given to schools that
                         present low levels of educational achievement and high dropout rates. Under PETC, the AEL selects
                         schools based on the State's strategy for the development of basic education, and the availability of
                         financial resources. The target group for PETC consists of basic education schools with only one
                         shift in primary education and tele-secundarias. Priority is given to schools serving vulnerable
                         populations and those with low achievement levels in the national standardized test and high
                         dropout rates.

                         c.      School improvement plan. The school improvement plan a strategic plan whereby the
                         school's technical council (Consejo Técnico Escolar, CTE) identifies the main challenges and defines
                         the goals and the means though which the goals will be reached. The plans are expected to cover
                         improvements to school management, teaching practices, and social participation to improve student
                         learning. The plan is presented to and agreed with the school's social participation council (Consejo
                         Escolar de Participación Social, CTPS) which includes parents. Under PEC, having a school
                         improvement plan approved by the CTPS and AEL is mandatory to be eligible for a school grant.
                         Each year, the CTE and CTPS evaluate the extent to which they have advanced towards reaching
                         their goals and, when necessary, redefine the plan's strategy.


                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         Component 2: Improving Schools’ Managerial Capacity (US$10 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2 would finance the necessary technical assistance to improve schools’ managerial
                         capacity or the school’s ability to use existing resources in an effective way to provide better
                         education services. Under the education reform, the role of supervisors and school directors are
                         defined by a set of standards determined by the Federal and Local Education Authorities. The school
                         supervisors are responsible for providing schools with the necessary tools, technical assistance, and
                         advice to improve management practices and ultimately the quality of education services. The school
                         directors are responsible for organizing the CTE to identify the schools’ challenges, discuss options
                         for improvement, define measurable and reachable goals, monitor the performance of key indicators
                         towards reaching the goals, and promote social participation, among others. The supervisors’ and
                         school directors’ diagnosis and performance monitoring activities would be based on a newly
                         developed school dashboard providing them with all the necessary information to undertake these
                         activities. The Project would also finance the development and implementation of a training program
                         for school supervisors and directors on the use of the dashboard, the use of a classroom observation
                         method (Stallings), and the improvement of schools' managerial practices in general.

                         Subcomponent 2.1: School Dashboards for Supervisors and School Directors

                         The Federal Education Authorities, in close collaboration with Local Education Authorities, will
                         develop a dashboard with information generated by the national education management information
                         system (SIGED) and other sources of information. The dashboard will include the following
                         sections: (i) minimum standards, (ii) basic inputs, (iii) school performance indicators, (iv) schools'
                         incidents; (v) management practices, (vi) goals, and (vii) sharing best practices.
                         The AEF defined the “normalidad mínima” or minimum standards that all schools should observe
                         and that will be monitored by the school director's and supervisor's dashboard:

                         a.       Number of school days, as defined by the official school calendar
Public Disclosure Copy




                         b.       All students should have a teacher for all school days
                         c.       All teachers should start their class on time
                         d.       All students should attend school during school day and attend classes on time
                         e.       All learning material should reach all schools
                         f.       Most of the time in school should be used in instruction
                         g.       The teachers should be able to keep students engaged in the learning process for most of the
                         instruction time

                         The dashboard will also include information on schools’ basic inputs, such as the number of
                         classrooms, students per classroom, number of teachers, desks available, functioning toilets, water
                         fountains, and availability of learning materials, among others. A section of the dashboard will
                         contain performance indicators such as failure and repetition rates, dropouts or retention, and
                         learning outcomes in Mathematics and Spanish based on the national standardized test. The
                         dashboard will include a registry of school incidences or reports such as infrastructure maintenance
                         or repair needed, administrative issues, and other exogenous conditions like floods and strike
                         violence, among others.

                         One of the most important elements of the dashboard will be a section recording the school directors’
                         management practices, such as the use of evaluation results as inputs of the school improvement
                         plan, the number of meetings between the director and teachers to discuss pedagogical strategies to

                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                         address the school's main challenges and the strategies carried out by the director to engage parents
                         and the community at large in the learning process, to name a few.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 2.2: Training to Improve Schools’ Managerial Capacity

                         A training strategy for school directors, supervisors and parents would complement the design and
                         implementation of the school dashboards. Among the activities to be financed would be the design of
                         the training courses to ensure that all directors and supervisors in schools participating in programs to
                         strengthen school based management know how to use the school dashboard. Perhaps more
                         importantly, the training course will be geared to how an instrument like the dashboard can be used
                         to improve school management practices in general. Design of the training's rollout strategy to
                         prioritize among those most in need would also be financed by this component.

                         To measure and monitor the fulfillment of keeping students engaged in the learning process (part of
                         the “normalidad mínima”), this component would finance the training of school directors and
                         supervisors in the use of the classroom observation method Stallings. The design of the rollout
                         strategy would be part of the activities financed under this subcomponent.

                         Component 3: Monitoring and Evaluation (US$5 million)

                         This component would finance (i) the implementation of a new instrument to measure schools'
                         managerial capacity; (ii) technical assistance to the State to improve implementation capacity; and
                         (iii) an impact evaluation measuring the effects of the activities financed by this Project.

                         Subcomponent 3.1: Measuring Schools’ Managerial Capacity

                         Recent evidence using data for Mexico and elsewhere shows the importance of managerial practices
                         on students’ performance (Di Liberto, Schivardi and Sulis (2013), Bloom et. al (2014) and de Hoyos,
                         Garcia and Patrinos (2014)). A starting point in the agenda for improving managerial capacity at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         school level is to measure it. Therefore, this Project would finance the piloting, redesign (if
                         necessary), implementation, and comparison of three instruments to measure schools’ managerial
                         capacity: “The World Management Survey,” developed by the London School of Economics,
                         “Principal Instructional Management Rating Scale,” developed by a consulting firm and PEC’s own
                         directors’ questionnaire. The preferred instrument would identify the most important deficits in
                         schools' managerial capacity vis-à-vis a set of standards defined by the Secretariat of Public
                         Education (Secretaría de Educación Pública, SEP). The design of training to school directors
                         financed under Component 2 will be informed by the results of the first measurement of schools’
                         managerial capacities and will focus on strengthening skills that are highly correlated with learning
                         outcomes in the context of school autonomy.

                         Subcomponent 3.2: Technical Assistance to States to Improve Adherence to PEC’s Operating Rules

                         The activities carried out under the umbrella of technical assistance to the States include supervision
                         visits, national and regional meetings, training, workshops, and knowledge exchanges on best
                         practices intended to support States implementing units’ understandings of the operating, financial
                         and implementation rules of the Program.

                         Subcomponent 3.3: Impact Evaluation



                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                         An impact evaluation, using randomized control trials, would be implemented in self-selected States
                         to estimate and quantify the effect of the intervention supported by the Project. The outcome
                         variables would include intermediate results or indicators, directly linked with the intervention, such
Public Disclosure Copy




                         as schools’ managerial practices (measured by the newly developed instrument) and, long term
                         indicators measuring the quality of education services: efficiency rates, dropouts, repetition, failure,
                         and learning outcomes of the national standardized test. The evaluation design would define two
                         treatment groups, schools part of PEC, schools part of PETC, and a control group. Given time
                         constraints and willingness of States, the evaluation design would define a treatment group receiving
                         only the technical assistance (Component 2), without the additional resources to the school
                         (Component 1) to test if this would be enough to improve managerial capacities, parents’
                         participation and the quality of education services.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project would have a national coverage, with a focus on marginal and poor rural localities and in
                         selected poor urban areas. Because of this targeting, the Project would include as potential
                         beneficiaries indigenous communities that represent around 10% of the national population and are
                         among the poorest in the country. Hence, Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples
                         applies to the Project. Accordingly, an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) was prepared. A consultation
                         process of the IPP was conducted and completed before Appraisal, following this safeguard's
                         principles and the national regulations established by the National Indigenous Commission (CDI) in
                         charge of indigenous affairs in Mexico. After consultation, the final IPP was disclosed following
                         Bank's Disclosure Policy.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No               None of the Project's activities is likely to cause
Public Disclosure Copy




                          BP 4.01                                              any adverse environmental impacts. However,
                                                                               minor works financed by the Project would be
                                                                               implemented according to the environmental,
                                                                               health, and safety guidelines included within the
                                                                               PEC operational rules, which are mandatory for
                                                                               all participating agencies.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               The Project would not include construction
                                                                               activities.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               The Project would not be situated near forests and
                                                                               would not have any impact on forests.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No               This Project would not include any procurement
                                                                               of pesticides and would not affect pest
                                                                               management in any way.
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               The Project would not include construction
                          BP 4.11                                              activities.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes              The Project would have a national coverage
                                                                               focusing on marginal poor areas in which
                                                                               indigenous communities are usually located.



                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                                                                                Therefore, the Project triggers this safeguard
                                                                                policy. An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) was
                                                                                prepared. Consultation of the IPP was conducted
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                before Appraisal and the final IPP was disclosed
                                                                                according to Bank's Disclosure Policy.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No              The Project does not include any activity that may
                            4.12                                                cause involuntary resettlement.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              The proposed Project would not involve the
                                                                                construction of dams and would not depend upon
                                                                                an existing dam or the construction of a dam.
                            Projects on International        No                 The proposed Project would not affect
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 The Project would not be situated in any disputed
                            7.60                                                areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Project would have a positive social impact, as it would improve managerial capacity and
                              parental participation in public basic education schools and contribute to reducing dropout and
                              repetition rates, which are highly correlated with the most poor and vulnerable in the country. In
                              addition, both programs supported by the Project (PEC and PETC) give priority to schools located
                              in marginalized and indigenous schools.

                              The Project is not expected to have any adverse environmental impacts. Like the two previous
Public Disclosure Copy




                              projects, the proposed Project has received an environmental rating of C and OP/BP on 4.01
                              Environmental Assessment is not triggered. The Project's proposed school grants may support
                              minor works (such as maintenance and repairs of schools’ existing facilities) that cannot cause any
                              type of adverse environmental impacts and that will be conducted according to health and safety
                              guidelines included in the Operational Rules of PEC.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              PEC will continue to target all public basic education schools and to prioritize marginalized and
                              indigenous schools; however, given that projects such as PETC have been introduced more
                              recently and with a stronger focus on schools situated in rural, marginalized and indigenous
                              communities, it is likely that the share of PEC indigenous and PEC marginalized schools would
                              stagnate or decrease slightly. Since the Project would focus on supporting the policy of school
                              based management also through PETC, the overall number of indigenous and marginalized
                              schools is expected to increase.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.


                                                                        Page 6 of 8
                           In order to ensure that Mexico's indigenous populations benefit equally from Project interventions,
                           an Indigenous People's Plan (IPP) was developed based on the experiences of the previous
                           operations and the targeting mechanisms defined by PEC and PETC. The IPP discusses i) the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           targeting of investments; ii) actions for improving the effectiveness of interventions in indigenous
                           schools; and iii) the associated budget for IPP implementation. The IPP helps guarantee that
                           concrete actions are taken to ensure that indigenous and marginalized schools benefit from the
                           Project interventions at least at the same rate as the rest of the schools in the country.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The IPP has been prepared and its consultation was conducted according to a process approved by
                           the Bank following guidelines under OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples in order to identify lessons
                           learned for improving the design and implementation. The IPP was disclosed on the Bank's
                           website and on SEB’s website prior to Appraisal, as established in the Bank's Disclosure Policy.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      26-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   26-Jun-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mexico                                                           26-Jun-2014
                           Comments: Disclosed on SEP website at http://basica.sep.gob.mx/pi2014.pdf
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies



                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Rafael E. De Hoyos Navarr
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager:      Name: Janet K. Entwistle (PMGR)                   Date: 25-Jul-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
