                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC 141

    Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Feb-2015
    Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Feb-2015
    I. BASIC INFORMATION
      A. Basic Project Data

       Country:            Colombia                          Project ID:      P120899
       Project Name:       Colombia FCPF REDD Readiness (P120899)
       Task Team           Carole Megevand
       Leader(s):
       Estimated             15-May-2015
       Board Date:
       Managing Unit: GENDR


       Sector(s):          Forestry (100%)
       Theme(s):           Climate change (100%)
       Financing (In USD Million)
       Total Project Cost:             0.20                Total Bank Financing:           0.00
       Financing Gap:                  0.00
0         Financing Source                                                              Amount
          Borrower                                                                         0.00
          Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                         0.20
          Total                                                                            0.20
       Environmental
       Category:
       Is this a           No
       Repeater
       project?

      B. Project Objectives
      The Project Development Objective is to support a participatory and inclusive process with key
      stakeholders for the preparation of Colombia's REDD+ strategy.
      C. Project Description
      The Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP) prepared by the Government of Colombia identifies the
      necessary activities to strengthen Colombia's technical and institutional capacities to participate in a
      future REDD+ mechanism. The overall financial envelop needed for achieving REDD+ Readiness in
    Colombia has been estimated to US$ 29.3 million (as per the final version of the R-PP dated
    September 2013). Since 2011, Colombia has already implemented various activities under the REDD
    + preparation process with the support from different sources, which include multilateral and
    bilateral financing arrangements, in addition to the Colombian government's own contribution.
O
    The proposed FCPF grant would focus on a subset of component and activities of the R-PP: this
    subset of activities was selected jointly with MADS, taking into account the following criteria: (i)
    comparative advantage of the World Bank, and (ii) complementarity with activities financed by other
    donors and government. The FCPF operation would only support three out of the six components
    presented in the R-PP (for more information on the general budget of the REDD+ Readiness
    preparation activities, as presented in the R-PP, please refer to the FCPF website). It is important to
    highlight that the FCPF support is limited to analytical studies, capacity building, and consultation
    processes at the national and sub-national levels and would not include any physical investment or
    the implementation of any REDD+ program on the ground.

    The FCPF grant will finance in specific the following components:

    Comp. 1: REDD+ Readiness Organization and Consultation (FCPF amount: $2,850,000)
    Sub-Comp. L.a.: National Readiness Management arrangements (FCPF amount: $1,750,000)
    The FCPF grant would support the efforts initiated by MADS to strengthen a team of multi-
    disciplinary experts to coordinate and support the design of the REDD+ strategy. It would also
    ensure a full participation of government's representatives to the international negotiations on REDD
    +. Finally, this sub-component would also support the design of a Feedback and Grievance Redress
    Mechanism (FGRM) for REDD+ and strengthen processes in handling feedback requests and
    complaints paying particular attention to facilitating access to this mechanism by communities

    Sub-Comp. 1.b.: Stakeholder Consultation and participation (FCPF amount: $1,100,000)
    The FCPF grant would support the information sharing and the consultation process at the regional
    and national level with key stakeholder to inform the preparation process of the national REDD+
    Strategy. To this end, the FCPF grant would identify and strengthen existing participatory platforms,
    and would support regional mechanisms to foster a continuous dialogue on REDD+ with Indigenous
    Peoples, Afro-Colombian communities and campesinos. Additionally, technical consultations would
    be carried out with relevant stakeholders such as government ministries and regional governments,
    the private sector and unions, as well as with civil society organizations.
    A participation and consultation plan would be prepared by the social expert to be recruited under
    Component la, based on the national legal framework, the country's commitment to follow the
    requirements of ILO Convention 169 and the principles of the UN Declaration of the Rights of
    Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP). A differentiated consultation process that is culturally adequate
    would be followed in the case of Indigenous Peoples and Afro-Colombian communities as per World
    Bank Operational Policy on Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10) in seeking broad community support for
    the National REDD+ Strategy. As part of the consultation methodology, special attention would be
    paid to women in order to understand their specific issues and concerns and to promote gender
    parity. A comprehensive communications strategy would support the participation and consultation
    processes at the regional and national levels.

    Comp. 2: Assessment of social and environmental impact (FCPF amount: $630,000)
    The FCPF grant would support the continuation of the SESA process in Colombia, through the
    preparation and implementation of the SESA Workplan, building on the outcomes of the dialogue
    already conducted in the eco-regions of Pacific and Amazonia. It would include the conduct of
    analytical work based on the key issues identified by key stakeholders during the participatory
      process to contribute to the design of the REDD+ strategy.

      Comp. 3: Program monitoring and evaluation framework (FCPF amount: $120,000)
      The FCPF grant would cover the third party independent audits, as required by World Bank
      procedures.
      D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
O
      analysis (if known)
      The FCPF Readiness Preparation Grant does not entail physical investments or pilot projects on the
      ground. Instead, the grant will finance a number of analytical and diagnostic studies as well as a
      series of consultation meetings and workshops with relevant stakeholders. It is important to highlight
      that the FCPF support will not include any physical investment or the implementation of any REDD+
      program on the ground. . While Readiness Preparation is conceived as mostly strategic planning at
      this stage, key policy and regulatory precedents are being set at the readiness phase that will have
      downstream impact at the national level once the national REDD+ strategy is ready to be
      implemented. The activities of the Grant itself will not have specific impacts per se but may lead to
      recommendations for actions in the future which could bring such risks which will be assessed
      during the Grant period. The analytical and diagnostic studies as well as the consultation meetings
      and workshops that will be financed under this Grant will be used to address any potential risks and/
      or negative impacts associated with the actions being considered for the National REDD+ Strategy.
      E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
      Since the mid-i 990s, the Government of Colombia and the World Bank have been closely
      collaborating on a variety of environmental issues, ranging from urban environmental management
      to biodiversity conservation in forest ecosystems. The MADS has institutional capacity and proven
      track record in implementing the Bank's environmental and social safeguard policies. After the
      separation into the two new ministries, MADS retained the staff responsible for execution of Bank-
      funded projects: this staff has the adequate experience with Bank procedures and policies, including
      environmental and social safeguards.
      Specific to REDD, the MADS has a small, technically strong team at national level with experience
      and engagement with a broad range of stakeholders, including Indigenous Peoples, campesino
      communities, Afro-Colombian peoples, small producers, and others. This MADS' small team,
O
      including other key stakeholders, has been recently trained by the Bank in SESA processes including
      preparation of the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).
      Colombia has adopted a subnational approach to REDD+ during the preparation phase under which it
      proposes to advance the participatory development of Regional Plans based on the specificities of
      each of its five eco-regions: (i) Andean; (ii) Amazon; (iii) Pacific; (iv) Orinoquia; and (v) Caribbean.
      During the readiness phase, strengthening the human resources and expertise, particularly on social
      and environmental dimensions of REDD+, will be a key priority at both
      F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
      Juan Martinez (GSURR)
      Raul Tolmos (GENDR)

    II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
      Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
      Environmental Assessment          Yes            This policy is triggered given that some of the
      OP/BP 4.01                                       decisions and recommendations forthcoming from
                                        the REDD+ Readiness phase may have implications
                                        for forest management and associated environmental
                                        services during the implementation phase of the
o                                       REDD+ strategy (phase during which physical
                                        investments may be supported).
                                        The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
                                        (SESA) being carried out under the project will serve
                                        to identify, avoid, and mitigate the potential negative
                                        environmental and social impacts associated with
                                        future activities to be supported by the REDD+
                                        strategy by providing guidance and key elements for
                                        the preparation of an Environmental and Social
                                        Management Framework (ESMF). The SESA will
                                        also influence the national REDD+ strategy, by
                                        ensuring that social and environmental risks are
                                        factored in the preparation of the strategy. The SESA
                                        will be built upon national legal and institutional
                                        frameworks in place for the forestry sector,
                                        participation and, if applicable, strategic
                                        environmental assessment. Likewise, the ESMF will
                                        be built upon exiting country procedures and
                                        requirements where such procedures are consistent
                                        with Bank policy requirements. The results of public
                                        consultation on the draft of both the SESA and the
                                        ESMF instruments will be taken into account during
                                        the process
    Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The application of this policy seeks to ensure that all
                                        options proposed in the National REDD+ Strategy
                                        take into account the conservation of biodiversity, as
                                        well as the numerous environmental services and
                                        products that natural habitats provide to the
                                        Colombian society. Overall, REDD+ activities are
                                        expected to have significant positive impacts on
                                        natural habitats, as the country puts in place an
                                        effective strategy to reduce loss of natural forests.
                                        The SESA will address issues related to natural
                                        habitats and potential impacts of the National REDD
                                        + Strategy, which will later be included in the ESMF.
                                        The team will ensure that the associated ESMF also
                                        includes appropriate screening criteria to ensure that
                                        impacts on natural and critical natural habitats are
                                        properly evaluated. Furthermore, the ESMF will
                                        make it clear that no future investments to be
                                        undertaken in the name of the REDD+ strategy will
                                        involve the significant conversion of forests as
                                        natural habitats.
    Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have
                                        significant positive impacts on forests, in that the
                                        main goal of the program is to reduce deforestation
                                        and forest degradation, promote conservation,
o                                       sustainable management of forests and enhancement
                                        of forest carbon stocks, while contributing to the
                                        well-being of forest-dependent communities.
                                        Potential impacts of the National REDD+ Strategy
                                        on natural forests will be assessed through the SESA
                                        and included in the ESMF. The SESA and associated
                                        ESMF will reflect the requirements of the Bank's
                                        Operational Policy regarding forest management, in
                                        particular as these relate to plantations and the use of
                                        critical forest areas, as relevant. Screening
                                        mechanisms will be incorporated into the associated
                                        ESMF to ensure that the environmental and social
                                        risks of future investments undertaken in the name of
                                        the REDD+ strategy, which affect the management
                                        of forests or the welfare of forest dependent
                                        communities, are properly assessed and to ensure
                                        that any impacts on forests be mitigated through
                                        measures defined as part of the broader approach on
                                        natural habitats are included as part of recommended
                                        management or mitigation measures.
    Pest Management OP 4.09       TBD   This policy could be triggered depending on the final
                                        scope of the National REDD+ Strategy.
                                        Agricultural intensification and reforestation
                                        activities, for instance, could trigger this policy,
                                        depending on the methods employed by concrete
o
                                        activities on the ground to manage pests. The SESA
                                        will address critical issues related to pest
                                        management if necessary, and if so, these will also
                                        be included in the key elements for the ESMF. The
                                        associated ESMF will include specific screening
                                        measures to ensure that investments undertaken in
                                        the name of the REDD+ strategy incorporate
                                        appropriate screening measures to ensure
                                        investments that might result in the procurement or
                                        significant use of pesticides are fully evaluated and if
                                        potential impacts are identified, the ESMF will
                                        include mitigation measures consistent with the
                                        policy to avoid significant impacts.
    Physical Cultural Resources   TBD   This policy could be triggered if REDD+ activities
    OP/BP 4.11                          promote actions in areas containing sites deemed
                                        physical cultural resources (PCR). Though it is not
                                        anticipated that the project will have negative
                                        impacts on any such sites, the existence of any such
                                        sites and the corresponding need to trigger this policy
                                         will be determined once the National REDD+
                                         Strategy is completed. If potential impacts are
                                         identified, the associated ESMF will include specific
                                         screening provisions for evaluating potential impacts
                                         on physical cultural resources and should provide
                                         specific guidance on these procedures.
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       Yes   The REDD+ readiness will involve and potentially
    4.10                                 affect Indigenous Peoples. The SESA (Strategic
                                         Environmental and Social Assessment) process was
                                         initiated in the regions of Pacific and Amazon with
                                         the participation of Indigenous Peoples and Afro-
                                         Colombian communities in identifying the drivers of
                                         deforestation, proposing recommendations for the
                                         strategic options and identifying key issues for the
                                         design of the REDD+ strategy. The outcome of the
                                         participatory SESA process will be an ESMF with a
                                         stand-alone Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
                                         (IPPF): the IPPF will include a specific framework
                                         for Afro-Colombian communities with collective
                                         held lands. Under OP 4.10, free, prior and informed
                                         consultation leading to broad community support for
                                         the national REDD+ strategy from the affected
                                         Indigenous Peoples and Afro-Colombian
                                         communities with collective rights will be
                                         ascertained at the national level. Representation of
                                         indigenous peoples and afro-descendant communities
                                         at the national level will be in line with Colombia's
                                         legal framework for indigenous peoples (Law 21)
o
                                         and afro-Colombian communities (Law 70)
                                         establishing the various formal platforms for
                                         consultation between the Government and
                                         Indigenous Peoples and Afro-Colombian
                                         communities and in close coordination with the
                                         Ministry of Interior. Colombia has also committed to
                                         comply with its obligations under ILO Convention
                                          169 on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples (please refer to
                                         Assessment Note for further details on this point).
                                         The main product of the consultation and SESA
                                         processes will be an ESMF with a stand-alone Social
                                         Assessment as required under the OP 4.10.
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   This policy is triggered given the potential of land
    BP 4.12                              acquisition that could lead to physical or economic
                                         displacement and restrictions of access to natural
                                         resources as part of the implementation of the REDD
                                         + strategy. During the SESA process, specific efforts
                                         will be made to review the potential risks and
                                         benefits of the REDD+ strategy in relation to the use
                                                                                                  of natural resources in protected areas. A
                                                                                                  Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), as part of the
                                                                                                  ESMF, will be prepared in the event that resettlement
o
                                                                                                  occurs due to the implementation of the REDD+
                                                                                                  strategy. If necessary, a Process Framework (PF) will
                                                                                                  also be prepared to address potential restrictions of
                                                                                                  access to natural resources as part of the design
                                                                                                  phase of the REDD+ Strategy. Screening criteria will
                                                                                                  be included as part of the ESMF to screen and
                                                                                                  manage potential voluntary land donations or
                                                                                                  reassignment of use of land as part of the
                                                                                                  implementation phase of the REDD+ strategy.
          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                          This safeguard policy was not triggered because the
                                                                                                  project will not support the construction or
                                                                                                  rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
                                                                                                  investments which rely on existing dams.
          Projects on International                                   No                          This safeguard policy was not triggered because the
          Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                    project will not support activities which affect
                                                                                                  international waterways.
          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                       This safeguard policy was not triggered because the
          BP 7.60                                                                                 project will not support activities in disputed areas.

    III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
         A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 25-Oct-2017
         B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
            The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
              Dialogue and participation of key stakeholders started since the formulation phase of the R-PP.
              The participatory process initiated will continue and be strengthened throughout the Readiness
              phase accompanying the preparation of the national REDD+ strategy leading to formal
              consultations on the national REDD+ strategy taking into account the feedback and inputs
              received throughout the readiness phase.
              One of the main products of the SESA process will be an Environmental and Social Management
              Framework (ESMF) that will be prepared as an operational tool to manage risks and impacts and
              enhance the potential benefits of any future REDD+ investments. As the ESMF's objective is to
              provide risk management and mitigation measures on potential impacts from actions derived of
              the national REDD+ strategy, it is expected that the preparation of the ESMF will be aligned as
              the national REDD+ strategy takes shape. The ESMF is intended to be a live document that may
              evolve and be updated over time when new REDD + strategy options and projects or activities
              (including investments), or policies/regulations are identified during implementation of REDD+.
              Information and participation of key stakeholders will facilitate the participatory SESA process as
              it will be financing the development and implementation of a communication, participation and
              consultation strategies that will include guidelines and activities for the engagement with
              indigenous peoples, afro-colombian communities and other key stakeholders. In addition, funds
              have been specifically allocated for the development of the national Feedback and Grievance
              Redress Mechanism (FGRM). It is expected that an Environmental and Social Management




    Reminder. The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoSihop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
    form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
        Framework (ESMF) will be prepared based on the participation of key stakeholders and as an
        outcome of the SESA process.
    IV. APPROVALS
O
      Task Team Leader(s):    Name: Carole Megevand


      Approved By:
      Regional Safeguards     Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                        Date: 13-Feb-2015
      Coordinator:
      Practice Manager/       Name: Emilia Battaglini (PMGR)                     Date: 18-Feb-2015
      Manager:




o
