                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA4430
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Yemen, Republic of               Project ID:    P146055
                            Project Name:      Mocha Wind Park Project (P146055)
                            Task Team          Jianping Zhao
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          23-Oct-2013                      Estimated   28-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSEE                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other Renewable Energy (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Climate change
                                              (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     144.00           Total Bank Financing:                20.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       19.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                20.00
                              Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development                                            65.00
                              OPEC FUND                                                                                20.00
                              SAUDI ARABIA Saudi Fund for Development                                                  20.00
                              Total                                                                                   144.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)



                                                                      Page 1 of 8
                         The development objective of the Project is to increase the supply of cost-effective renewable wind
                         electricity.
                          3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed Project would consist of the following components:

                         1.       Component 1 – Physical Investment (US$121 million): The proposed component will
                         support the construction of a wind farm at Mocha of approximately 60 MW generation capacity. The
                         wind farm will be connected to an existing substation through a new 132 kV transmission line of
                         about 2.5 km. The substation is part of the national grid which is owned and operated by PEC. The
                         wind farm will be implemented by a Supply and Installation contractor. The selection of the
                         contractor will be based on International Competitive Bidding (ICB) process. The unit size and
                         number of wind turbines will be determined by the Supply and Installation contractor. The contractor
                         will also be retained to operate and maintain the wind farm for at least three years. This component
                         will initially be implemented by a Project Management Unit (PMU) established under the Ministry of
                         Electricity and Energy (MOEE). A Special Purpose Company (SPC) will be created as a wholly
                         government owned entity to own and operate the wind farm before it is completed and operational.
                         The precise form of the SPC and the timing of its creation will be agreed prior to negotiation. An
                         international engineering firm is being employed to assist with the procurement process of the
                         Supply and Installation contactor and with supervision during the construction stage.

                         2.      Component 2 – Consulting Services, Capacity Building and Market Development (US$7.0
                         million): The proposed component consists of the following sub-components: (i) an international
                         engineering consulting firm employed to assist the PMU in the procurement and contracting of the
                         EPC contractor and in the construction supervision of the project throughout the construction phase
                         and the initial operation stage; (ii) an international consulting firm employed to assist MOEE to
                         design tendering procedures and documents for competitive procurement of PPP wind projects and to
                         assist MOEE with the tendering process; (iii) advisory service for SPC which would operate
                         commercially with clear contractual arrangement with the electricity off-taker; (iv) advisory service
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and instruments for the implementation of regional long-term wind measurement program in three to
                         five wind development zones; (v) consulting service for preliminary environmental and social impact
                         assessments, grid connection planning for promising wind sites; and (vi) other consulting services as
                         needed and capacity building activities.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The area identified for the construction of a 60 MW wind farm is the northwest part of Yemen, about
                         4 km from the port city Mocha near Al Mocha Power Plant (MPP) on the Red Sea coast of Yemen.
                         The project area is about 48 km2 bordered by a rectangle of 7.2x6.6 km.

                         The site is an open plain area comprised of sandy soil with scattered vegetation cover from the
                         invasive Mesquite plant. There are a number of small settlements located within and around the
                         project area; these settlements are comprised from small number of houses built from mud and
                         woods. These villages are Al Houlibi Village settlements which is comprised of 31 houses and
                         located around the western border of the project. Al Oksh settlement which comprise 36 houses (3 of
                         them are uninhabited) and a cemetery and is located near the southern and eastern border of the
                         project and Serega village which comprises 32 houses and is located around the northern border of
                         the project. Some of the houses of these villages are located within the four borders of the project.
                         Further to the east the Red Sea shoreline is located about 2.5 km from the eastern border of the site.


                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                           MPP is located on the coast about 2.5 from the eastern border of the site. Mocha city is located about
                           4 km southeast from the southeastern corner of the site, while Mocha Harbor is located about 6 km
                           from the southeastern corner of the site.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The waste disposal site of Mocha city is located about 1.5 km to the south on the same road leading
                           to the site. In addition to the domestic solid waste received at this site, dead animals received at
                           Mocha Harbor are also placed in this disposal site, which causes offensive odors in this spot. A 132
                           KV power line exits MPP substation to the west and splits into two power lines that penetrate the
                           project site, one to the northwest direction and the other to the southwest direction.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Banu Setlur (MNSEE)
                           Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)

                            6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes               It is currently not envisaged that there will be
                            4.12                                                 relocation or land acquisition associated with the
                                                                                 project activities. But during construction, there is
                                                                                 small possibility that temporary land may be
                                                                                 required for construction activities.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Project is classified in environmental Category B as activities could result in potential adverse
                              environmental impacts on human populations and the environment. The Safeguard Policies that
                              are triggered by the Project include World Bank (WB) Operational Policies 4.01 on


                                                                         Page 3 of 8
                         Environmental Assessment and OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. . However, potential
                         environmental impacts are expected to be site-specific and reversible, and can be mitigated with
                         the implementation of an environmental and social management plan.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP 4.12 was followed in drafting the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) in order to set a
                         framework for the needed actions and policies in case any of the project components triggered
                         involuntary resettlement.
                         Other relevant WB Safeguard Policies are not expected to be triggered by project activities. The
                         project location does not completely fulfill the definition of OP 4.04 on Natural Habitats’
                         definition of “natural habitats? as the vegetation cover is almost exclusively formed by the
                         invasive Mesquite tree Prosopis juliflora, which is not a native plant to Yemen and the site has
                         been moderately modified by human interventions through over grazing and cutting of vegetation.
                         Therefore OP 4.04 is not triggered. Concerning OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources, the
                         project site does not include any objects or structures that have cultural importance and the policy
                         is not triggered. However, chance-find procedures have been proposed in the ESMP for adequate
                         management of potential objects or structures if found during project construction.

                         Expected Environmental Impacts and Proposed Mitigation Measures:

                         An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the project was carried out by the
                         borrower as part of the project preparation, under Terms of Reference approved by the World
                         Bank. The ESIA is consistent with World Bank Operational Policy 4.01 on Environmental
                         Assessment.

                         The ESIA concluded that no large-scale, significant or irreversible environmental or social impacts
                         can be expected from the project as planned, and it proposes mitigation measures, a monitoring
                         program, and a capacity building/training program in an Environmental and Social Management
                         Plan (ESMP) which will be adequate to mitigate any potential risks that could arise as a result of
                         the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The ESIA presents an analysis of the potential positive and negative impacts of the proposed wind
                         farm related activities. It is expected that construction and operation phases of the wind farm will
                         have some negative impacts. During the construction phase, potential negative impacts expected
                         are from construction related wastes, emissions of dust and pollutants to the air from construction
                         vehicles and activity, construction noise and vibrations, effects of construction traffic on normal
                         traffic flow in the area, risk of accidents to workers and inconvenience to normal freedom of
                         movement of local inhabitants. However, any potential negative environmental impacts are
                         expected to be minor, localized and temporary in nature, if the contractor does not comply at all
                         times with the relevant health and safety guidelines. Adequate mitigation measures and monitoring
                         activities are included in the ESMP, and these will be imposed as contractual obligations for the
                         EPC contractor. The ESMP also includes procedures for chance finds, monitoring indicators for
                         environmental and social impacts as well as reporting procedures.

                         During the operation phase, potential impacts include the effects of noise and impacts of shadow
                         flickering from wind turbines on local residents, scrap and maintenance waste, and other impacts
                         of minor significance including stability risks of the wind turbines, impacts of dust generation,
                         electro-magnetic field impacts and visual impacts. The operation phase is expected to generate
                         positive environmental and social impacts including a reduction in air emissions, job opportunities
                         and household gains. Adequate mitigation measures to counteract the potential negative impacts

                                                                    Page 4 of 8
                           are proposed in the ESMP. An additional concern during the operation of the wind turbines is the
                           potential risk to birds. In this regard, 2 ornithological field investigations were carried out during
                           autumn and fall seasons over 50 days of field observation. This was combined with literature
Public Disclosure Copy




                           review and consultations with locals and scientists to augment information collected in the field,
                           and the results are summarized in the ESIA. As a result of the field investigations, a detailed report
                           entitled, ‘Assessment of Risk to Birds from Planned Wind Energy Development at Mocha’ was
                           prepared by the Client during July 2010, to serve as a complement to the ESIA. The assessment
                           concluded that, ‘the current proposed wind energy development at Al Mocha is unlikely to have
                           impacts on birds of catastrophic nature, and that the level of risk to migratory and local birds is
                           within a ‘tolerable’ or ‘acceptable’ range; i.e. that the level of damage that could affect birds is
                           expected to be limited and would not have significant conservation consequences to their
                           populations if prescribed mitigation and precautionary measures are taken.’ This conclusion
                           assumes that the size of proposed development remains limited in scale, and does not deviate from
                           the current proposal without further assessment; that existing man-made risk factors (solid waste
                           dumps and cultivations) will be relocated to a safe distance from the proposed wind farm; and that
                           the recommended mitigation measures are implemented. Accordingly, the Project will include as
                           an activity, the closing down of the existing dumpsite and relocating it to a safe distance (at least
                           5kms) from the project site as a mitigation measure to reduce risk on birds, the cost of which is
                           included in the overall cost for ESMP implementation.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No long-term or irreversible indirect impacts are anticipated from the project activities, provided
                           that the mitigation measures proposed in the ESMP are implemented.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The ESIA considered a “no-project? alternative and three different scenarios combining different
                           layouts and the use of turbines of different individual capacities. The ESIA concluded on a
                           scenario that is the most advantageous to the project as follows:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           a.       More efficient in energy production and achieves more reductions of CO2 emissions
                           b.       Less risky for birds because it has less density of wind turbine, provides more
                           maneuverability for birds to avoid collision, slower blades rotation and more obvious and visible
                           to birds from a distance.
                           c.       Associated with less wind turbine noise as less houses are located within the possibly
                           impacted zone
                           d.       Associated with fewer disturbances during construction as fewer construction works are
                           required and less disturbance to traffic will be caused.

                           The ESIA considered two alternative delivery routes for the components of the wind turbines,
                           opting for delivery by sea to the nearby port of Mocha for its advantageous minimization of
                           vehicle traffic to and from the project site.

                           The ESIA also considered two resettlement alternatives for the settlements currently located
                           within and near the project site. The alternatives were to resettle local residents located inside the
                           project zone, or to allow residents to continue residing inside the zone but establish safety buffer
                           zones. The latter option was recommended as it is:

                           a.      More sensitive to the concerns of the local community and their interests in the area

                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                           b.       An economically viable alternative
                           c.       A realistic alternative that understands the local community capabilities and work within
                           these capabilities rather than being an over ambitious alternative with unattainable objectives.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Since the project is classified as Category B thereby requiring partial assessment, an
                           Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) report was prepared by an independent third
                           party consultant according to Terms of Reference that was reviewed by the Bank. The ESIA
                           includes an assessment of the potential impacts of the project and the likely significance of such
                           impacts and recommended mitigation measures. The ESIA also includes an environmental and
                           social management plan (ESMP) outlining institutional settings, mitigation measures, and
                           monitoring plan for the potential impacts expected during construction and operation phases of the
                           project.

                          A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) consistent with the World Bank Operational Policies
                          4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement has been prepared. The RPF identifies procedures to be followed
                          during the planning, design and construction phase of MWFP activities, together with measures to
                          mitigate and monitor such impacts, including a screening process for sub-projects and criteria for
                          (abbreviated) RAPs (Resettlement Action Plans). For sub-projects for which the provisions of OP
                          4.12 are applicable, an abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared.

                          A Project Management Unit (PMU) has been established to have daily responsibility for
                          coordinating the preparation and implementation of the wind farm component. The PMU which
                          will have overall responsibility for coordinating the implementation of the ESMP and RPF
                          includes a number of technical specialists as well as an environmental and social specialist
                          (Health, Safety and Environment Officer – HSE). Capacity building for the environment and
                          social staff will include training on monitoring of ESMP implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           To ensure the environmental and social mitigations measures are implemented smoothly, both
                           internal and external monitoring will be carried out during project implementation. In terms of
                           external monitoring, independent consultants will be employed to provide independent monitoring
                           and evaluation of the implementation of the ESMP and any land acquisition and resettlement work
                           as necessary. The findings, conclusions and recommendations from the monitoring will be
                           recorded and reported to the PMU and Bank periodically.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The main stakeholders relevant to the project include the MOEE and PMU, the Mocha
                           Governmental Authority, the Mocha Thermal Power Plant, the Mocha Local Council, the Al
                           Zahraa NGO for Women’s Development in Mocha, the Alanwar Center for Human Development
                           (NGO), as well as the residents of the Al Houlibi Village, Al Oksh Village, and Al Tobila Village
                           located within the project boundaries.

                          Numerous representatives of these stakeholder groups were consulted between the summer of
                          2009 and the summer of 2010 during the preparation of the ESIA. During the scoping period,
                          several in-depth interviews, scoping sessions, semi structured interviews and survey
                          questionnaires were completed with various types of stakeholders. Focus group discussions were
                          also carried out with men in Al Houlibi village on the project site.



                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                           A public consultation workshop was held in Mocha on Tuesday June 8, 2010 to review the first
                           draft of the ESIA. Different project stakeholders were invited to a plenary session to share their
                           views about the project. This public consultation workshop had the primary objective of disclosing
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the ESIA report and reviewing its main findings and identified impacts with the key stakeholders.
                           Different dissemination tools were employed to ensure the announcement of the public
                           consultations and to encourage various categories of stakeholders from different backgrounds with
                           different interests to come together and discuss critical issues related to the ESIA. Participants'
                           feedback and recommendations were incorporated in the final ESIA report.

                           The ESIA and RPF were disclosed at the World Bank Infoshop on June 13, 2011. In-country
                           disclosure of both documents took place on May 15, 2011 at the PMU office and PEC website
                           (www.pec.com.ye). Since the disclosure of the ESIA and RPF, there has been no change to the
                           surrounding environment of the project and no change to the nature of the land and its status. The
                           scope of the project remains the same as well as the environment and social risks. Therefore, the
                           environmental classification also remains the same and the previously disclosed ESIA and RPF are
                           still valid. However, due to the postpone by the Bank in processing the project because of
                           sociopolitical situation in Yemen, the EISA and RFP were re-disclosed in country on July 15,
                           2013 and at the World Bank’s Infoshop on August 12, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        15-Apr-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     12-Aug-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Yemen, Republic of                                                 15-Jul-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: The ESIA was cleared by the Bank and disclosed in country on May 15, 2011 and in
                                         Infoshop on June 13, 2011. There has been no changes to the project scope and
                                         related environmental issues since. The same ESIA, including bird risk assessment
                                         was redisclosed in country on July 15, 2013 and in Infoshop on August 12, 2013.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        15-Apr-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     12-Aug-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Yemen, Republic of                                                 15-Jul-2013
                           Comments: The RFP was cleared by the Bank and disclosed in country on May 15, 2011 and in
                                         Infoshop on June 13, 2011. There has been not change to the project scope and the
                                         nature of the associated land. The same RPF was redisclosed in country on July 15,
                                         2013 and in Infoshop on August 12, 2013..
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Jianping Zhao
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Nina Chee (RSA)                                   Date: 26-Oct-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (SM)                       Date: 03-Nov-2013




                                                                        Page 8 of 8
