                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC1610

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mongolia                        Project ID:      P130891
                            Project Name:      MN: Support for Accountable, Responsible, and Transparent Government
                                               (P130891)
                            Task Team          Tenzin Dolma Norbhu
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       03-Oct-2013                        Estimated        20-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: TWICT                               Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Public administration- Information and communications (70%), General
                                               information and communications sector (30%)
                            Theme(s):          e-Government (80%), Other accountability/anti-corruption (10%), Regulation
                                               and competition policy (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     20.00                    Total Bank Financing:         19.40
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.60
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 19.40
                              Total                                                                       20.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           19.     The development objective of the project is to support Mongolia to improve accountability,
                           responsiveness, and transparency of public service delivery by engaging citizens and businesses
                           through participatory channels, including open data and ICT.
                           C. Project Description
                         Component 1: Enhance civic engagement and citizen feedback mechanisms (US$4.4 million) will
                         provide investment support for the expansion and improvement of the Government’s citizen call
                         centers. This will enable citizens to collaborate with government in policy and service design and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will make public sector data available to the wider public. It will also enable government to get
                         citizen’s views on their satisfaction with government programs, services and regulation to inform
                         government on improving service delivery. Specifically, the component will consist of:

                         (a) Investment and technical assistance support to improve, expand and scale up the Government’s
                         “11-11” center, and Ulaanbaatar City’s 1200, 1234 and smart city initiatives. IT infrastructure and
                         services, including computing hardware and packaged software and content will be procured (US
                         $2.4 million).

                         (b) Capacity building and technical assistance support to government to use business analytics on
                         information from the call centers to help government gain a deeper performance insight and ensure
                         that services meet citizen needs, to ensure effective use and management of government resources.
                         This component will also support the development of an institutional mechanism so that one
                         organization can service both Ulaanbaatar City and the Federal Government with the business
                         analytics function in a sustainable way. Capacity building will include training workshops, learning
                         events and master classes, conference participation and study tours (US$2.0 million).

                         Component 2: Enabling Foundations for SMART Government (US$8 million) will provide
                         investment and technical assistance to the Government to establish shared infrastructure and services
                         that can be used by all government agencies to improve service delivery. Specifically, the
                         component will consist of:

                         (a)      Investment and technical assistance to design, develop, deploy and use national enterprise
                         architecture (NEA) and interoperability (e-GIF) for better strategies, processes, plans, structures,
                         technologies and systems across the government. At present, NEA and e-GIF do not exist. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         NEA and interoperability framework will be used to better tailor information systems for government
                         agencies to achieve key Government objectives and outcomes and achieve increased data sharing,
                         better asset management, reduced risk and lower costs of IT procurement. This will consist of the
                         procurement of limited IT equipment and a single consulting contract (US$1.0 million).

                         (b)      Investment support to upgrade the National Data Center and transition it into a national data
                         exchange and cloud computing infrastructure for the Government. This infrastructure will be used to
                         establish it as a shared service delivery platform to facilitate the rapid deployment of government
                         applications that can be delivered on the mobile platform, at a low cost for use by various ministries,
                         agencies, and programs. The service delivery platform will support the delivery of voice and data
                         services and content to the largest number of potential users across Mongolia. This will involve the
                         procurement of IT infrastructure (systems and services) (US$3.5 million).

                         (c)      Investment support to establish an Innovation Support Fund. The fund will finance an
                         innovation grants program as a mechanism to quickly identify, test, and deploy simple mobile
                         applications and open data applications in support of specific government objectives in priority
                         sectors. The program will take the form of a grants competition that will fund the most innovative
                         tools that address specific development ‘innovation challenges’ in priority areas identified by various
                         ministries and agencies of the Government. In doing so, this program will both help mainstream
                         applications across the Government while also creating opportunities to involve private sector firms
                         in the development and provision of applications. The applications will be developed to respond to
                         demand from citizen demands that are captured by the citizen engagement platforms. This
                         subcomponent will be managed by the existing office of the Director General for Innovations in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Information Technology, Post and Telecommunications Authority (ITPTA). An operations manual
                         for the Innovation Support Program will be drafted during project preparation and will guide the
                         implementation of the subcomponent. In order to ensure that the program is well designed, an initial
                         pilot will be conducted focusing on one specific area where critical mass for open data and mobile
                         applications exist. This will enable the ITPTA to assess the validity of the program, prior to full scale
                         up (US$2.5 million).

                         (d) Capacity development support to the ITPTA to strengthen its ability to support various
                         government agencies on ICT initiatives. This includes building capacity through workshops and
                         training events, so that the ITPTA and its aligned agency, the National IT Park can better function as
                         an eGovernment resource center to support other line agencies on the design and development of
                         specifications for systems and solutions, contract management, quality assurance and testing among
                         others (US$1.0 million)

                         Component 3: Component 3: Enabling Open Data (US$6 million) will provide investment and
                         technical assistance support to the Government of Mongolia (Office of the Cabinet Secretary,
                         National Statistics Office, and other line agencies) to improve the quality and increase the quantity of
                         data released as open data. Specifically, support will be provided for:

                         (a)      Developing capacity to: (i) prioritize datasets that need to be opened, through a multi-
                         stakeholder public consultation, and demand assessment process and to provide better data that
                         matches citizens’ interests on a sustainable basis, (ii)identify the legal, institutional and technical
                         constraints to open data initiatives at the national, sub national and sector levels. This will include
                         training, workshops, conferences, peering arrangements with other open data offices and study visits
                         over a five-year period. This component will also provide technical assistance to the Office of the
                         Cabinet Secretariat to implement a national open data initiative, to the UB municipal government in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         particular, and to government agencies in general, to enable them to open their data. (US$1.0 million)

                         (b)       Investment support to implement the statistics production system at the NSO. The NSO,
                         through the Mongolia Statistics Support project has developed a detailed IT plan for NSO. The
                         project will support the implementation of this right-sized, rationalized IT plan, focusing on ensuring
                         that it enables NSO to produce quality data. Specifically, IT hardware systems and services will be
                         procured as a single package (US$5.0 million).

                         Project Implementation Support (US$1.0 million) will establish the Project Implementation Unit.
                         Project funds will be used to hire the Project Director, a Financial Management Specialist,
                         Procurement Specialist, and other required support staff including translators, communications
                         specialists, M&E officer. Funds will also be used to procure required infrastructure and services to
                         support the functioning of the PIU as needed, including office equipment. Operational costs of the
                         project will also be met from this allocation. The Government’s in-kind contribution to the project
                         will include office space and the cost of key technical officers at the Cabinet Secretariat office. The
                         PIU will be dissolved six months after project closing, with the technical skills for long-term
                         sustainability of operations developed and residing at the line agencies.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                               The project will be located in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia's capital city. The project will support capacity
                               building; technical assistance; an innovation fund; investment support in IT systems and statistics
                               production system. The project will not finance any physical interventions: neither civil works nor
Public Disclosure Copy




                               resettlement.
                               E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                               The Office of the Cabinet Secretariat's with support from the Project Implementation Unit, has
                               satisfactory capacity to monitor the compliance of safeguard policies for this project, given that it is
                               located in the capital city, and that the project will not finance physical interventions.
                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Chongwu Sun (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Oct-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      To be determined.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Tenzin Dolma Norbhu

                                 Approved By:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)            Date: 08-Oct-2013
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Ramesh Sivapathasundram (SM)   Date: 27-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
