INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC9387
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Mar-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Armenia                    Project ID:   P150327
Project Name:    Local Economy and Infrastructure Development Project (P150327)
Task Team        Ahmed A. R. Eiweida,Zaruhi Tokhmakhian
Leader(s):
Estimated        02-Sep-2015                Estimated     22-Oct-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Sub-national government administration (20%), SME Finance (10%), Rural and
Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (35%), General water, sani tation and flood
protection sector (35%)
Theme(s):        Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (10%), Cultural Heritage (20%),
Urban Economic Development (25%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service
Delivery (35%), Infrastructure services for private sector development (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      66.00             Total Bank Financing:    55.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                         11.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development            55.00
Total                                                            66.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to improve infrastructure services and institutional capacity
for increased tourism contribution to local economy in selected regions of Armenia.
C. Project Description


﻿The proposed Project will support the increased contribution of tourism to the local economies of
selected regions. It will do so by implementing an integrated approach entailing infrastructure
investment, urban regeneration, cultural heritage restoration, skills development, tourism product
development and diversification, and attracting private sector investment. The Project will help
create and build tourism circuits that connect multiple sites in the selected regions. Together, these
activities will help attract more visitors to the regions and increasing their spending and this will, in
turn, fuel job creation and local economic growth.
The design of the Project incorporates lessons based on experiences under similar operations in
Georgia (the first and the second Regional Development Projects), and recommendations from the
World Bank's 2014 Economic Sector Work (ESW) on Regional Development in the South Caucasus
Program. The latter helped identify some of the opportunities for regional development and shared
prosperity in Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia by analyzing the regional profile of each country, and
identifying key policy and investment needs in the most competitive sectors that drive private sector-
led growth and job creation, most notably tourism, agro-tourism and agri-business.
In Armenia, the Bank's ESW focused on the Southern Corridor (Garni- Geghard- Khor Virap- Areni-
Jermuk- Sisian- Tatev- Goris- Meghri), which crosses four regions (Kotayk, Ararat, Vayots Dzor and
Syunik) combining several scenic cultural and natural attractions; traditional farms, mountains
including Mount Ararat, carpet production in Yeghegnadzor and Goris, wine tourism in Areni, and
cultural heritage and traditional cuisine in Goris. It found that the quality of roads and other
municipal infrastructure ranges from poor to good along the Corridors but, overall, road and water
improvements and urban regeneration are high priorities. This Corridor provides opportunities for
many activities such as visits to natural areas, cultural heritage sights, and visits with carpet
producers, traditional meals and community home stays. Many of these activities are offered by
small and micro-enterprises. Hence, generating more tourist visitation facilitates local businesses and
spreads prosperity over a broader range of stakeholders.
The key conclusion of the ESW is that corridor development requires several key interventions, such
O
as tourism infrastructure improvements, especially through site management plans; improved and
expanded product offers; and local capacity building and workforce development. It also highlighted
Areni, Goris and Meghri as potential hub destinations that should be developed along with selected
spoke destinations to realize the vision of the establishment of the Southern Corridor as a new
responsible tourism destination, and achieve economic development objectives all along Corridor.
The ESW has identified destination hubs along the Southern Corridor that either are, or could be,
attractive to visitors, tour operators and investors. The "hubs" and corresponding "spoke"
destinations would serve as clusters and circuits. While it would be ideal to assist as many
destinations as possible in each of the areas mentioned above - product offerings and marketing,
infrastructure, private investment, and human resources - resources are limited and must be allocated
to those destinations where improvements could best attract more visitor spending, generate
increased incomes and employment, and spur more investment. Building on this, the proposed
Project will have the following two components:
Component 1: Urban Regeneration and Tourism Circuit Development (US$48 million):
Heritage Hub Regeneration. This sub-component includes restoration of public infrastructure,
building facades, public spaces, museums, roads and water. Based on product development and


﻿marketing potential, infrastructure needs, and Marz employment needs, the destination hubs with the
greatest potential to be catalysts for tourism development along the Corridor are: Areni, Goris, and
Meghri.
O
Tourism Circuits Development. This sub-component will finance implementation of an integrated
approach to cultural heritage site upgrading and improved management in the most attractive cultural
heritage sites located along the main tourism circuit/route in Southern and Northern Corridors. These
activities include: a) site management plans, b) construction of tourism facilities at each attraction,
such as information centers, caf6s, rest areas, public toilets, parking, c) preservation of cultural
heritage monuments, museums, etc., and improving the Southern Corridor access roads. Based on the
ESW, the following spokes were selected for enhancement of tourism circuit: Garni (temple and
gorge), Geghard Monastery, Khor Virap Monastery, Areni cave, Mozrov cave, Yeghegis, Shaki
waterfall, Karahunge, and Khndzoresk. Two World Heritage Sites in the Northern Corridor, Haghpat
and Sanahin, will also be restored and developed.
Public-Private Infrastructure (PPI). This sub-component will finance selected public sector
investments in municipal or regional infrastructure which will benefit the selected community as a
whole and will lead to increased medium-size private sector investments along the corridors. To
encourage private sector investments in the region, this component is to support a selected number of
private sector entities which show interest in and capacity to invest along the Corridors in the tourism
sectors or in agro-processing, but seek complementary public infrastructure necessary to make their
investments viable (e.g., public facilities within vicinity of the investments, road/sidewalk, water/
sanitation, communications, etc.). They would be subject to screening by a selection committee and
there will be appropriate conditions tied to that. Selection of private sector investments will be based
on transparent and competitive processes. The support offered will include streamlined business
startup procedures and provisions of the public infrastructure mentioned above.
Component 2: Institutional Development (US$7 million):
Capacity Building: Enhancing the institutional capacity and performance of the Development
Foundation of Armenia and other tourism and cultural heritage entities (local and regional) to carry
out the following activities: destination management and promotion, marketing and promotion;
workforce development with specific gender focus; construction supervision and sustainable site
a       management of cultural heritage; and performance monitoring and evaluation activities with specific
gender disaggregation.
Business Advisory Services for SME Development: Private investors, particularly those investing in
small and medium enterprises, shall be incentivized through the provision of various incentive
schemes such as public infrastructure and streamlined business start-up procedures. This component
can help encourage local communities to start up, or expand, small and medium enterprises. This
component will provide business advisory services for SME development - for example, to guest-
houses, restaurants, handicraft workshops, organic food and beverage firms; so that SMEs can access
micro-credit financing resources available at the Ministry of Economy (MoE).
The Project is likely to have differential impacts on men and women. It is expected to increase
employment opportunities in tourism/hospitality sectors for both men and women, but the types of
jobs available are likely to be different. The results of project activities will be monitored, using
gender disaggregated data. Improving the urban infrastructure will also have some positive direct
effects on women, given their greater role in domestic work. The Project will collect gender-


﻿disaggregated data to better understand and assess the role of men and women in the tourism
economy and its potential impact on both. In terms of participation, the Project will ensure that
women are adequately represented in public consultations. In assessing the demand for tourism sites
and designing the marketing activities, the Project will consider different experiences that male and
O
U       female tourists would like to have, such as wine tasting vs. experimenting lavash bread baking or
carpet knitting.
O
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Kotayq, Ararat, Lori, Vayots Dzor and Syuniq Marzes of Armenia
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Darejan Kapanadze (GENDR)
Michelle P. Rebosio Calderon (GSURR)
Nino Metreveli (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The Project carries investment components in
OP/BP 4.01                              support to infrastructure development and therefore
triggers OP/BP 4.01. None of the Project-supported
activities are expected to have significant, long term,
or irreversible impacts on the natural environment,
therefore the Project is classified as environmental
Category B.
0
A Strategic Environmental, Cultural Heritage and
Social Assessment (SECHSA) of the Project
interventions into the Southern Corridor will be
carried out to source any regional or marz level or
sectoral development plans that may exist or be
under development for the geographic area of
Project's influence or its parts and analyze how the
Project design and implementation may be shaped by
and/or contribute to the materialization of these
plans. SECHSA will also examine the likely long
term and cumulative impacts of the Project and
possible future developments that may be induced by
the Project implementation. SECHSA will be based
on a meaningful public participation and its
outcomes will influence final design of the Project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes        OP/BP 4.04 is triggered to ensure that any
interventions into the natural habitats and the areas in


﻿their immediate vicinity are fully harmonized and
supportive of the habitat conservation goals. Some of
the proposed tourism sites along the corridors are
caves, and they typically have very fragile
ecosystems that require very careful management
and monitoring. Site-specific Environmental and
Social Reviews (ESRs) and/or Environmental
Management Plans (EMPs) to be developed for
individual sub-projects related to natural habitats will
explain how the above principles are integrated into
the design and implementation arrangements of each
sub-project.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           No
Pest Management OP 4.09      No
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes          The Project aims at attracting increased flow of
OP/BP 4.11                                tourists to the natural and cultural heritage sites
selected for Project interventions. This would imply
improvement of access to these sites and
development of tourist infrastructure around them.
Implementation of civil works in and around the
historical monuments and other elements of the
cultural heritage carries a risk of affecting their
aesthetic value, accidental damage, or gradual
deterioration. These risks will be specified and their
mitigation measures laid out in sub-project specific
ESRs and EMPs.
o
OP/BP 4.11 is triggered to ensure that no element of
cultural heritage is affected negatively neither during
construction nor operation of the infrastructure
provided under the project. Site-specific ESRs and/or
EMPs will cover the aspect of cultural heritage
preservation and carry relevant mitigation measures,
as well as arrangements for monitoring their
implementation.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         While the specific sites and nature of civil works
BP 4.12                                   under the Project are not yet known, land use and
permanent or temporary land acquisition is expected.
A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will
therefore be prepared. The RPF will provide detailed
guidance and criteria for the development of
investment-specific Resettlement Action Plans


﻿(RAPs), which would to be prepared and
implemented prior to commencement of works at a
site where resettlement or land acquisition was
required. The RPF will be included as an annex to
the Project Operations Manual.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No
Projects on International     TBD
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Jul-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Preparation of safeguards documents will be supported by a project preparation grant from the
ECAPDEV trust fund. The ESMF, RPF and SECHSA will all be prepared, disclosed and
consulted prior to Project appraisal.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ahmed A. R. Eiweida,Zaruhi Tokhmakhian
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                        Date: 25-Mar-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst (PMGR)          Date: 26-Mar-2015
Manager:
0
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


