                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC9754

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Uruguay                          Project ID:       P149069
                            Project Name:      Uruguay Climate Events’ Impact Mitigating Investment Project Financing
                                               (P149069)
                            Task Team          Cristina Savescu
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       14-Oct-2014                         Estimated         02-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GMFDR                                Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Public administration- Energy and mining (50%), General public administration
                                               sector (30%), Hydropower (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Other economic management (70%), Other public sector governance (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    150.00                      Total Bank Financing:        150.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         150.00
                              Total                                                                         150.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the proposed operations is to assist the government of the Oriental
                           Republic of Uruguay in its efforts to shield public accounts from the effect of hydropower deficits
                           that affect electricity generation costs by leveraging the Energy Stabilization Fund (FEE) resources
                           dedicated to electricity tariffs stabilization. The PDO would be achieved by providing
                           contingentfinancing to this Fund to enhance the government’s ability to attenuate the volatility of
                         electricity tariffs and cushion the negative effects of rainfall shortages on the financial balances of
                         the state owned electricity company, UTE. The operation will help the government to further cushion
                         volatility of electricity tariffs and the financial flows of UTE enabling a more predictable decision
Public Disclosure Copy




                         making environment for households, firms, and UTE.
                         C. Project Description
                         The Energy Stabilization Fund (FEE)

                         The Energy Stabilization Fund (FEE) was created in 2010 (Law No. 18.719, article 773 of December
                         27, 2010) as a mechanism to help stabilize electricity tariffs in the face of climatic changes which
                         affect significantly the cost of generating the electricity required to satisfy the projected demand
                         reducing the negative impact of hydropower deficits on the financial situation of the (UTE) and on
                         public finances. It is a sole-purpose fund, established within the National Development Commission
                         (CND) which acts as the trustee. The Law 18.719 stipulates that the fund has an upper limit of 4
                         billion unidades indexadas, inflation-indexed monetary units which currently is the equivalent of US
                         $496 million. In 2011, the FEE received an initial contribution amounting US$150 million from
                         UTE.

                         The FEE’s operating regulations are stipulated by the Decree 442/011. If the quarterly hydropower
                         generated is below an inferior limit of 0.9 of a simulated long term historical average UTE can
                         request the use of funds from FEE (Article 4 of the decree 442/011) to compensate the difference
                         between the 90 percent of the estimated hydropower generation and the real hydropower generation.
                         That difference is valued at the variable cost of the thermal plants per MWh and that of the effective
                         unitary import cost (Article 5 of the Decree 442/011). When applicable, the quarterly calculations of
                         transfers from the FEE to UTE are made public on the website of the Electricity Market
                         Administration (Administración de Mercado Eléctrico - ADME).

                         According to the Decree 442/001 the FEE can be funded with internal government resources
                         provided by Rentas Generales, funds contributed by UTE, and external financing. However, it is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         expected that the Fund should function and be sustainable with the foreseen transfers made by UTE
                         and their extractions whenever there is less hydropower than expected. According to Article 3 of
                         Decree 422/011UTE transfers to FEE should be made annually and the size of the transfers are
                         associated to the generated hydropower. For example, whenever the actual generated hydropower is
                         above 0.65 the expected one the transfer is 6.5 percent of the maximum level of the FEE. When it is
                         between 0.65 and 1 the transfers are 8.5 percent of the maximum level of the FEE.

                         To enhance the FEE’s governance and institutional framework, the government is setting up a
                         management trust. A management trust as oppose to a financial trust means that the Trustee will not
                         be able to contract commercial loans or issue debt. Once a management trust agreement is created the
                         funds will be transferred at the request of the management trustee Conafin Afisa, and the Executiev
                         power decrees will not be necessary. The trust fund is expected to be established in November 2014
                         before negotiations of this operation will take place.


                         Description

                         The proposed operation is designed as an Investment Project Financing (IPF) with 100 percent
                         contingency that would provide funding to the National Development Corporation. CND will on-
                         lend in a symmetric operation to the Energy Stabilization Fund through its CONAFIN AFI S.A.
                           trustee. The funds will be disbursed if disbursement-linked indicators are met and after a threshold
                           level of the Energy Stabilization Funds (FEE) has been used. The operation has a 100 percent
                           contingent component which means that the entire loan amount will be disbursed to CND if the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           adverse event materializes.

                           The proposed disbursement-linked indicator (DLI) is the same than the established by the Decree
                           442/011 which conditions transfers from the FEE to UTE: the difference between expected generated
                           hydropower GHE_Q , which is the historical average, and the Lower Hydropower Limit (LIH_Q)
                           defined as 90 percent of the GHE. When the disbursement linked indicator is met and the level of
                           FEE funds fall below a certain threshold (to be defined with the government) and the GOU requires
                           it, the proposed operation would disburse to the FEE. The IPF will use the data reported to and
                           published by the Administracion de Mercado Electrico (ADME) to monitor the DLI.

                           The Financial Management (FM) implementation arrangements will be the same operating at the
                           company level at National Development Corporation (CND) and its 100 percent controlled company
                           Corporación Nacional Financiera Administradora de Fondos de Inversión S.A. (CONAFIN AFI S.
                           A.), since the project comprises an operation with a contingent payment upon meeting the
                           disbursement –linked indicators.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The proposed Project, which involves 100 percent contingency, does not contemplate any physical
                           investments but rather will provide funding to an Energy Stabilization Fund. In addition, none of the
                           disbursements will be linked to carrying out any specific activities. Therefore, there will be no a
                           physical Project location and the Project does not have any safeguards implications.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Since the proposed Project is not expected to have adverse environmental and/or social impacts and
                           no safeguard policies will be triggered, there is thus no need to assess the Borrower’s institutional
Public Disclosure Copy




                           capacity for safeguard policies management.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No              The proposed Project, which involves 100
                           BP 4.01                                              percent contingency, would provide funding to
                                                                                an Energy Stabilization Fund under certain
                                                                                conditions (parametric disbursement linked
                                                                                indicators, level of the FEE and the GOU’s
                                                                                request), aimed at providing buffers to help
                                                                                manage temporary drought and energy price
                                                                                shocks, avoiding disruptive shutdowns or sharp
                                                                                tariff increases that would affect households,
                                                                                mainly the poorest ones, and businesses. Since
                                                                                none of the disbursements are linked to carrying
                                                                                out any specific investment or physical works/
                                                                                                                                 interventions, the Project is not expected to
                                                                                                                                 cause any adverse environmental impacts.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No                            This policy is not triggered since the Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 does not require the significant conversion of
                                                                                                                                 natural habitats or critical natural habitats and
                                                                                                                                 will not take place in protected areas or
                                                                                                                                 ecologically important sites.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            The policy is not triggered as the proposed
                                                                                                                                 Project will not finance any activity that could
                                                                                                                                 affect forest, the welfare of forest-dependent
                                                                                                                                 communities or the management of forests.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            This policy is not triggered as the proposed
                                                                                                                                 Project will not finance any activity that involve
                                                                                                                                 the procurement or increased use of pesticides.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            The policy is not triggered as the proposed
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         Project will not finance any activity that could
                                                                                                                                 affect sites with archeological, paleontological,
                                                                                                                                 historical, religious, or unique natural values.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            This policy does not apply since indigenous
                                                                                                                                 peoples, as defined by the four required
                                                                                                                                 characteristics in OP 4.10, are not present in the
                                                                                                                                 project's area of influence.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            This policy is not triggered because the
                                 4.12                                                                                            proposed Project will neither cause involuntary
                                                                                                                                 physical resettlement, nor negative impacts on
                                                                                                                                 livelihoods due to involuntary land taking or
                                                                                                                                 restriction of access to natural resources.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The Policy is not triggered since the Project will
                                                                                                                                 not support the construction or rehabilitation of
                                                                                                                                 dams nor will it support other investments
                                                                                                                                 which rely on the services of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The proposed Project will not involve
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways as defined in the policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This policy is not triggered since the proposed
                                 7.60                                                                                            Project will not involve disputed areas as
                                                                                                                                 defined under the Policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Oct-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      No Social or Environmental Assessment is required beyond the initial screening.
                         IV. APPROVALS




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Cristina Savescu

                         Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)     Date: 09-Sep-2014
                         Coordinator:
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Auguste Tano Kouame (PMGR)   Date: 15-Sep-2014
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
