                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC6895

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Dec-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Uzbekistan                       Project ID:      P146334
                            Project Name:     Regional Roads and Development Project (P146334)
                            Task Team         Mustapha Benmaamar
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         15-Dec-2014                      Estimated        15-Jun-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GTIDR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (70%), General transportation
                                              sector (10%), Other domestic and international trade (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (40%), Trade facilitation
                                              and market access (60%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    240.00                    Total Bank Financing:        200.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     40.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       200.00
                              Total                                                                       240.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           14. The proposed Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are to reduce road user costs, improve
                           road safety on the project roads and to develop a framework program for regional road asset
                           management.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed project would consist of three components totaling US$240 million.

                         Component 1: Road Rehabilitation and Safety (US$230.0 million). The component will finance part
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of the priority regional road rehabilitation roads program. The Project will rehabilitate the priority
                         roads in three of the thirteen Oblasts. The 3 Oblasts will be determined during project preparation
                         using a screening method based on a set of criteria to be discussed with the Government.
                         Specifically, the Project will finance the rehabilitation works including structure renewal as well as
                         existing ancillary road connections (crossroads, access roads, drainage systems). This component
                         will also support integration of road safety considerations into the design of the project's road
                         sections and their subsequent implementation towards the mainstreaming of these practices in all
                         roads;

                         Component 2 (US$5.0 million): Institutional Strengthening Component. This component is
                         envisioned to among others, (i) to carry out a Road Safety Management Capacity Review, develop a
                         Road Safety Strategy and Action Plan and implementation of Road Safety Improvements
                         Interventions on a set of road sections (ii) Support the GoU to improve road management practices
                         and financial/institutional sustainability of the road sector (iii) Support to the GoU to improve the
                         operating environment for the local construction industry; (iii) Institutional strengthening of the
                         Republican Road Fund to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of its organizational arrangements
                         (i.e. internal business processes, multiannual planning and development; development and
                         implementation of a communication strategy; training and various other studies to be determined.

                         Component 3 (US$5.0 million): Project management support: Design and Supervision Consultants
                         to provide support as may be necessary in project management, procurement, and financial
                         management, environmental and social safeguards.

                         The main interventions will consist of rehabilitating the existing roads, using the same alignment.
                         The Project will not build new roads - the rehabilitation work will be extended to existing access
Public Disclosure Copy




                         roads for safety reasons and structural reasons. It is anticipated that the environmental impacts
                         therefore would be temporary and mitigatable, so the project is categorized as 'B'.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Locations of the project activities are not decided yet and will be determined during project
                         preparation. Detailed design work is expected to be completed for the initial works prior to appraisal.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Project will be implemented through the existing Project Management Unit (PMU), within
                         Republican Road Fund (RRF). The PMU is staffed with the full time safeguards specialists, who are
                         capable of the implementation of environmental assessment documents (EAs/EMPs/EMP checklists).
                         as well as social safeguards documents (RAP/RPF). The team has gained good experience working
                         with the Asian Development Bank and bilateral donors on the Uzbekistan sections (404 km) of the
                         Central Asia Regional Economic Cooperation Road Investment Program (CAREC) since 2006. Part
                         of the ECAPDEV Grant will be allocated to support and further enhance the PMU capacity during
                         project preparation.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Mark C. Woodward (GSURR)
                         Esra Arikan (GENDR)
                           Rebecca Emilie Anne Lacroix (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          This policy is triggered because civil works to
                           BP 4.01                                     be implemented under the project represent
                                                                       environmental risks which are mainly temporary
                                                                       and limited by the period of construction.
                                                                       However, since it is planned not to build new
                                                                       roads but only rehabilitate the existing roads the
                                                                       impacts are predictable, manageable and
                                                                       mitigatable. The potential impacts may include
                                                                       destabilization of slopes, loss of some land due
                                                                       to rehabilitation or small scale expansion within
                                                                       the ROW, , disturbance of drainage systems,
                                                                       extraction of road construction materials,
                                                                       increased dust production and air and noise
                                                                       pollution, disturbance to ecosystem to a certain
                                                                       extent. It is not known at this stage if the client
                                                                       will use existing borrow pits or will need to
                                                                       build new pits for the rehabilitation works.
                                                                       Assuming the client will not build new borrow
                                                                       pits, the simple environmental impacts arising
                                                                       from rehabilitation works could be managed by
                                                                       SMP checklists. The client will prepare a
                                                                       project EMP which will outline the generic
                                                                       impacts, mitigation and monitoring measures.
                                                                       As soon as the exact project locations are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       determined, client will use an EMP checklist
                                                                       template and fill that by using site specific
                                                                       information to prepare the site specific EMPs.
                                                                       Those EMP documents (in checklist form)
                                                                       determine site-specific impacts which are likely
                                                                       to occur due to the program implementation,
                                                                       propose adequate mitigation measures, define
                                                                       responsibilities and arrangements for the
                                                                       implementation of those measures, and outline
                                                                       the monitoring mechanism.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No           It is anticipated that the project activities will be
                                                                       conducted on the existing routes and they will
                                                                       not involve large scale new construction. The
                                                                       policy is not triggered because no significant
                                                                       impacts are envisaged on natural habitats, and
                                                                       the mitigation of those impacts will be duly
                                                                       addressed by respective EMP checklists.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36             No
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   No impact on physical cultural resources is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.11                                 anticipated, however the environmental
                                                                 screening process will screen for potential
                                                                 impact and all construction contracts will
                                                                 include provisions for addressing chance finds
                                                                 should they occur.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The policy is triggered because although land
                         4.12                                    acquisition is not envisaged, the project may
                                                                 potentially lead to the loss or disruption of
                                                                 income sources of vendors and businesses
                                                                 operating in project affected areas, as well as
                                                                 potential encroachments on rights of access and
                                                                 way. Land acquisition is not foreseen, as all
                                                                 road sections affected by the project belong to
                                                                 the State or respective municipalities, and
                                                                 acquisition of private land will not be necessary.
                                                                 However, as existing roads will be rehabilitated
                                                                 and ancillary roads may be renewed the
                                                                 project may potentially disrupt the economic
                                                                 activities and sources of income of roadside
                                                                 vendors and busnesses, and affect rights of way
                                                                 and access. Once project sites are confirmed, it
                                                                 will also be determined whether project
                                                                 activities will require compensation for any
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 trees or plants located along the roads. As it is
                                                                 expected that detailed designs for all road
                                                                 segments will not be available prior to appraisal
                                                                 the client will prepare an RPF. RAPs,
                                                                 commensurate with the extent of impact, will be
                                                                 prepared prior to appraisal if needed for all
                                                                 segments for which detailed designs will be
                                                                 ready and, subsequently, during
                                                                 implementation, for any other segments that
                                                                 would need them. During preparation the Bank
                                                                 team will visit the proposed alignments to assess
                                                                 the likelihood of land take and/or other social
                                                                 impacts.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International        No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                         7.60
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 03-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The general project EMP and RPF will be ready before appraisal and need to be disclosed in the
                                      country and at the Infoshop. And for the projects, for which the designs are ready, there should be
                                      site specific EMPs (checklist format) and RAPs (if needed) consulted and disclosed by the
                                      appraisal. For the ones which are not ready by appraisal, the client has to prepare the EMP
                                      checklists and RAPs (as needed) and conduct public consultation meetings during implementation
                                      phase.

                                      Social dimensions of regional roads development will be addressed through close attention in this
                                      project to roads-induced socio-economic benefits and the shared prosperity agenda. This will
                                      entail vigilance and assessment work on differential benefits of regional roads upgrading for
                                      communities, social groups of different income levels, disaggregated by gender, livelihood base,
                                      etc.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Mustapha Benmaamar

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 01-Dec-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                                                                                                  Date: 02-Dec-2014
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
