                             INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                     APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                           Report No.: ISDSAI 1800
o



    Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Jan-2015
    Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Nov-2014, 22-Jan-2015
    I. BASIC INFORMATION
       1. Basic Project Data

       Country:          Armenia                             Project ID:    P148836
       Project Name:     Armenia Social Investment and Local Development Project (P148836)
       Task Team          Erkin Mamadaliev
       Leader(s):
       Estimated       02-Dec-2014                           Estimated      13-Mar-2015
       Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
       Managing Unit: GSPDR                                  Lending        Investment Project Financing
                                                             Instrument:
       Sector(s):         Other social services (87%), Public administration- Other social services (13%)
       Theme(s):          Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Other human development (30%),
                          Municipal governance and institution building (20%), Decentr alization (10%),
                         Participation and civic engagement (10%)
       Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
       8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
       Financing (In USD Million)
U
       Total Project Cost:          42.85                  Total Bank Financing:       30.00
       Financing Gap:                0.00
          Financing Source                                                                         Amount
           Borrower                                                                                   11.02
           International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      30.00
           Local Communities                                                                           1.84
           Total                                                                                      42.85
       Environmental B - Partial Assessment
       Category:
       Is this a           No
       Repeater
       project?

       2. Project Development Objective(s)
      Improve quality and use of and access to community and inter-community infrastructure.
       3. Project Description


                                                  Page 1 of 11
    The proposed project will include three components:

    Component 1: Support to Socio-Economic Development and Capacity Building at the Local Level
    (US$24.4 million, of which US$17.7 million IBRD loan). Under this component, SILD project will
    follow the model of previous ASIF projects to implement small-sized investment projects (known as
    micro-projects) targeting vulnerable communities to address priority basic needs. Community
O
    investment micro-projects will be chosen using a two-stage poverty targeting strategy, with the first
    level defining broad allocations for marzes (regions) and the second level identifying needy
    communities. Needy communities are identified using a community profiling and mapping exercise
    based on criteria relating to social, demographic, economic, financial, geographic, and infrastructure
    conditions. Under ASIF's community-driven development approach, communities are responsible
    for (a) identifying their priorities using participatory methods; (b) contributing to the financing of the
    selected micro-projects (at a 5-10% community contribution rate), and (c) maintaining these projects
    after completion. This operational model, successfully implemented under past ASIF projects, will
    continue to be the primary mode of SILD project operations, particularly during its first years.

    This component will fund approximately 120 micro-projects. Through the micro-project process,
    SILD project will: a) rehabilitate and develop community infrastructure and services (public, social,
    economic, environmental), (b) build institutional and financial capacity at the community level to
    develop and implement these projects and services, and (c) provide consultancy and technical
    assistance to local partners, such as community councils. The micro-project selection methodology
    for projects under this component will continue to be based on: (a) the vulnerability ranking of the
    community; and (b) the technical quality of submitted applications/projects. As part of SILD project
    preparation, ASIF is reviewing and updating its methodology and tools for community assessment
    and vulnerability ranking. The revised methodology will continue to classify all the communities into
    three clusters based on their vulnerability. SILD project will maintain the policy implemented under
    ASIF III targeting at least 40 percent of loan funds under this component to communities in the most
    vulnerable cluster, and providing up to 20 percent of funds to finance micro-projects in communities
    in the least vulnerable cluster. The updated targeting methodology will be included in the Project
0
    Operational Manual.

O   The menu of micro-projects to be financed under this component includes: renovation and
    rehabilitation of key social infrastructure covering education (i.e., kindergarten, primary, secondary
    and special schools) and health (i.e., primary healthcare clinics); multipurpose community centers;
    social service centers for vulnerable groups; water supply systems; sanitation systems; minor
    irrigation works; rural electrification; school heating systems; and rehabilitation of gymnasiums and
    playgrounds. Depending on the priority needs identified by selected communities, new small-scale
    construction projects may be financed. This component would also finance goods for micro-projects,
    primarily in the form of furniture for rehabilitated schools, kindergartens and community centers. To
    ensure proper design and supervision of community infrastructure micro-projects, this component
    would finance local consultancies for micro-project design, supervision and field work in the form of
    technical assistance and logistical support.

    Capacity building for community councils, school boards and micro-project implementing agencies
    to effectively plan and maintain their investments will be undertaken under this component. SILD
    project will reinvigorate existing sustainability measures and will introduce new ones to improve
    operation and maintenance of new and rehabilitated community infrastructure under the project as
    outlined in the Sustainability section below. In order to further build local institutional and financial



                                                  Page 2 of 11
    capacity, key stakeholders (i.e. municipal officials, village council members, community leaders,
    etc.) will be trained in areas such as financial management, budgeting, accounting, and asset
    management.
O
    Component 2: Support to Inter-Community Social and Economic Development Initiatives (US$13.5
    million, of which US$10.1 million IBRD loan). This component will directly support the Armenia
    Development Strategy 2012-2015 objectives of reducing regional socio-economic disparities and
    promoting harmonic territorial development by financing innovative inter-community socioeconomic
    development initiatives. These initiatives, known as sub-projects, will finance infrastructure and
    services which have both social and economic impact and can catalyze future economic growth and
    human capital development for a region or group of communities. Through this component, SILD
    project will also strengthen inter-community dialogue, priority-setting and development planning and
    management. The component will include a particular focus on vulnerable and lagging regions.

    This component is aligned with the GOA's planned territorial development reform which targets the
    agglomeration of community clusters into structures optimal for balanced development. As the
    agglomeration process, which is yet to be fully defined by the GOA, will happen in phases rather
    than over a set and established timeline, this component will proceed in parallel with the process but
    in alignment with its overall objectives. The component will supplement the agglomeration process
    in two ways. First, it will foster linkages and shared opportunities for socioeconomic development,
    between and among communities. This component will support inter- or multi- community projects
    (sub-projects) and will support shared capacity-building and planning. Second, sub-projects will
    expand beyond the traditional ASIF model of infrastructure-focused micro-projects to longer-term
    sustainable territorial development sub-projects able to promote social capital and livelihood and
    employment opportunities. Sub-projects should also strengthen the environment for further economic
    investment and provide incentives for communities to explore potential development synergies.

    As this is a novel component for ASIF, a series of preliminary studies are being undertaken to inform
    its detailed design. These include analyses of international good practices around regional
    socioeconomic development and social inclusion schemes, of regional socioeconomic development
    and growth potential throughout Armenia, of institutional and legal modalities to enable inter-
    community development collaboration, and of methodologies and tools for the preparation and
    evaluation of sub-projects. These studies are expected to be completed during the project preparation
    process and prior to project signing.

    A phased implementation approach has thus been adopted for this component. In this approach, the
    first year of the project will be used to finalize the design of this component in light of the findings of
    the preparatory studies with respect to: (i) local potential for economic growth and socio-economic
    development, (ii) the appropriate level of local co-financing, including co-financing from
    communities and private business, (iii) mechanisms for coordination and synergy with other
    development initiatives in project areas, (iv) links to the mid-term development program of the
    region, (v) the potential for sub-project sustainability and (vi) capacity-building needs within ASIF,
    and at community, marz and national level for the successful implementation of this component. The
    specific types or menu of sub-projects to be supported under this component will also be confirmed
    at this time. Based on international experience these would be expected to be productive communal
    investments which could, for example, support improved agricultural production or commerce (e.g.
    irrigation, transport), improved conditions for production or manufacturing (e.g. waste management,
    water systems) or improved human capital development opportunities (e.g. training and skills
    development centers). However, only public goods which are sustainable with public investment


                                                  Page 3 of 11
will be supported.

A piloting process for the component will then begin in project year two. During this year a small
number of sub-projects will be financed, with a focus on generating experience and models that can
be more widely applied throughout the country and on necessary refinements to the component
design. In project year three, the component will be scaled up, with more complex sub-projects
becoming eligible for support. During the piloting process, the Project will focus on communities
that are most ready to cooperate together and develop viable investment proposals, overlapping as
feasible, with those communities identified by the GOA for agglomeration. There is a risk, however,
that these communities might not be the poorest. As such, the Project will privilege inter-community
collaborations that include vulnerable communities and will develop a program of support for
accompaniment of more vulnerable communities in preparation and finalization of sub-projects.
Overall SILD will be expected to fund the design, selection and implementation of approximately 25
- 30 of inter-community sub-projects.

Component 3: ASIF Institutional Strengthening and Project Management (US$5 million, of which
US$2.2 million IBRD loan). This component will finance project management and operating costs,
including salaries, utilities, office equipment, field supervision, training, financial audits, fiduciary
and safeguards oversight, monitoring and evaluation and management information systems. In
addition, it has been recognized that in order to reduce dependence of ASIF and the future Territorial
Development Fund on World Bank financing, it would be appropriate for the World Bank's share in
funding operating costs to decline over the life of the project. As such, whereas the World Bank
financed 50 percent of project operating costs throughout previous projects, the Bank's share of
funding for operating costs will decline over the course of SILD project implementation by five
percent each year thereafter, bringing it down to 30 percent in year five. It is expected that the
financing gap will be covered by the Government and, potentially, by other donors.

This component will also support ASIF's transition to a Territorial Development Fund. The
Government of Armenia passed a formal decision on "Approval of the ASIF's Development Strategy
and the Creation of a Territorial Development Fund on the Basis of the Restructuring of ASIF"
which entails the transformation of ASIF into a territorial development fund (TDF) as of January
2015. ASIF will transition to a TDF with the objective of supporting territorial development policies
to reduce territorial disparities and support balanced and sustainable development of all Armenian
regions. As ASIF has been the primary channel of capital investment funding to communities, it is
expected that when it transitions into the TDF it will also become the primary channel to deliver
capital investment funding for territorial development. ASIF/TDF also intends to evolve its funding
model, moving away from a predominantly WB-financed model towards a greater diversity of
funding sources through which it can improve its financial sustainability. This component will
support ASIF to develop this fund-raising capacity.

An institutional assessment to review ASIF's existing structure and capacity is currently ongoing as
part of the SDC grant. It will propose recommendations and an action plan for filling any gaps
identified, building capacity and enhancing the structure and operations of ASIF to meet its new
mandate. This component will build on the findings of that assessment and support implementation
of its recommendations. These are expected to include a range of activities which will directly
support ASIF's institutional development including: (a) development of new tools and approaches,
including methodologies and guidelines for appraisal, promotion and selection of projects , (b)
procedural improvements, including in monitoring and evaluation and financial management, (c)
staff capacity building, (d) organizational/structural changes; and (e) outreach strategy to assist ASIF

                                              Page 4 of 11
    to diversify its sources of funding by helping it brand itself and reach out to potential financiers in
    order to finance its programs.
     4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
    analysis (if known)
    Nationwide. SILD Project will target vulnerable communities in all regions of Armenia.
O
     5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
    Darejan Kapanadze (GENDR)
    Sarah G. Michael (GSURR)
    Yousif Mubarak ElFadil (GSURR)

     6. Safeguard Policies         Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
     Environmental Assessment      Yes            Vast majority of individual micro-projects and sub-
     OP/BP 4.01                                   projects to be financed under the SILD project will
                                                  support rehabilitation or enhancement of small to
                                                  medium size public infrastructure. Minor new
                                                  construction may be supported as well. This type of
                                                  investment is unlikely to have significant negative
                                                  environmental impacts. Vast majority of the potential
                                                  sub-project proposals are likely to fall under
                                                  environmental Category B or C. Category A micro-
                                                  projects and sub-projects will be filtered out through
                                                  environmental screening and will not be supported
                                                  under the SILD project.

                                                  Because the sub-project proposals will arrive and be
                                                  reviewed on the rolling basis, most of them will not be
                                                  known by the time of the project appraisal. ESMF
                                                  prepared for SILD project establishes guiding principles
                                                  of (i) environmental and social screening of micro-
                                                  project and sub-project proposals, (ii) identifying the
                                                  expected impacts of micro-projects and sub-projects at
                                                  their construction and operation phases, (iii) setting
                                                  forth measures for mitigating environmental and social
                                                  risks, and (iv) monitoring of environmental performance
                                                  under the supported micro-projects and sub-projects.
                                                  Site-specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs)
                                                  will be developed, disclosed, and consulted with local
                                                  communities prior to commencement of works at any
                                                  individual sub-project site. Environmental due diligence
                                                  will be built into the general procedures of sub-projects'
                                                  selection, approval and monitoring and the Project
                                                  Operational Manual will provide step-by-step guidance
                                                  on this. Adherence to these procedures and
                                                  implementation of EMPs will be closely supervised by
                                                  ASIF.




                                                  Page 5 of 11
    Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
    4.04
    Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
a


    Pest Management OP 4.09     No

    Physical Cultural Resources No    OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources is not
    OP/BP 4.11                        triggered, as the project will not finance civil works at
                                      any known sites of historical and/or cultural heritage
                                      and the number of micro-projects and sub-projects
                                      involving new construction is expected to be minimal.
                                      In the unlikely case of chance finds, construction
                                      supervisors will follow guidance of the Project
                                      Operational Manual, which calls for immediate
                                      suspension of works, notification to the State authority
                                      for cultural heritage, and adherence to the course of
                                      action worked out by such authority.
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No
    4.10
    Involuntary Resettlement    Yes   OP/BP 4.12 is triggered and a Resettlement Policy
    OP/BP 4.12                        Framework (RPF) has been prepared and will be
                                      included into the Project Operational Manual to
                                      facilitate implementation of sub-projects under
                                      Component 2 which may trigger resettlement (No
                                      activities with resettlement impacts will be permitted
                                      under Project Components 1 and 3). If required,
                                      Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be developed for
                                      sub-projects following the guidance provided in the
                                      RPF. They will be disclosed, consulted with the sub-
                                      project-affected people, approved and implemented
                                      prior to commencement of works at a given site.

                                      The RPF includes clear grievance redress procedures to
                                      be maintained throughout the project implementation
                                      period.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No

    Projects on International   Yes   Some irrigation schemes operated in Armenia abstract
    Waterways OP/BP 7.50              water from trans-boundary rivers and/or their tributaries.
                                      Discharge from a number of waste water collection
                                      systems enters surface water bodies that flow into
                                      international waterways. Since the final design of some
                                      activities under Component 2 (subprojects) will be only
                                      completed at a later stage, and the features of those
                                      activities are currently unknown; the criteria for the
                                      selection of subprojects will exclude activities that may


                                      Page 6 of 11
                                                  involve the use or potential pollution of international
                                                  waterways. On the other hand, as part of the activities
                                                  under Component 1 (microprojects), the SILD project
                                                  may support renovation/rehabilitation of existing
                                                  community level water supply, sanitation, and irrigation
                                                  schemes which are not known upfront and will be
                                                  identified on a rolling basis during the project's life.
                                                  Hence, there is a likelihood of financing works on the
                                                  infrastructure that intakes or discharges water into
                                                  international waterways. However these activities will
                                                  not exceed the scope of the existing schemes owing to
                                                  the small size of individual investments. As such, they
                                                  (i) will not adversely change the quality or quantity of
                                                  water flows to the other riparians; and (ii) will not be
                                                  adversely affected by the other riparians' possible water
                                                  use.. The vast majority of physical works under
                                                  Component lof the SILD project will be confined to the
                                                  repair of the existing infrastructure. For water,
                                                  wastewater and irrigation systems this would exclude
                                                  increase in their design capacity of water intake and/or
                                                  discharge. Rehabilitation works on water-related
                                                  infrastructure will be predominantly aimed at cutting
                                                  water loss due to leakages and overflows from damaged/
                                                  clogged passages and malfunctioning of dilapidated
                                                  hydraulic structures. Therefore, while OP/BP 7.50
                                                  "Projects on International Waterways" is triggered,
                                                  communication between the riparian states on the
                                                  project interventions is deemed unnecessary. An
                                                  exception from the requirement for the notifying the
                                                  other riparian states was obtained from World Bank
                                                  Management on January 15, 2015.
.2      Projects in Disputed Areas   No
        OP/BP 7.60

     II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
       A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
        1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
          and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
         Environment risks associated with SILD project are low and the majority of the sub-project
         proposals are likely to fall under environmental Category B or C. Micro-projects and sub-projects
         that are classified as environmental Category A and/or may potentially impact quality and/or
         quantity of water in international waterways will be filtered out through environmental screening
         and will not be supported. Armenia is earthquake prone, which is a risk to the project investments
         and will be considered in the process of selecting micro-projects and sub-projects. Because the
         micro-project and sub-project proposals will arrive and be reviewed on a rolling basis, most of
         them were not known by the time of the Project appraisal. Therefore, an Environmental and Social
         Management Framework (ESMF) was developed to establish guiding principles of (i)


                                                  Page 7 of 11
     environmental and social screening of micro-project and sub-project proposals, (ii) identifying the
     expected impacts of micro-projects and sub-projects at their construction and operation phases,
     (iii) setting forth measures for mitigating environmental and social risks, and (iv) monitoring of
     environmental performance under the supported micro-projects and sub-projects. Site-specific
O
     Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) will be developed, disclosed, and consulted with local
     communities prior to commencement of works at any individual investment site. Environmental
     due diligence will be built into the general procedures of sub-projects' selection, approval and
     monitoring and the POM will provide step-by-step guidance on this. Adherence to these
     procedures and implementation of EMPs will be closely supervised by ASIF.

     OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement is triggered on a precautionary basis as the type and location
     of new Project activities under Component 2 are not yet known, and the type and scale of civil
     works and land acquisition are still to be determined. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has
     therefore been prepared and will be followed by all Project activities. The RPF was consulted with
     stakeholders and disclosed publicly. Site-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be
     prepared and implemented prior to commencement of works at any site where resettlement, land
     use or acquisition is required. However, as was the case under the ASIF3 Project, under
     Component 1 of SILD, no micro-projects involve land acquisition (permanent or temporary) or
     resettlement will be approved; and no civil works are planned under Component 3.

     Some irrigation schemes operated in Armenia abstract water from trans-boundary rivers and/or
     their tributaries. Discharge from a number of waste water collection systems enters surface water
     bodies that flow into international waterways. There is a likelihood of SILD project financing
     works on the infrastructure that intakes or discharges water into international waterways. However
     the Project implementation will not cause measurable impact on the quality and/or quantity of
     water in trans-boundary water bodies because for water, wastewater and irrigation systems no new
     construction will be allowed and only those small to medium size rehabilitation works will be
     eligible for funding that do not affect design capacity of water intake/discharge of the existing
     schemes. Therefore, while OP/BP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways is triggered,
     communication between the riparian states on the Project interventions is deemed unnecessary.
    2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
      in the project area:
     No negative indirect and/or long term impacts are expected due to anticipated future activities in
     the project area. Improved operation of the rehabilitated priority public infrastructure is expected
     to have a positive social impact on the beneficiary communities.
    3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
      impacts.
     Sub-projects requiring land acquisition or resettlement have been excluded from Component 1.
     This will decrease social risks of the Project and simplify sub-project preparation and supervision.
     However given the objective of supporting potentially transformative inter-community socio-
     economic development projects under Component 2, the decision was made not to ban sub-
     projects based solely on the likelihood of resettlement. If a sub-project is otherwise eligible and
     well justified, but triggers resettlement, it will be handled in full compliance with OP/BP 4.12 on
     Involuntary Resettlement and a RAP will be prepared, as applicable.
    4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
      assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     An ESMF for the project has been prepared. It spells out procedures for environmental and social



                                                Page 8 of 11
      screening, review, and supervision of SILD project-financed activities, as well as mechanisms of
      reporting on the outcomes of environmental monitoring of sub-projects. Information on the
      environmental performance will be fed into the integrated Monitoring and Information System and
      used in the process of portfolio management by ASIF. For micro-projects and sub-projects with
O
      the reported environmental issues, corrective actions will be prescribed and closer field
      supervision will be planned.

      The project will be implemented by ASIF - an agency with strong administrative capacity and
      technical expertise with an operation history of 18 years. ASIF has a high capacity staff, sound
      financial management and procurement systems and reporting mechanisms that are currently used
      under the ASIF III project. Environmental management had been a relative weakness of ASIF
      several years ago, however it improved considerably through the recruitment of an environmental
      specialist; integration of environmental screening and monitoring into the general procedures of
      projects' review, approval, and supervision; and quality enhancement of environmental record
      keeping. Overall, no cases of major environmental non-compliance have been identified during
      implementation of the ASIF III project to date, though there were issues with the quality of
      documented reporting on the environmental screening and monitoring of operations. Hiring of an
      environmental specialist led to tangible improvements which include the use of environmental
      screening and field monitoring checklists, and photo documentation of the findings from site
      visits. Maintaining a staff unit of an environmental specialist in ASIF will be critically important
      for ensuring good environmental performance under SLID project. In terms of social safeguards,
      as previous projects implemented by ASIF excluded civil works requiring land acquisition or
      resettlement, ASIF does not have experience overseeing compliance with OP/BP 4.12 and will
      require additional capacity to effectively supervise social safeguards compliance.
    5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
       on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
      ASIF, beneficiary communities, and municipal governments will be the key stakeholders of the
      Project. ESMF and RPF have been made available for the stakeholders through the public
      disclosure and opened for feedback. Draft site-specific EMPs and Resettlement Action Plans
      (RAPs), if required, will also be disclosed and discussed with sub-project-affected people prior to
      finalization.

      The process of consultation with the beneficiaries will take place at three stages: (i) public
      information and outreach campaign at the beginning of a micro-project cycle; (ii) appraisal of
      micro-projects; and (iii) monitoring and evaluation for assessing outcomes and results. All
      consultations will be gender-sensitive. Disclosure of the project-related environmental
      information and consultation with affected communities will be the responsibility of the ASIF and
      PIAs. ASIF will carry overall responsibility for the meaningful public involvement in the micro-
      project cycle. Beneficiary assessments, included in the monitoring and evaluation mechanism, will
      be used to obtain public feedback on the ongoing operations, including their environmental and
      social implications.
    B. Disclosure Requirements
    Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
     Date of receipt by the Bank                                          24-Oct-2014
     Date of submission to InfoShop                                       05-Nov-2014
     For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
     Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


                                                Page 9 of 11
    "In country" Disclosure
     Armenia                                                              31-Oct-2014
     Comments:     http://www.armeniasifam/reports/ESMF SILD.pdf
O
     Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
     Date of receipt by the Bank                                          28-Oct-2014
     Date of submission to InfoShop                                       05-Nov-2014
    "In country" Disclosure
     Armenia                                                              3 1-Oct-2014
     Comments:     http://www.armeniasifam/reports/SILD%/ 20RPF_2014_eng.pdf
    If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
    respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
    Audit/or EMP.
    If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


    C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
    OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
     Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes   [   X]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
     report?
     If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes   [   X]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
     Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
     Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes   [ X]     No [   ]   NA [   ]
     in the credit/loan?
    OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
     Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes   [   X]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
     process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
     If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [ X ]      No [   ]   NA [
     Practice Manager review the plan?
    OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
     Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [      ]   No [ X ]   NA [   ]
     If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [     X]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
     notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
     Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
     Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [ X]       No [   ]   NA [   ]
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
     Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes   [   X]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
     World Bank's Infoshop?
     Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes        [ X]     No [   ]   NA [   ]
     place in a form and language that are understandable and
     accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
    All Safeguard Policies




                                                Page 10 of I1
        Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes[X]     No[        NA
        responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
        measures related to safeguard policies?
        Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes[X]     No[        NA
        in the project cost?
        Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes[X]     No[        NA
        include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
        related to safeguard policies?
        Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes[X]     No[        NA
        with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
        the project legal documents?

    III. APPROVALS
       Task Team Leader(s):      Name: Erkin Mamadaliev
       Approved By
       Practice Manager/         Name: Andrew D. Mason (PMGR)                    Date: 22-Jan-2015
       Manager:




o




                                                  Page 11 of 11
