                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC6486

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Pakistan                         Project ID:      P131324
                            Project Name:      PK-Sindh Barrages Improvement Phase I Project (P131324)
                            Task Team          Abdulhamid Azad
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          21-Jul-2014                      Estimated        16-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDA                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Irrigation and drainage (70%), General water, sanitation and flood protection
                                               sector (30%)
                            Theme(s):          Water resource management (60%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%),
                                               Social risk mitigation (10%), Climate change (5%), Other e nvironment and
                                               natural resources management (5%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    170.00                     Total Bank Financing:        160.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            10.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  160.00
                              Total                                                                        170.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective is to safeguard the reliable supply of water to about 1 million hectares
                           through the rehabilitation of the Guddu barrage and the improvement of O&M capacity of the
                           Irrigation and Power Department.
                           C. Project Description
                         1. Pakistan’s agricultural sector is almost wholly dependent on irrigation: irrigated land supplies
                         more than 90 percent of agricultural production. Agriculture in most areas is not possible without
                         irrigation because the climate of Pakistan is arid to semi-arid with low and variable rainfall. Annual
Public Disclosure Copy




                         rainfall over much of the area is not more than 150 mm per annum with high evaporation rates,
                         ranging from 1,250 mm to 2,800 mm per annum.

                         2. Given climate change and high population growth rates, current forms of water resources
                         management are widely recognized as being unsustainable and inadequate to ensure future water
                         availability for food security, economic growth, and the needs of the environment.

                         3. Barrages are strategic hydraulic assets. Barrages are used to raise the water level in the river so
                         that irrigation water can be diverted to the main and link canals by gravity for various uses. Barrages
                         are also used for river control and flood management, act as a source of water supply for all sectors
                         of the economy, function as bridges over rivers, and are often used for utility crossings such as gas
                         pipelines. Therefore, the condition and the safe and reliable operation of a barrage have far-reaching
                         implications for the livelihood and economic growth of all sectors of society.

                         4. Priorities for Improvement of Barrages in Sindh. Three large barrages were built between 1932
                         and 1962 on the Indus River in Sindh Province. The northern one, Guddu Barrage, has major safety
                         issues. The second one, Sukkur barrage, is one of the oldest and serves about 3 million ha of
                         agricultural lands. It also has several safety issues. Repairs on the Sukkur Barrage are being carried
                         out regularly. The last one (most southerly), the Kotri Barrage, was rehabilitated in 2000.

                         5. The project area is dry with a mean annual rainfall of less than 88 mm. There are two wet seasons:
                         the first with low rainfall in February and March and second with higher rainfall in the monsoon
                         period of July, August, and September. About 80% of the mean annual rainfall occurs in the two wet
                         seasons.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6. Guddu barrage. The primary function of the gated Guddu barrage is to provide irrigation water to
                         over one million hectares of agricultural lands in the Jacobabad, Larkana , Sukkur and the
                         Naseerabad districts , by feeding the Ghotki Feeder and Rainee canals on the left (east) side and the
                         Begari Sindh (BS) Feeder and Desert Pat Feeder canals on the right (west) side. The barrage
                         incorporates two fish ladders. The barrage is also used for river control and flood management. It has
                         been designed to pass a super-flood discharge of up to 33,980 cubic meters per seconds (m3/sec).
                         The barrage is also an important transport link across the River Indus and provides cooling water for
                         the thermal power station at Guddu. Two major gas lines cross the barrage. The barrage was
                         commissioned in 1962 and has now seen over fifty years of active service. The Guddu barrage has a
                         span of 1,400 meters. It consists of 64 gates of 18 meters each and one navigation lock with a span of
                         15 meters. The gates weighing 55 to 100 tons are “fixed wheel” type and operate without
                         counterweights. The project has the following three components:

                         7. Component A: Rehabilitation of Barrage (US$140 million). This component will support
                         rehabilitation and modernization of the barrage and its associated structures. The works have been
                         determined based on (a) detailed diagnostic assessment; (b) hydrological and sediment analysis
                         studies including physical and numerical model studies; and (c) geotechnical, structural, and safety
                         evaluation studies. The component will finance gate replacement works to improve the regulation
                         and the flow of the barrage. This includes replacing all 65 main barrage steel gates (the gates are 18.3
                         m wide and 6.6 m high and weigh 55 tons each), 25 main canal head regulator gates (the gates are
                         7.3 wide and 3.8 high and weigh 25 tons each) and hoist gears. It also includes providing new
                         standby generators, electrical cabling and switch gears, replacement of barrage lighting, repairs to the
                         barrage life-bridge and safety barriers, as well as rehabilitation of the three main canal head
Public Disclosure Copy




                         regulators. In addition, this component finances the strengthening of embankments to ensure
                         improved flood protection. Minor concrete repairs are needed along some of the upstream gate
                         grooves and both fish ladders require rehabilitation.

                         8. Component B: Improved Barrage Operation (US$15 million). This component will support
                         modernization and improvements to the barrage operation and maintenance. This will include
                         necessary upgrades to the instrument monitoring systems such as piezometers, gate positioning and
                         gauging, training and capacity building for staff, replacement of surveillance and maintenance boats
                         and procurement of hydrographic equipment. The project will provide new covered workshops and a
                         stock of spare parts for maintenance activities. The instrument monitoring system for the barrage will
                         be renovated and the operating staff will be equipped with an upgraded operation, maintenance, and
                         surveillance manual. An emergency preparedness plan will be prepared. The emergency plan will
                         specify the actors and actions in relation to the following chain of tasks: (a) detection and
                         classification of any potential problem at the barrage site; (b) decision to notify and warn competent
                         authorities; and (c) mobilization of response units when needed. This component will lead to
                         upgrading of the operating facilities with a higher level of control and improved operation &
                         maintenance.

                         9. Component C: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$15 million). This
                         component will support the coordination of all project-related activities as well as training and
                         technical assistance in procurement, financial, social and environmental safeguards and
                         communication. This component will also cover the cost of consulting services including
                         construction supervision, contract administration, quality control, preparation of any additional
                         designs, and bidding documents. Activities will include the establishment of an independent Panel of
                         Experts (POEs) to review, monitor, evaluate, and help guide the rehabilitation process with regard to
                         the safety of the barrage. The component will also support implementation of an information
Public Disclosure Copy




                         dissemination and communication program, particularly regarding possible canal closures and
                         implementation of the safeguard related action plans.

                         10. A social development action plan and an environmental management plan will be developed
                         based on detailed surveys, social and environmental studies, and consultations with local
                         communities in the command areas and areas around the barrage. This component will support the
                         implementation of these two plans. If necessary, this component will also support the implementation
                         of a resettlement action plan.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         11. Guddu barrage. The primary function of the gated Guddu barrage is to provide irrigation water to
                         over one million hectares of agricultural lands in the Jacobabad, Larkana and Sukkur and the
                         Naseerabad districts, by feeding the Ghotki Feeder and Rainee canals on the left (east) side and the
                         Begari Sindh (BS) Feeder and Desert Pat Feeder canals on the right (west) side. The barrage
                         incorporates two fish ladders. The barrage is also used for river control and flood management. It has
                         been designed to pass a super-flood discharge of up to 33,980 m3/sec. The barrage is also an
                         important transport link across the River Indus and provides cooling water for the thermal power
                         station at Guddu. Two major gas lines cross the barrage. The barrage was commissioned in 1962 and
                         has now seen over fifty years of active service.
                           12. The project is confined to a single site and involves works that have been designed in detail based
                           on a well-prepared detailed Feasibility Study (FS) of an international standard. The project involves
Public Disclosure Copy




                           mechanical and civil works on the existing barrage structure (rehabilitation), and no new works are
                           included. By far the largest and most complex element of these works is the removal and
                           replacement of the 65 barrage gates and 25 head regulator gates. A detailed inspection of each gate
                           shows that wear and tear on the gates, rollers and hoists is considerable and that the probability of
                           failure is evident. There is considerable risk of failure of the main barrage gates within the next five
                           years. Considering that it will take about four years for the project to be completed and for all the
                           gates and mechanical equipment to be replaced, the proposed project needs to proceed, so that the
                           gates are replaced before any failure occur.

                           13. During project preparation an environmental impact assessment will be prepared aimed at
                           identifying potential adverse impacts of the project such as (a) potential disruption in the irrigation
                           supplies due to the extended canal closure during rehabilitation works, (b) potential damage to the
                           habitat of Indus blind dolphin in the reach between Guddu and Sukkur barrages, and climate change
                           related impacts in reference to irrigation supplies and flood management . As the project involves
                           large-scale rehabilitation works on the existing barrage, there is a possibility of interruption of water
                           supplies through canal closures for a short or longer duration. Also, the project may impact on flora
                           and fauna: the Indus River between the Guddu and Sukkur barrages is a important game reserve and
                           habitat for the Indus or Blind Dolphin (Platanista gangetica minor). This part of the river contains
                           large population of dolphin. Therefore, the project is categorized as an Environmental Category “A”
                           project, requiring thorough environmental and social assessment, development of social impact and
                           environmental management plans, consultations with a wide spectrum of stakeholders, disclosure of
                           mitigation measures, and their diligent implementation and monitoring. Design consultants have
                           already prepared an environmental impact assessment study, which needs to be verified and updated
                           to fill in the gaps by a team independent consultants.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Irrigation and Power Department of the Government of Sindh has extensive experience in
                           implementing World Bank funded projects, with a number of projects in the irrigation sector based
                           along the Indus River, thus, they are experienced with the Bank environment and social safeguards
                           requirements. A skeleton Project Management Office (PMO) within the Irrigation and Power
                           Department of Sindh exists already. It will have been expanded and fully staffed by the time of
                           project appraisal. The PMO is expected to grow substantially and be in future responsible for
                           rehabilitating other barrages in Sindh. The project will improve the capacity of PMO staff in
                           handling social, environmental, and resettlement issues, in applying emergency preparedness plans,
                           and in developing improved communication strategies. A capacity building plan will be developed
                           during the preparation, including training and knowledge exchange within or outside of Sindh.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Miki Terasawa (SASDS)
                           Javaid Afzal (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes   The proposed project involves civil and
                         BP 4.01                                 mechanical rehabilitation works of the existing
                                                                 barrage, which is located on Indus river. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 impact of the project will be site specific and
                                                                 will be mainly associated with the construction
                                                                 phase. An independent EIA will be undertaken
                                                                 during project preparation. The project will
                                                                 develop an emergency preparedness plan, a
                                                                 social development action plan and an
                                                                 environmental management plan.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   The project may impact on flora and fauna: the
                                                                 Indus River between the Guddu and Sukkur
                                                                 barrages is an important game reserve and
                                                                 habitat for the Indus or Blind Dolphin
                                                                 (Platanista gangetica minor). This part of the
                                                                 river contains large population of dolphins.
                                                                 During the preparation, the project will assess
                                                                 the performance of the fish ladder and propose
                                                                 improvements or alternatives based on best
                                                                 global practices available technologies if
                                                                 possible.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                TBD   There may be an impact on local eucalyptus
                                                                 plantation. If so, an action plan will be prepared
                                                                 accordingly.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    There will be no change in the irrigation
                                                                 supplies from the barrage after the rehabilitation
                                                                 works have been completed and therefore there
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 will be no change in the existing pesticide use
                                                                 practices in the irrigation command.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    The rehabilitation works are limited to the
                         BP 4.11                                 existing structure with no new activities.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    There are no known indigenous groups in Sindh
                                                                 province as identified under this policy. The
                                                                 only identified indigenous people in Pakistan
                                                                 under the OP/BP 4.10 are in Kalash valley in
                                                                 the northern Pakistan (Chitral district of Khyber
                                                                 Pakhtunkhwa province).
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    TBD   Temporary land acquisition may be required. If
                         4.12                                    so, an appropriate resettlement action plan will
                                                                 be prepared.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         Yes   Although barrages are not dams, they are indeed
                                                                 major hydraulic structures on which millions of
                                                                 hectares of irrigated land and population are
                                                                 dependent. The dam safety Policy is triggered,
                                                                 and an action plan will be developed, including
                                                                                                                                 establishment of an independent panel of
                                                                                                                                 experts.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            The project area is located on the Indus River
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            which is an international waterway. However,
                                                                                                                                 the project essentially involves rehabilitation of
                                                                                                                                 existing barrage facilities. It does not involve
                                                                                                                                 works and activities that would exceed the
                                                                                                                                 original scheme, change its nature, or alter or
                                                                                                                                 expand its scope and extent to make it appear a
                                                                                                                                 new or different scheme. Therefore given the
                                                                                                                                 nature of works envisaged under the proposed
                                                                                                                                 project: (a) the project will not adversely affect
                                                                                                                                 the quality or quantity of water flows to other
                                                                                                                                 riparians; and (b) it will not be adversely
                                                                                                                                 affected by other riparians’ water use. The
                                                                                                                                 project team has also reviewed Article VI1 of
                                                                                                                                 the Indus Waters Treaty between India and
                                                                                                                                 Pakistan and concluded that a notification by
                                                                                                                                 Pakistan to India under paragraph (2) of the said
                                                                                                                                 Article VI1 is not required, as the project will
                                                                                                                                 not cause interference with the waters of any of
                                                                                                                                 the Rivers and will not affect the other riparians
                                                                                                                                 materially. Therefore, the Project falls within
                                                                                                                                 the exception to the notification requirements of
                                                                                                                                 OP 7.50, set forth in paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is located within Sindh province of
                                 7.60                                                                                            Pakistan.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-May-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      March 2014
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Abdulhamid Azad

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                                                                                             Date: 18-Feb-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (SM)                                                                                               Date: 18-Feb-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
