                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6211
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Myanmar                            Project ID:    P145534
                            Project Name:     MM: Telecommunications Sector Reform (P145534)
                            Task Team         Tenzin Dolma Norbhu
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         02-Dec-2013                        Estimated   06-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    TWICT                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Telecommunications (70%), Public administration- Information and
                                              communications (20%), General information and communications sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Regulation and competition policy (70%), e-Government (20%), Infrastructure
                                              services for private sector development (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      31.50           Total Bank Financing:                31.50
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              31.50
                              Total                                                                                    31.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objectives of the project are to: (a) improve the enabling environment for the
                           telecommunications sector and extend coverage in selected remote pilot locations; and (b) establish
                           priority eGovernment technological foundations and institutional capacity for Government to embark
                           on its public sector reform program.

                                                                      Page 1 of 13
                         3. Project Description
                         Project Components
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project takes an integrated approach to the development of the ICT sector in Myanmar. It has
                         three substantive and interrelated components. Creating the enabling policy, regulatory and legal
                         environment will facilitate the establishment of a competitive telecommunications market and
                         expansion of good quality and affordable communications in Myanmar while institutional reform of
                         the government owned incumbent, Myanmar Post and Telecommunications (MPT) will enable
                         separation of the policy and operational functions of Government in the sector, facilitating the
                         establishment of a level playing field in the sector. The development of a universal service strategy
                         and implementation of pilots will ensure the expansion of services to extremely remote communities.
                         Finally, the establishment of key priority eGovernment foundations will allow for common technical
                         horizontals/shared services that government agencies will have access to in order to facilitate the use
                         of ICT for governance reforms and public sector modernization.

                         Component 1: Creating an enabling environment for connectivity ($ 14.0 million) The Project will
                         finance technical assistance and investments to support MCIT and PTD in designing and
                         implementing a policy and regulatory environment that establishes a pro-competitive sector. This
                         component will focus on:

                         (a)      Technical assistance for addressing policy and regulatory bottlenecks to maximize the
                         benefits of the sector reform agenda (US$ 2.00 million). Technical assistance will be provided to
                         MCIT on policy matters and to the regulator on various regulatory matters.
                         (b) Institutional capacity strengthening for the Ministry and the regulator (US$ 1.5 million).
                         Significant institutional strengthening support is needed to ensure that Myanmar can successfully
                         transition from a monopoly to a competitive market structure and establish a credible policy and
                         legal environment. Capacity development support for MCIT and PTD staff will be provided through
                         workshops and training events, and study visits. Limited capacity development for key ICT sector
Public Disclosure Copy




                         related Parliamentary Standing Committee related officials will also be provided. The support will
                         focus, among others, on issues such technology trends and policy implications, competition, open
                         access and price regulation, licensing, spectrum management and monitoring, quality of service
                         monitoring and technical regulations.
                         (c) Spectrum management and monitoring system ($8.3 million). The regulator will be responsible
                         for spectrum management and monitoring. Given that most new network deployments will rely on
                         wireless technology, there is a need to support the strengthening of the regulator’s spectrum
                         management function. The PTD will be provided investment support to procure and implement a
                         spectrum management and monitoring system so that it has the tools to effectively manage the radio
                         spectrum. Spectrum management will include the following tasks: Planning, Allocation,
                         Assignment and Monitoring. As part of the Spectrum Planning process, PTD and its successor MTC
                         will prepare and periodically update the Myanmar National Frequency Allocation Plan (NFAP)
                         taking into account the ITU Region 2 plan and national allocation requirements. As part of the
                         spectrum monitoring process, PTD and its successor MTC have to ensure that all wireless operators
                         and users operate their equipment in compliance with spectrum allocations, within permitted power
                         limits and specified international standards. To ensure this compliance, a Spectrum Management
                         Control Center will be set up in Yangon; and will be connected with Fixed Monitoring Stations
                         (FMS) located at Yangon, Mandalay and another location as assessed through a study. Mobile
                         monitoring stations will be located in key cities to facilitate the spectrum monitoring function across
                         the country. The PTD’s spectrum database will be fully updated. Consultants will assist the regulator


                                                                      Page 2 of 13
                         in the development of technical specifications for the SMMS, preparation of bidding documents, bid
                         evaluation, supervision of installation and commissioning and contract administration of the system.
                         The consultant will also provide handholding support to PTD on various spectrum issues.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (d) Restructuring of Myanmar Post and Telecommunications ($2.2 million). The main objective of
                         this component is to separate the policy and operational functions of the Government and will entail
                         the technical assistance with the corporatization of MPT. Technical assistance will be provided to
                         implement MPT restructuring and convert it from the present Government agency into a limited
                         liability company, registered under the Company's Act.

                         No civil works are envisaged under Component 1.

                         Component 2: Extending connectivity to rural areas ($10.65 million): This component will support
                         the development of the Government’s universal access strategy in order to accelerate the provision of
                         telecommunications and internet services in remote areas of Myanmar. The support for this
                         component will have two important impacts: (a) establish and institute a competitive and transparent
                         process to involve the private sector in providing infrastructure access and services in rural and
                         economically unviable areas of Myanmar; and (b) redefine public sector role from that of financing
                         information and communications infrastructure development to one of facilitating private service
                         provision of services. This component will be implemented over two phases.
                         (a)      In the first phase, technical assistance will be provided to conduct a detailed scoping of the
                         universal access program, a Universal Service Strategy (USS) will be designed, Universal Service
                         Fund (USF) manual and USF implementation procedures will be developed, and pilots (both supply
                         and demand side) will be identified and designed pilots for implementation.
                         (b)      In the second phase, the pilot program will be implemented. This pilot program will be
                         functionally independent of the investment programs that are being made by the newly licensed and
                         existing operators. Supply-side interventions will be primarily be achieved through a competitive
                         award of capital subsidies through an output-based aid, reverse tender process (with the subsidy
                         being awarded to the lowest bidder) to licensed operators that would be responsible to provide
                         telecommunication and internet services to rural areas of Myanmar that are commercially non-viable
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for operators to service without a one-time subsidy and limited demand side interventions to provide
                         content and application services for rural communities.
                         The sites for these pilots will only be identified during implementation once the USS is prepared.
                         The pilots will entail the extension of mobile network coverage to rural areas and will include the
                         setting up of telecommunication towers/masts and relevant base stations. This will entail small-scale
                         civil works for the establishment of communication towers foundations and affiliated facilities
                         (access platform, pre-fabricated shelter, equipment, etc.) in line with technical requirements and
                         design conditions for siting such communication infrastructure as well as in compliance with relevant
                         regulations (e.g., radio frequency admissible levels).

                         Component 3: Enabling eGovernment Foundations ($4.79M). This component aims to support the
                         Government’s charter in governance reforms by improving transparency and accountability. It will
                         also place a stronger emphasis on the provision of Government information and services for its
                         constituents as committed by the President to its people.
                         (a)      A mobile friendly Myanmar National Portal will be financed to provide citizens, businesses,
                         and visitors (comprising of foreign workers, investors and tourists) with a single window into the
                         information and services offered by the Government. Over time the National Portal will allow its
                         users to find relevant information, provide suggestions and feedback, and transact services in a safe
                         and convenient electronic environment. The National Portal subcomponent would comprise of: (i)
                         technical assistance to develop the Myanmar National Portal strategy to chart the portal development

                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                         for the next five years, understand citizen’s needs for online information and services, conduct
                         workshops on global cases studies on national portals, and identify appropriate software and
                         hardware technologies to springboard Myanmar’s socioeconomic agenda, and developing the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         bidding document for the calling of an open tender to solicit the portal implementation services; and
                         (ii) implementation of Myanmar National Portal through an international competitive bidding
                         process. The National Portal would enable ministries, departments, and agencies to consolidate
                         information and services to provide what the users with essential information and services. The
                         National Portal would also serve as a primary engagement channel for the citizens and businesses to
                         provide feedback on issues with poor public services and/or raise concerns on corrupted practices.
                         As such, the National Portal will become the essential platform for citizens and businesses in dealing
                         with all Government related matters in Myanmar. The ability for the portal to operate across the
                         Internet and Mobile, and in both Myanmar and English languages would mean the portal will
                         become a strategic tool for the various groups of users, regardless of language barriers, and physical
                         location.
                          (b)     eLeadership Capacity Building (US$ 0.09 million). The main objective of this
                         subcomponent is to carry out the changes in processes needed to transform the way Government
                         delivers its services to citizens and businesses. As civil servants in ministries and agencies are in
                         charge of these processes, a series of visioning and capacity building programs are recommended to
                         drive mind-set changes in the ministries involved in delivering the services electronically. This will
                         include: (a) a series of high-level eGovernment visioning exercises to expose politicians and senior
                         civil servants to the value of eGovernment and how it supports the nation’s charter for accountability,
                         transparency and progress; and (b) eGovernment capacity building for approximately 150
                         government employees. The government employees will be trained in conceptualizing, planning,
                         managing and monitoring e-Government services. The eGovernment capacity building program
                         would be designed for public officers who are involved in the provision of services in each Ministry.
                         (c) eGovernment Delivery Unit (US$ 1.08 million): The project will also initially finance operations
                         costs of an eGovernment delivery unit, which should comprise of staff with project management,
                         change management and technical skill sets to coordinate different aspects of implementing the
                         eGovernment program.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         These component activities do not envisage any civil works or development of technical studies that
                         will trigger civil works in the future.


                         Project Implementation Support ($2.06 million). Project funds will be used to support the MCIT/
                         PTD with project implementation support. A full-time Project Director will be appointed from the
                         MCIT Government staff to implement the project effectively and efficiently. The project director
                         will be a Government appointed staff. The project director will report to the Deputy Minister, MCIT
                         and support MCIT to conduct implementation activities - including project management, co-
                         ordination, procurement, financial management, monitoring and evaluation, and social impact
                         assessments. Funds will also be used to procure required infrastructure and services to support the
                         Project Director’s office as needed, including office equipment and vehicles. Operational costs of
                         the project will also be met from this allocation. The Government’s in-kind contribution to the
                         project will include office space and the salary of the Project Director.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Components 1, 2 and 3 of the project will be implemented in Nay Pyi Taw and Yangon, whereas
                         second phase of Component 2 will be implemented in remote, rural inhabited locations in Myanmar.
                         The exact locations and details of Component 2 will be identified and confirmed during project


                                                                      Page 4 of 13
                         implementation when the Universal Service Strategy is developed and pilots designed in line with
                         this Strategy recommendation and demand. Potential site specific and small-scale impacts are
                         associated with the installation of the towers/masts and base stations for mobile services in rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         areas. Screening procedures are set up in the Environmental and Social Management Framework
                         developed for the project. All Project sites where telecommunication masts and towers will be
                         installed will be selected in such a manner that they do not adversely affect natural habitats, forests,
                         and physical cultural resources. The Project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any type
                         of dams and will not depend on operation of existing reservoirs or dams. The project will not impact
                         International waterways and will not alter their water quality or quantity.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Andrea Fitri Woodhouse (EASTS)
                         Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (EASER)
                         Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes               The project is proposed as category “B” as the
                         BP 4.01                                              Extending Rural Connectivity component of the
                                                                              project will include limited small scale civil
                                                                              works related to the construction of
                                                                              telecommunications masts and towers. Potential
                                                                              but temporary negative impacts on local
                                                                              environment and communities (such as noise and
                                                                              air emissions, temporary access detours,
                                                                              temporary disturbance to vegetation, etc) will
                                                                              mainly occur during the construction phases of
                                                                              this Project. The nature of the proposed
                                                                              construction works although at different sites (not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              identified yet) will include similar activities (e.g.,
                                                                              installation of antenna supporting small
                                                                              structures, their foundations of reinforced
                                                                              concrete, and appurtenances in line with technical
                                                                              standards, installation of towers equipped with
                                                                              specific accessories, safety devices, lights,
                                                                              ladders, etc) with an extent of impacts during
                                                                              construction that can be readily screened,
                                                                              assessed and mitigated. The selection of sites will
                                                                              be screened for environment and social impacts
                                                                              using an Environmental and Social Management
                                                                              Framework (ESMF) before decision on the actual
                                                                              location is made and commencement of works.
                                                                              To mitigate the potential negative impacts during
                                                                              construction and maintenance, Environmental
                                                                              Codes of Practices (ECOPs) have been prepared
                                                                              as part of the ESMF to outline requirements for
                                                                              mitigation measures and monitoring aspects to be
                                                                              carried out during construction and as well as



                                                                      Page 5 of 13
                                                                         maintenance. This ESMF is in line with the WB
                                                                         safeguard policies and will be incorporated in the
                                                                         bidding documents of the contractors/selected
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         operators particularly the site specific ECOP/
                                                                         EMP part of the ESMF. The ESMF be disclosed
                                                                         in the Bank’s Infoshop on December 2, 2013. It
                                                                         was disclosed in the country on the MCIT
                                                                         website in English on November 22, 2013 and in
                                                                         the local Myanmar language on November
                                                                         25,2013. The draft has been also discussed with
                                                                         civil society organizations during two public
                                                                         consultation sessions held on November 28 in
                                                                         Yangon before project appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes            Policy is triggered as a precautionary approach
                                                                         since specific locations of project sites have not
                                                                         been yet identified and related civil works might
                                                                         have potential to impact existing natural habitats.
                                                                         The ESMF includes screening procedure to (i)
                                                                         determine whetherthe proposed site for towers
                                                                         installation is in a critical or non-critical natural
                                                                         habitat and (ii) avoid any significant conversion
                                                                         or degradation of any critical natural habitat. Sites
                                                                         with critical natural habitats that could be
                                                                         adversely affected by the installation of masts and
                                                                         towers will be avoided, whereas installation of
                                                                         masts and towers maybe allowed in natural
                                                                         habitats provided that the benefits outweigh the
                                                                         negative impacts of the installations and that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         mitigating measures developed and implemented
                                                                         to address the impacts.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No             Given the scale of mast and tower installations,
                                                                         the project is not expected to affect forests, forest
                                                                         health and forest-dependent communities.
                                                                         Nevertheless, the ESMF includes provisions for
                                                                         screening environment and social impacts of mast
                                                                         and tower installationsand measures in case the
                                                                         installations will have impacts on forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No             Not relevant

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes            It is unlikely that the masts and towers will be
                         BP 4.11                                         located in areas with and/or will negatively affect
                                                                         PCR. Nevertheless, the ESMF includes
                                                                         provisions for screening of PCRs during site
                                                                         selection and installation of masts and towers.
                                                                         This will include an investigation and inventory
                                                                         of cultural resources likely to be affected,
                                                                         documentation of the characteristics and


                                                                 Page 6 of 13
                                                                        significance of such resources, and brief
                                                                        assessment of the nature and extent of the impact.
                                                                        In addition, the ESMF also includes provisions
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        for Chance Find during installation of masts and
                                                                        towers
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes             Since a large part of population in remote areas
                                                                        where Extending connectivity to rural areas pilot
                                                                        would be implemented under Component 2 are
                                                                        ethnic minorities, the policy is triggered. The
                                                                        Ethnic Minorities Planning Framework (EMPF,
                                                                        equivalent of IPPF) has been developed and
                                                                        attached to the Environmental and Social
                                                                        Management Framework. EMPF was disclosed
                                                                        locally and at Infoshop as a stand-alone
                                                                        document. Ethnic screening will be conducted per
                                                                        EMPF during implementation and, where ethnic
                                                                        minorities are found to be present, free, prior and
                                                                        informed consultations will be carried out leading
                                                                        to broad community support to the pilot activities.
                                                                        A Social Assessment will also be carried out and
                                                                        a simple Ethnic Minority Plan will be developed
                                                                        per EMPF which will provide measures to
                                                                        mitigate negative project impacts, if any and
                                                                        enhance benefits if appropriate. Consultation
                                                                        meetings were conducted with organizations
                                                                        representing ethnic minorities during preparation
                                                                        which confirmed their broad support to the
                                                                        project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             It is not anticipated that involuntary land
                         4.12                                           acquisition will occur under the project since
                                                                        operators under Component 2 will make long
                                                                        term lease contracts with interested land owners
                                                                        on commercial and willing buyer-willing seller
                                                                        terms. However, the policy is triggered, given the
                                                                        complex and uncertain land tenure situation in
                                                                        parts of rural Myanmar and the limited
                                                                        knowledge of many rural people of land
                                                                        ownership or land use entitlements that may make
                                                                        them vulnerable when entering into commercial
                                                                        long term lease contracts. Land Lease Guidelines
                                                                        were developed in line with OP 4.12, and are part
                                                                        of the ESMF. It was also disclosed as a stand-
                                                                        alone document locally and at Infoshop.

                                                                        It is expected that the project will support 4
                                                                        pilots. The operators will seek land owners who
                                                                        are willing to lease their land on a commercial


                                                                Page 7 of 13
                                                                                basis. Government entities will not provide any
                                                                                support to the operators in securing lease
                                                                                contracts, but provide guidance to land owners to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                ensure they can negotiate lease contracts with the
                                                                                operators with a full knowledge of their
                                                                                entitlements under the project, without coercion
                                                                                or under duress. The Land Lease Guidelines also
                                                                                provide steps to verify that there is no legacy
                                                                                issue in any land transactions under the project,
                                                                                and that no pilot would be supported that requires
                                                                                an extension of the existing core ICT network to
                                                                                which the pilot ICT sub-schemes are functionally
                                                                                related.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No                The Project will not involve in construction or
                                                                                rehabilitation of any dams. None of the project
                                                                                activity is dependent of any existing dam or dam
                                                                                under construction.
                            Projects on International           No                There are no known investments involving
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                International Waterways as defined under this
                                                                                Policy of the World Bank
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   The project is not located in any known disputed
                            7.60                                                areas as defined under this WB Policy. All
                                                                                activities will be confined to Myanmar Political
                                                                                boundary.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Component 2 of Project would support extending connectivity to rural areas on a pilot basis.

                             OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment is triggered since Component 2 will entail limited small
                             scale civil works related to the construction of telecommunication towers. The general known and
                             predictable impacts envisaged during construction stage include primarily dust, noise, construction
                             waste effects and temporary disruption of access roads. Provisions for possible impacts and
                             relevant mitigation measures anticipated during project sites screening for environmental and
                             social criteria are listed in ECOPs and included in the ESMF. The height of some radio
                             transmission towers can pose potentially fatal risk to birds, mainly through collisions. The visual
                             impacts of tower and antennae equipment may depend on the perception of the local community as
                             well as the aesthetic value assigned to the scenery Operations and maintenance activities of towers
                             may result in the generation of electronic wastes such as nickel cadmium batteries and printed
                             circuit boards from computer and other electronic equipment as well as backup power batteries.
                             This e-waste will be temporarily stored properly (avoiding direct contact with soil, water, people)
                             and discarded as hazardous waste in special designated landfills. Finally, communities may be
                             exposed to structural safety risks in the event of structural failure of masts or towers, especially in
                             vulnerable areas such as those prone to earthquakes, flooding, or landslides.


                                                                        Page 8 of 13
                          To address such potential impacts the project will carefully integrate environmental provisions in
                          its design and the choice of site location of towers as well as provide mitigation measures to avoid
Public Disclosure Copy




                          or manage negative impacts and bring positive environmental conservation benefits such as proper
                          recycling of waste materials, promotion of sustainable investments in new technology that do not
                          contain hazardous materials, and environmental awareness and public consultation regarding the
                          use of local material supply and management in a sustainable manner.

                          OP4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources is triggered given the unknown location of the pilot areas.
                          However, it is unlikely that the masts /towers will be located in areas with and/or will negatively
                          affect Physical Cultural Resources (PCRs). Chance find provisions are presented in the ESMF and
                          inserted in contractors contracts.

                          OP 4.04 on Natural Habitats is triggered as a precautionary approach at this project stage since
                          specific locations of project sites have not been yet identified and related civil works might have
                          potential to impact existing natural habitats.

                          The potential application of the last two safeguard policies will be screened during project
                          implementation, prior to rolling-out of the pilots, at each proposed site where towers/masts will be
                          installed and if likely to be triggered appropriate mitigation measures and monitoring of their
                          implementation will be carried out in line with provisions defined in this Environment and Social
                          Management Framework (ESMF).

                          OP4.10 is triggered because the pilot may be implemented in areas where ethnic minorities are
                          present, since the pilot will be implemented in commercially unviable rural areas. Overall impacts
                          are expected to be positive, since the pilot will allow cheap and easier access to ICT services for
                          ethnic minorities if they are present in pilot areas. The improved connectivity to ICT services may
                          disturb culture and value systems of ethnic minorities, at least temporarily.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Also, the installation of towers, masts and sub-stations that is required under Component 2 will
                          require a limited scale of land which the operators will secure based on a long-term lease
                          contracts. The government entities are not allowed to support the operators in securing the land,
                          and the operators should make a lease contract with land owners/ occupants on a voluntary and
                          commercial basis. The fluid tenure situations in rural Myanmar and lack of knowledge among
                          rural people of land ownership or land use entitlements make them potentially vulnerable when
                          entering into lease contracts. OP 4.12 is thus triggered to set out processes and procedures so all
                          landtransactions under the project will be conducted on a voluntary and commercial basis, with
                          adequate information and without coercion or under duress.

                           In order to ensure that free, prior and informed consultations are conducted with ethnic minorities
                           in pilot areas leading to their broad community support, that negative impacts that may occur to
                           local people including but not limited to ethnic minorities will be fully mitigated, and that land
                           owners/ users negotiate and enter into commercial land lease contracts with the operators with
                           adequate information on and without coercion or under duress, Land Lease Guidelines and an
                           Ethnic Minority Planning Framework are developed and attached to the Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:


                                                                     Page 9 of 13
                           None anticipated.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Alternative pilot sites have to be identified namely if (i) impacts are significant and/or risks levels
                           are rated high, (ii) the functional independence of the pilot is not confirmed based on site
                           inspections, and/ or (iii) ethnic minorities in pilot areas do not provide broad community support
                           to pilot activities. Also, if the site inspection and screening find that local people have to
                           physically relocate to build infrastructure, alternative sites should be identified where no physical
                           relocation is required.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The ESMF has been developed by Ministry of Communications and Information Technology
                           (MCIT) to comprise the following key steps: (1) safeguard screening and impacts assessment
                           through site surveys of project areas, including taking in consideration extensive consultation
                           sessions with stakeholders and residents in each pilot project areas; (2) preparation of mitigation
                           measures and documentation (ECOPs; Land Lease Guidelines; Ethnic Minority Planning
                           Framework); and (3) implementation, monitoring, and reporting.

                           The environmental and social safeguard screening, impact assessment, and preparation of site
                           specific ECOPs or EMPs under Component 2 will be carried out during Project implementation
                           and will be submitted for WB clearance before their approval and implementation. An Ethnic
                           Minority Plan should be reviewed and cleared by the WB before the pilot for which the EM Plan
                           is developed is approved for implementation, and the first 10 land lease contracts should also be
                           reviewed and cleared by the WB before the civil works which requires the land lease are allowed
                           to start. It should be noted that all chosen investments would have to meet the selection criteria as
                           specified in this ESMF in order for the ESMF and ECOPs to apply. If any pilots selected for
                           investment do not meet the selection criteria, additional safeguard documents such as
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Management Plan (EMP) may be required. World Bank team shall be consulted
                           where necessary timely before approval of sites. The assessment and verification of land leasing,
                           and free, prior and informed consultation with ethnic minorities will also be carried out as part of
                           the ESMF process.

                           The Borrower has limited institutional capacity for safeguard policies. At the national level there
                           is limited legal requirements and limited institutional capacity for ensuring effective safeguard
                           preparation and implementation in infrastructure projects in Myanmar. The MCIT is in the
                           process of issuing licenses to two new operators/service providers (from Norway and Qatar) who
                           were selected through an international competitive process. There will be four licensed
                           telecommunications operators in total in Myanmar over the next few years - the two new foreign
                           operators mentioned earlier and two Myanmar companies, including Myanmar Post and
                           Telecommunications. These service providers will be required to adhere to the license terms and
                           conditions for purpose of each pilot site, and to meet particular technical construction guidelines as
                           well as the social and environmental requirements as listed in ECoPs/site-specific EMPs (and
                           detailed in the ESMF).

                           The MCIT will hire a Safeguards Specialist to support the function for the project. MCIT staff will
                           also receive training and guidance from World Bank safeguard specialists during project
                           implementation. Also, the Service Provider will appoint an Environmental and Social Focal Point,


                                                                      Page 10 of 13
                           who will assume the primary responsibility for the overall planning and implementation of
                           environmental and social issues under the project (e.g., s/he will visit pilot sites regularly,
                           especially for the first six months of pilot implementation when s/he should visit pilot sites on a
Public Disclosure Copy




                           monthly basis, monitor compliance of all pilots with ESMF, receive grievances local people and
                           seek to resolve them in partnership with the MCIT Safeguard Specialist). Estimated budget has
                           been included in the project funds to provide specific capacity building and training on applicable
                           safeguards policies
                           to the Safeguards Specialists in MCIT as well as to the Service Provider Environmental and Social
                           Focal Point.

                           For the Project, activities to build safeguard capacity building at MCIT will be designed.

                           The ECOP will be included in procurement and contract documents and all costs for the
                           implementation of mitigation measures will be part of the contract cost.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders are the MCIT, the operators and communities who will receive services. ESMF
                           was disclosed at MCIT’s website, and consultation meetings were conducted with interested
                           stakeholders – one with international NGOs and another with national stakeholders including
                           national NGOs. When pilot sites under Component 2 are determined, copies of ESMF will be
                           made available in local language in pilot areas. Free, prior and informed consultations will be
                           carried out in pilot areas, without regard to the ethnicity of pilot areas, as part of the community
                           outreach to be carried out by the operator to ensure local people are aware of both the upcoming
                           ICT services that will be made available to them, and potential impacts, mitigation measures and
                           grievance mechanisms that will be made available to them under the project.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       22-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    04-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Myanmar                                                           22-Nov-2013
                           Comments: Disclosure of the ESMF took place online in both English (on November 22, 2013)
                                         and the Myanmar language (on November 25, 2013). Public consultations were held
                                         in Yangon on November 28, 2013 with local stakeholders, including NGOs.
                                         Consultations also took place on the same day with donors and international NGOs.
                                         During project implementation, (design of pilots under Component 2 stage), the
                                         ESMF and site specific EMPs will be disclosed to communities in the selected pilot
                                         areas.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       22-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    04-Dec-2013




                                                                     Page 11 of 13
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Myanmar                                                           25-Nov-2013
                           Comments: Land Lease Guidelines were developed in line with OP 4.12, and attached to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         ESMF.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       22-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    04-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Myanmar                                                           25-Nov-2013
                           Comments: The Ethnic Minorities Planning Framework (EMPF, equivalent of IPPF) has been
                                         developed and attached to the Environmental and Social Management Framework.
                                         EMPF was disclosed locally and at Infoshop as a stand-alone document.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?


                                                                     Page 12 of 13
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Tenzin Dolma Norbhu
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                               Date: 05-Dec-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Alan G. Carroll (SM)                              Date: 05-Dec-2013




                                                                       Page 13 of 13
