INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCIO85
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Dec-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Zambia                     Project ID:   P151451
Project Name:    Zambia Rural Women Empowerment Project (P151451)
Task Team        Cornelia M. Tesliuc
Leader:
Estimated        30-Apr-2015                Estimated     29-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSPDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Public administration- Other social services (100%)
Theme(s):        Social safety nets (35%), Other social protection and risk management (35%),
Gender (30%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      50.00             Total Bank Financing:    50.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                      50.00
Total                                                            50.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase income levels of extremely poor
households benefitting from the project.
C. Project Description
The Project proposes an integrated approach to support extremely poor women and adolescent girls
as key agents to undertake actions to reduce vulnerabilities and increase opportunities for the entire


﻿family. The Project is based on a theory of change that hypothesizes that when women and
adolescent girls are empowered by acquiring social and economic skills and productive assets they
can draw on these to improve their family consumption, build savings, and invest in their children's
(especially daughters) education and well-being. At the same time, investments to expand the real
O
U       and perceived educational and livelihood opportunities available to poor adolescent girls can make
delays in early marriage more economically viable for their families. Given the country context, as
outlined above, the Project will be selective in targeting extremely poor women and adolescent girls
in rural areas where poverty and vulnerability are most acute.
The proposed design reflects Government's social protection vision for extremely poor households,
which emphasizes predictable cash transfers for labor-constrained households and economic
empowerment support for the extremely poor with the potential to engage in income generating
activities. Under Component 1, the Project would support expansion of the existing SCTS, under
which targeted households are identified as in need of long-term, sustained support because of
extreme poverty coupled with labor-constraints (defined as a labor-dependency ratio greater than
three because of high number of children, disability, or chronic illness). The predictable cash
transfers aim to reduce poverty and the intergenerational transmission of poverty through
consumption smoothing and human capital development. Under Component 2, the Project would
also support the extremely poor, but with a focus on women with the potential to engage in
productive livelihoods. The Government envisions that such an intervention would foster economic
and social empowerment and have long-lasting impacts on well-being and standards of living. As
noted above, although many such projects are under implementation, coverage remains limited,
delivery is affected by limited implementation capacity, and there is little coordination or
complementarity to promote synergies among these interventions. Under Component 3, the Project
would support strengthening institutional capacity in terms of policy dialogue, coordination,
management systems, and monitoring and evaluation to effectively undertake social protection and
women's empowerment activities. The following figure provides a summary of the proposed Project
components.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project will target women and adolescent girls in extremely poor households in rural areas. The
Project will identify these beneficiaries by building on the targeting mechanism developed for the
ongoing Social Cash Transfer Scheme (SCTS). The SCTS uses a three-stage targeting mechanism
combining geographical targeting, community-based targeting, and verification through a proxy
means test. At the geographical level, targeting could be conducted on the basis of a poverty map at
sub-district level. A poverty map using the 2010 Census and Household Survey Data is being
developed by Central Statistical Office with support from the World Bank and should be ready in
October 2014. The poverty map will provide poverty estimates down to the lowest administrative
level (ward) allowing prioritization of areas with high incidence of extreme poverty. At the
beneficiary level, the Project will target both women from SCTS households (extremely poor, labor-
constrained households) with potential for engaging in incoming generating activities as well as
women in households identified by SCTS as extremely poor but not eligible for the cash transfer
benefit because of their households' labor endowment. The SCTS defines labor-constrained
households based on chronic illness, physical disability or a labor-dependency ration greater than
three.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


﻿Project preparation will include a review of the Government's existing livelihood support programs
to assess the institutional capacity of the relevant ministries.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
O
U       Albab Akanda (GENDR)
Paula F. Lytle (GSURR)
o
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies             Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   TBD           The Project proposes, under Component 2, to
BP 4.01                                      provide support to extremely poor, rural women
by improving their opportunities for income
generating activities through a package of
training and financial support. Project
preparation will include a gender assessment
study to understand the types of income
generating activities that potential beneficiaries
are already undertaking. The types of activities
and their scale (which are expected to be limited
to the household level) will help determine
whether the Project would trigger
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01. This
study is expected to be completed by January
2015.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No            The project will not affect or involve natural
habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36             No            The project will not affect or involve forests or
forestry.
Pest Management OP 4.09        No            The project does not involve pest management.
P hysical Cultural Resources OP/  No         The project will not affect or involve physical
BP 4.11                                      cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  TBD           During preparation, the Task Team will consult
the Government to determine whether the
Project's Component 1, which may be national
in scale, would include targeting of the country's
indigenous peoples (the San). These
consultations will take place during the
December 2014 preparation mission. Following
the required input from Government, the Team
will decide if it is appropriate to trigger
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No           The project does not involve land acquisition
4.12                                        leading to involuntary resettlement and/or
restrictions of access to resources and
livelihoods.


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37       No             N/A
Projects on International       No             N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No            N/A
7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Jan-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The Project is conducting a gender assessment study that will, among other objectives, seek to
develop a detailed list of income generating activities in which potential beneficiaries are currently
engaged. This list will help determine whether supporting the increased productivity of these
livelihoods is likely to have an effect on the safeguard polices triggered by this Project. An initial
draft of this research is expected by December 2014, with the final report ready by January 2015.
The next Project preparation mission will be conducted in early December 2014 and would
determine whether any additional safeguard-related studies will be required.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:     Name: Cornelia M. Tesliuc
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                 Date: 09-Dec-2014
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/     Name: Manuel Salazar (PMGR)                     Date: 09-Dec-2014
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


