                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC8426

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Somalia                         Project ID:      P149306
                            Project Name:      Somalia Urban Development Project (P149306)
                            Task Team          Roland White
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          26-Jan-2015                     Estimated        30-Apr-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTU1                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Urban Transport (40%), Water supply (20%), Solid waste management (20%),
                                               Sub-national government administration (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Decentralization (10%), Municipal governance and institution building (20%),
                                               Urban services and housing for the poor (20%), Other ur ban development
                                               (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     71.45                    Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    0.00
                              Free-standing TFs AFR Sustainable Development                              71.45
                              Total                                                                      71.45
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The PDO for the project will be: “Improved urban infrastructure and urban financing systems in
                           South-Central Somalia, Puntland and Somaliland”.
                           C. Project Description
                         1.      Description

                         The operation will support investment in urban infrastructure and the development of formal, public-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sector institutional systems and capacities in the cities of Mogadishu, Hargeisa, and Garowe which
                         are, respectively, the capital cities of South-Central Somalia, Somaliland and Puntland. Together, the
                         operation’s activities will improve the economic productivity of these cities, enhance living
                         conditions and inclusive access to urban economies, and strengthen systems of urban management
                         and governance.

                         Clearly, urban investment needs in wider Somalia – and in the three cities on which the operation
                         will focus – greatly outweigh available resources. Moreover, a cardinal design consideration for the
                         operation is that it is being developed in the context of the state and peace-building goals of the
                         Compact, including the Special Arrangement for Somaliland, and the associated mandate of the
                         Multi Partner Fund (MPF) to support development throughout South-Central Somalia, Puntland and
                         Somaliland. Accordingly, the operation will comprise four key components: three of these will
                         support focused urban infrastructure and institutional strengthening in each of the three cities, while a
                         fourth will support the expansion, deepening and consolidation of a fiscal transfer to fund basic
                         infrastructure delivery and capacity-building of local governments in the larger urban concentrations
                         across the three territories.

                         For all the components of the project, the project will support two key phases of activity (i) detailed
                         preparation including engineering design, determination of Bills of Quantity, estimates, bidding
                         documents, test drilling (in the case of water supply), institutional design, social and environmental
                         studies; and (ii) execution of the components i.e. construction, capacity-building etc. The activities
                         for the SUDP will be undertaken on the basis of feasibility and preliminary design studies which will
                         be undertaken under a separate MPF-funded project i.e. the Somalia Urban Investment Planning
                         Project (SUIPP). It should be noted that the team will request the deferral of safeguards instruments
                         from the project preparation phase into the implementation phase, evoking the special considerations
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for situations of urgent need of assistance and capacity constraints under paragraph 11 of OP10.00.
                         In lieu of safeguards instruments the team will, in accordance with the Guidance Note on Investment
                         Project Financing Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints” (August 2013)
                         prepare a safeguards action plan before project appraisal. This action plan will address applicable
                         environmental and social policies during project preparation individually for each territorial entity
                         and component, and will be annexed to the PAD. During the first phase of project implementation
                         draft TOR for the proposed safeguards instruments will be prepared by the Recipient and submitted
                         for review by the RSA.

                         The key components of the SUDP operation will be as follows:

                         Component 1:             Mogadishu

                         This will comprise four chief sub-components:

                         •       Rehabilitation of key primary/arterial roads running through the city;
                         •       Improvement and extension of secondary/tertiary roads at the District level;
                         •       Renovation of the Banaadir Regional Administration (BRA) building;
                         •       Strengthening the key institutions of urban management and governance of the city.
                         Subcomponent 1.1:        Primary roads

                         As indicated above, with support from the Turkish Government, rehabilitation of 33 kilometers of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         primary roads is currently underway (expected completion is August 2014). These roads are in a
                         general area north of the airport and north of the port. A further 17 km of primary roads requiring
                         priority attention for rehabilitation to improve transport and transit efficiencies within and through
                         the city have been identified by the city. The economic and social returns to this investment are
                         expected to be high. The roads, once reconstructed, would complete one road network loop which
                         has already been partially undertaken by the Turkish aid program, as well as the rehabilitation of
                         other key roads. The roads requested by BTA and earmarked for financing consideration are: the
                         Heart (Wadnaha), the Thirty (Soddonka), and Industrial Road (Warshadaha). In addition, (i.e. over
                         and above the 17 km) a priority road - perpendicular to Wadnaha, starting from an intersection of
                         Maka-Al-Mukarama and continuing to Industrial Road – which intersects the major market Bakaraha
                         has been identified.

                         The technical specifications for the road rehabilitation would include replacing the sub-base and base
                         materials of the roads – if determined by road materials tests – with an appropriately designed
                         asphaltic cement road surface. All road infrastructures would be designed to have robust associated
                         road-side drainage networks.

                         An initial cost estimate of the 17 km of primary road network is approximately US$ 20.4 million.
                         The cost of traffic management and optimization (junctions, signaling etc.) is roughly estimated at
                         US$ 0.5 million.

                         Subcomponent 2:          Secondary/tertiary roads

                         A second priority is the upgrading of secondary and tertiary roads and footpaths (including
                         associated side-drainage) at the District and community levels in Mogadishu (i.e. in all 17 Districts)
                         to enhance intra-neighbourhood mobility and access to the city, particularly among more
Public Disclosure Copy




                         marginalized communities. These roads would be constructed using interlocking paving block or
                         cobble stone surfacing technologies which are labour-intensive – thus assisting with job creation –
                         and deliver surfaces which are easy to maintain and repair. In addition to mobility (hence
                         productivity) benefits, this activity is likely to improve the hygiene and sanitation of affected
                         neighbourhoods through as a result of enhanced drainage.

                         Preliminary estimates during the mission indicate that the potentially available resource (US$ 6.8m)
                         for this activity would be sufficient to finance about 2km of road and drainage upgrading per District.

                         Subcomponent 3:          Renovation of the BRA Administrative building

                         A third identified priority is the renovation of the heritage City Hall building which is meant to house
                         the offices of the city and regional administration. The building is in very poor condition. Its
                         refurbishment would restore a national architectural heritage asset and alleviate an acute shortage of
                         office space for civil servants, thus providing a basis for the improved management of the city.

                         Based on some preliminary design work for one wing of the building, which is currently being
                         undertaken by an architect working for the BRA, the total cost estimate of this activity is around US$
                         4 million (structure plus furnishings, cabling etc.). BRA has indicated that it would consider
                         providing limited counterpart financing for the building.
                         As indicated above, some preliminary design work has been done, covering about a quarter of the
                         building (one wing). This would need to be completed and extended to the whole structure. It is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         possible that the design and construction of the renovation project could be undertaken in a series of
                         phases.

                         Subcomponent 4:          Institutional strengthening and capacity-building

                         Strengthening the institutions and systems of urban management and local government, and
                         strengthening the organizational capacities of these institutions is a critical priority. In this context,
                         the project should make resources available, and be designed to incentivize, activities which support
                         these objectives. Broadly, and building on the platform already established by other donor
                         programmes (e.g. the Sustainable Employment Creation and Improved Livelihoods – SESIL-
                         activities which support the BRA Planning Unit; the USAID financial management support), such
                         activities are likely to focus on (i) spatial and project planning; (ii) procurement and contracting, (ii)
                         financial management, (iii) asset management, (iv) project execution and supervision; (vii)
                         environmental and social management.

                         A likely budget of US$1-2m would probably be necessary for these activities at a scale sufficient for
                         them to have the desired impact.

                         Component 2:             Hargeisa

                         This component has four main subcomponents:

                         •       Drainage
                         •       Solid Waste Management (SWM)
                         •       Water Supply
                         •       Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Adequate drainage, SWM and water supply directly translates into cross cutting benefits in public
                         health, job creation, poverty reduction and environmental management.

                         Subcomponent 1:          Drainage

                         Hargeisa is arid with around 400 mm precipitation falling annually over an average 30 annual rain
                         days in two main seasons. Topographically the city is divided North and South by a wadi (Tugga
                         Maroodhi Jeh) that drains an upstream catchment of some 300km2 to Daaboolaaq in the west. The
                         immediate urban catchment of approximately 30km2 falls some 100m of elevation within 3 km
                         North to South. Dry antecedent conditions thus give rapid rise to overland spates from comparatively
                         small but intense amounts of rainfall, draining laterally West to East along the Maroodhi Jeh with
                         surface flows in seasonal spate only a few days a year. However major destructive floods have been
                         recorded in 1 in 5 years over the past two decades, destroying one of two city bridges and laying
                         waste to large areas of low lying settlement in 2007 for example.

                         There is no flood plan for Hargeisa and what little drainage infrastructure exists is not fit for purpose
                         to the needs of an expanding city. Current, poor drainage performance of existing infrastructure is
                         seasonally exacerbated by the build-up of solid waste in culverts and drains before the rains.
                         Drainage, storage, buffer and flood protection measures urgently need to be reviewed and upgraded,
                         with existing infrastructure cleared of debris and detritus in the short term to reduce the public health
                         risks and regulate the effect of flooding on the local economy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Review of estimates from recent analysis (UNHabitat) has identified a requirement for 30 km of
                         drainage network interlinking 5 natural gullies in the Northern half of the city. To be implemented in
                         two phases works proposed include engineering of 14 km of streams, 4.5 km of outfalls, 25.6 km of
                         drains and the construction of a new 45,000 m3 sump reservoir (see attached map). These measures
                         are required in the medium term as the funding becomes available.

                         Under this project the short-term measures will be financed, that are required to build the foundation
                         for further work , and to prepare adequately for the lager, medium-term scale of infrastructure
                         rehabilitation/development . Specifically the following activities are planned: (i) clean out the
                         existing natural drainage channels and engineer basic repairs, (ii) produce feasibility and planning
                         documents, (iii) initiate capacity building at the municipal level.

                         Subcomponent 2:          Solid Waste Management

                         The World Bank has been supporting preliminary SWM activities in Hargeisa directed at developing
                         an enabling environment for PPPs for investment, services expansion and quality improvements in
                         private provision of solid waste management. There is a rudimentary system in place based on a
                         Public Private Partnership (PPP) between Hargeisa Municipality (HM) and private operators on
                         concession basis. The performance of two contractors during the recent eight months has increased
                         municipal revenues by approximately 120% in one case and 30% in another, with a proportionate
                         rise in the customer base. To date the number of households served by all the contractors has reached
                         30,000, approximately 35% of the city population.

                         There is a need to underpin and expand these gains with further support and investment in both the
                         collection and bulk disposal dimensions of the solid waste cycle because Hargeisa is rapidly
                         expanding and the production of solid waste increasing proportionately. Waste ranges from general
Public Disclosure Copy




                         household waste containing a large amount of organics and plastics, to industrial waste and
                         construction detritus, to specific medical waste from 3 hospitals where incinerators are in need of
                         overhaul. There are currently two major dumpsites, one to the South of town and one to the East, and
                         these are not adequately engineered or managed. The sites are open and present a public health
                         hazard since constant burning results in excessive dioxins released, etc. Informal dumping sites
                         compound the problem, suggesting that regulation of dumpers requires enforcement for SWM across
                         the city to be effective. Inadequate infrastructure at the secondary level of the supply chain (transfer
                         stations) compounds the problem.

                         The objective of the planned investment support under this project would be to develop the bulk
                         disposal system (i.e. engineered landfill), improve secondary level infrastructure in the refuse
                         collection and disposal chain (i.e. transfer stations), and to scale up the collection system for city
                         wide SWM through building on and expanding the private collection/PPP arrangements that have
                         already been established. An initial cost estimate of the engineering of two landfills -- which are well
                         outside the city's residential areas, and geologically characterized by low permeability formations
                         and deep aquifers -- and the transfer stations and equipment is in the region of US$ 6 million.

                         As an immediate, first step during project implementation more accurate estimates would be obtained
                         from the findings of a comprehensive feasibility study (FS). The FS would prepare for, provide
                         guidance for decision-making, and constitute the planning / design basis for the subsequent
                         implementation of physical works. The actual implementation and supervision of the works, as well
                         as the design of operational plans and procedures, would be closely linked to capacity building
                         activities to reach the minimum institutional structures and skills for planning, engineering and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management required to approach internationally accepted standards .

                         Subcomponent 3:          Water Supply

                         Hargeisa depends for its wat er supply on groundwater well fields some 35km to the North of the city
                         built originally in the 1970s, and distributing through a reticulated network in Hargeisa that is
                         inadequate to meet current and future needs. The water supply is provided and managed by
                         theHAWA and currently the North of the city receives the vast majority of the supply. The current
                         distribution remains grossly inequitable and much of the Southern part of the city does not receive
                         piped water from HAWA. For citizens directly unserved vended water costs on average five times
                         the amount for a compound/household connection.

                         On a daily basis it is estimated that up to 11,000 m3 of potable water are provided to the city, with
                         8,000 m3 supplied by HAWA through the city supply pumped from Ged Deeble well field to the
                         North, and with an additional 2-3,000 m3 brought in by private operator tankers.

                         Supported by UNHabitat HAWA is in the process of developing the supply to increase production
                         from the existing 8,000 m3 day to 20,000 m3 day by 2016 with a potential maximum extraction rate
                         of 24,000 m3day for the system according to the hydraulic limits of the design. Of this 15,000 m3/
                         day is foreseen from Ged Deeble and Hora Hadlay. A prospective additional quantity of 6,000 m3/
                         day from the Las Dhuure aquifer requires verification through hydrogeological studies and test
                         drilling, before connection to the supply pipeline and commencement of production. In addition to
                         increasing supply, HAWA currently draws from Somaliland Development Fund (SDF) funding to
                         extend the distribution into the South and East of the city. While distribution can draw on up to
                         24,000 m3/day the requirement to deliver 50 l/c/d from 2016 onwards suggests a shortfall of 16,000
                         m3/day at that time, and underpins the need for long term water resources investigations to secure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         adequate supply. The proposed abstractions will not have any major adverse cumulative impacts.
                         This SDF program has a number of critical priorities which are currently unfunded, particularly
                         related to the development of the Las Dhuure aquifer.

                         The activity proposed to be financed by this project would target these priorities, specifically (i)
                         construction of pump and generator buildings at Ged-Deeble, (ii) Las Dhuure groundwater
                         investigations and test drilling, (iii) civil works for connection of the Las Dhuure aquifer and (iv)
                         delivery of pumps and generators to Ged-Deeble.

                         In addition, HAWA currently draws from SDF funding for some existing contracts on the production
                         side. However, the HAWA capacity remains constrained, especially engineering support to the
                         HAWA general manager, although limited capacity building is being initiated under the Water and
                         Sanitation Program (WSP) to provide institutional support to HAWA in four key areas, viz. (i)
                         establishment and organization of the HAWA Board; (ii) financial management and procurement;
                         (iii) staffing and HR rules and procedures and (iv) development of a financial statement.

                         An initial cost estimate of the investments in design, engineering, equipment and civil works for
                         infrastructure is in the region of US$ 6 million.

                         Subcomponent 4:          Institutional stren gthening and capacity-building
                         Strengthening the governance and organizational systems and capacities for HAWA, and the
                         capacities and systems of urban management for HM are important priorities. In this context, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         operation should make resources available, and be designed to incentivize activities which support
                         these objectives. Broadly, and building on the platform already established by other donor
                         programmes (e.g. the Habitat and WSP activities for HAWA and Joint Program for Local
                         Government (JPLG) and UNHabitat activities for HM), such activities are likely to focus on, for
                         HAWA, (i) governance (ii) technical strengthening; for HM, (i) spatial and project planning; and for
                         both (i) procurement and contracting, (ii) financial management, (iii) asset management, (iv) project
                         execution and supervision; (vii) environmental and social management.

                         A likely budget of US$1.5m would probably be necessary for these activities at a scale sufficient for
                         them to have the desired impact.

                         Component 3: Garowe

                         This component would include two subcomponents: upgrading of key intra-city roads and
                         institutional strengthening.

                         Subcomponent 1:          Intra-city roads

                         Since 2010, using UN JPLG financing Garowe Municipality (GM) has undertaken a program of
                         upgrading targeted intra-city roads to provide a freer flow of urban traffic, facilitating easier and
                         quicker transport between various parts of the municipality. This improvement in urban mobility is
                         aimed at facilitating increased commercial activity, improving revenue generation and boosting
                         incomes within the urban setting. The upgrading programme from 2010 to 2013 mainly consisted of
                         providing an engineered earth base with some of the roads having a gravel surface applied. USAID is
                         also financing some roads upgrading in Garowe.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This programme has benefited from UN-Habitat technical assistance. A survey of road conditions
                         has been conducted by the Municipality with UN-Habitat assistance, the results of which have been
                         documented and recorded on a GIS platform for improved roads network planning and assets
                         management capabilities of the GM. Currently - with JPLG assistance - three roads with a combined
                         length of 7.6 km are in the process of being upgraded from gravel with the application of a bitumen
                         surface. The bitumen surfaces are of a double-seal dressing technical specification.

                         For financing under this project the roads conditions survey and additional planning activities by the
                         GM identified an additional 27.03 km of roads in two categories – gravel and earth-engineered –for
                         priority bitumen surfacing. The cost estimate for design and construction lies in the range of US$
                         10.8 million for the completion of 27 km of roads upgrading. The cost of traffic management and
                         optimization is roughly estimated at US$ 50,000.

                         Subcomponent 2:          Institutional strengthening and capacity-building

                         Strengthening the governance and organizational systems and capacities for GM, specifically for
                         urban planning and management for HM is an important priority. In this context, the project should
                         make resources available, and be designed to incentivize, activities which support these objectives.
                         Broadly, and building on the platform already established by other donor programmes (e.g. the JPLG
                         and Habitat), such activities are likely to focus on (i) governance; (ii) technical strengthening; (iii)
                         spatial and project planning; (iv) procurement and contracting; (v) financial management; (iv) asset
                         management; (vi) project execution and supervision; and (vii) environmental and social management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A likely budget of US$0.8m would probably be necessary for these activities at a scale sufficient for
                         them to have the desired impact.

                         Component 4:             Local Development Fund

                         The Local Development Fund, an activity within the Joint Programme on Local Government (JPLG),
                         provides an average of US$200,000/annum to 14 of the largest category A DGs in Somaliland and
                         Puntland for investment in basic services and infrastructure in line with local priorities determined
                         through a bottom-up planning process and will expand for the first time to one District Government
                         in South-Central Somalia. The LDF was initiated with a budget of US$950,000 for 2011. This was
                         doubled to US$2.1 million for 2012, grew to US$3 million for 2013 and is budgeted at US$4.5m for
                         2014. The grant incentivizes performance and is accompanied by a range of technical assistance and
                         capacity building activities to support sub-project planning and execution and the management of the
                         funds. DGs have used the fund to invest in small-scale projects such as roads construction and
                         maintenance, repair and re-building of schools, water systems, garbage collection, community
                         centres and markets. Given their resource constraints, the LDF provides DGs with one of their only
                         funding streams which allows them to actualize their core service-delivery functions.

                         One important recent development has been the progression of decentralization policy in Somaliland
                         and Puntland and, to a much more limited extent, in South-Central Somalia. Both Somaliland and
                         Puntland have developed Decentralization Policy Documents which articulate a clear, and similar,
                         vision of a substantially decentralized intergovernmental system in which adequately resourced and
                         empowered local governments are responsible for local governance and service delivery in
                         significant sectors, including municipal infrastructure and services. In the case of Somaliland, the
                         policy document has been endorsed by the Inter-ministerial Committee which has overseen its
                         formulation, and is awaiting Cabinet approval. In Puntland, endorsement has been interrupted as a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         result of the change in government following the recent election. Progress in South-Central Somalia
                         has been much slower, but work has begun on the development of a decentralization policy
                         framework. Of particular note in the Somaliland and Puntland policy documents is a clear
                         commitment to fiscal decentralization including, among other things, the development of a system of
                         unconditional and conditional intergovernmental fiscal transfers to finance recurrent and
                         development expenditures.

                         In this context, provision of support to the LDG presents an important potential opportunity. The
                         architecture of the LDF has many of the core features of the sort of systematic, equitable, conditional
                         grant to be used to support development expenditures envisaged in the Somaliland and Puntland
                         policy documents. Over time, and with the right type of support, it could be expanded (from the
                         bottom up, as the system grows) and institutionalized (from the top down, as policy consolidates and
                         is implemented) as a central element of the evolving sub-national fiscal framework throughout
                         Somaliland, Puntland and, eventually (should the policy environment permit it), South-Central
                         Somalia.

                         The Bank has specific expertise in assisting countries, including a number in the immediate region,
                         develop intergovernmental transfer systems of this kind and could add specific value to the LDF
                         through providing support with this as a core objective. In order to achieve this, two basic types of
                         activity would be necessary: (i) direct support to expanding and deepening the fiscal transfer
                         mechanism itself, accompanied by design optimisation to the extent necessary (e.g. to enhance its
                         performance orientation, strengthen the way in which capacity-building is delivered etc.); and (ii)
                         support to the institutionalization process, focused on the formulation of a detailed implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         plan to phase in universal coverage, followed by the development and implementation of the grant
                         instruments, mechanisms and procedures (on the foundation, naturally, of what the LDF has already
                         established).

                         Given the limited total budget envelope available for the project, it appears that no more than US$
                         11m would be available for these activities over four years. Of this, approximately 10m would be
                         targeted at support of the grant instrument with approximately US$1m available for support to the
                         institutionalization process. With MPF Funding, the projected LDF budget for the next 3 years
                         (2015-2017) will increase from US$ 14.5 million to US$ 25.4 million. There will be substantial
                         deepening in investment funding with a geographic expansion from 20 LGs to 30 LGs (from 16 in
                         Puntland and Somaliland to 24 and in South Central Somalia from 4 to 6 LGs), with investments in
                         Mogadishu alone increasing about 600 % to enable noticeable contribution to service delivery.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project activities will be implemented in or close to major urban areas in Somalia, specifically in
                         Mogadishu as the countries capital and primary city, as well as in Garowe, Puntland’s administrative
                         capital, and Hargeisa, the capital of Somaliland. The following project activities and details will be
                         relevant to the project’s environmental and social assessment and management arrangements:

                         Hargeisa Water Supply

                         The proposed Hargeisa Water Supply Project may have potential negative environmental and social
                         impacts that would need to be mitigated. The two main environmental issues emerging from this
                         mission relate to (i) water quality and (ii) depletion by overexploitation of the Laas Dhuure aquifer.
                         Both risks would need to be assessed during the project preparation phase by appropriate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         hydrogeological investigations and analyses, relating both to water quality and yield. Any decision to
                         proceed with the development of additional water supply from the aquifer would depend on the
                         outcome of these investigations and the ability to mitigate potential risks.

                         Negative social impacts on the people living in the area of the Laas Dhuure aquifer cannot be
                         excluded at this stage. There may be impacts on their livelihoods by reduced (ground)water
                         availability, as well as issues connected to land acquisition for boreholes, well-heads, pumping
                         stations, pipelines and other infrastructure. E.g. there may be households or farmers dependent on the
                         aquifer for irrigation purposes, or for livestock or human consumption.

                         Another key social issue related to this proposed project is related to equity and access of water. The
                         proposed project is meant to increase the production of water and extend the network to reach the
                         population in the southern part of the city. The populations in southern Hargeisa are generally poorer
                         and have been buying water from vendors at a much higher cost than those in the north who benefit
                         directly from the network. Any additional connections and kiosks established through this project
                         would benefit the population in the south but given demand will continue to be higher than the
                         supply, the location and distribution of these connections and kiosks will need to be managed
                         carefully.

                         The proposed safeguards instruments for this project component would be an ESIA and ESMP, that
                         would include detailed studies on the aquifer’s hydro-geology, screen and establish the exact number
                         of households in the area, how much groundwater local residents, farmers and other stakeholders are
                         currently using, from which depth it is produced (it could well be separate, much shallower aquifers),
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and if generally their property or homes would be physically affected by the planned water supply
                         infrastructure. If significant impacts on land or livelihoods of local stakeholders are anticipated, an
                         RPF/RAP would additionally prepared to clarify any compensation and restoration requirements.

                         Hargeisa Waste Management: The existing waste repositories in Hargeisa are characterized by poor
                         planning, lack of basic physical infrastructure (such as side walls, liner, drainage system and seepage
                         treatment plant), and poor management (waste neither compacted, nor covered, frequent fires
                         observed, vectors abundant, household mixed with potentially hazardous waste). The environmental
                         performance of the two main facilities thus is low, and both are currently the source of negative
                         impacts including: aerial emissions via smoke, odors, dust and windblown litter, contaminated
                         runoff, seepage, and the presence of disease vectors (rats, baboons, birds). The project will finance
                         the construction of new cells for waste reception, as well as remedial and upgrading measures for the
                         existing dumps, and thus have a largely positive impact. The proposed safeguards instruments would
                         include an ESIA and ESMP to be produced during further project preparation with the following
                         purposes: (i) to detect significant ongoing risks from the dumps and enable quick, targeted remedies;
                         (ii) to collect required data to inform the design process; (iii) to provide instructions on
                         environmental management of the civil works during the construction phase; (iv) to provide guidance
                         and standards f or the remediation and safe closure of the existing dumps.

                         Mogadishu Intra-Urban Roads Rehabilitation: Given that the activities will only relate to the
                         upgrading of existing main as well as “neighborhood” roads within urban areas that are already built
                         up (andravaged by decades of civil war), the baseline conditions are extremely low, and any
                         incremental environmental impacts are likely to be limited (and in part positive e.g. as a result of
                         improved side-drainage). Moreover, the works are planned to be carried out with high labor intensity:
                         This will further reduce environmental impacts (e.g. eliminating much of the noise, vibrations, dust
                         and emissions associated with heavy machinery), and also have positive social impacts in terms of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         employment generation. As the activity will be carried out within the existing right of way (ROW)
                         the social impacts (and any resettlement costs) are also expected to be limited, but it has not yet been
                         possible to estimate them (as the degree of encroachment is unknown). The proposed safeguards
                         instrument would be a simplified ESMP, e.g. in a “checklist format”, which would contain targeted
                         mitigation measures that would be communicated in a concise, easy to understand, action-oriented
                         manner to Client, Engineers and Contractors.

                         Mogadishu Renovation of the BRA Administrative building: The restoration works are expected to
                         be minor, localized, confined to an existing structure within an urban center, and thus will have
                         limited, foreseeable impacts related to civil works. These will be easily mitigated and management
                         with good housekeeping measures, and readily available, standardized and tested mitigation
                         measures. As the building is likely to be considered a physical cultural resource (PCR) under Bank
                         policy, OP4.11 would be triggered, and special attention to design and construction management will
                         be required to preserve any historically, culturally or architecturally valuable physical components
                         and substance of the building. The proposed safeguards instruments would be a simplified ESMP,
                         which would contain targeted mitigation measures that would be communicated in a concise, easy to
                         understand, action-oriented manner to Client, Engineers and Contractors. In addition an
                         architectural / cultural survey of the building would be commissioned and a PCR management plan
                         produced, that would inform design and implementation of the rehabilitation works to preserve a
                         maximum of the buildings historical substance and significance.
                         Garowe Intra Urban Roads Rehabilitation: Given the nature of the activities, being the upgrading of
                         existing intra-urban roads within areas that are already built up, any environmental impacts are likely
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to be limited (and in part positive e.g. as a result of lesser dust, less emissions due to more constant
                         travel speeds, and safer due to additional planned sidewalks).

                         The anticipated negative impacts are likely to be confined to the construction period, connected to
                         routine civil works, and include: emissions such as noise, dust, and exhaust gases from machinery;
                         generation of construction related waste, such as earth, gravel, rubble, concrete slurries, as well as
                         hazardous waste types such as spent engine oil, empty containers of lubricants, paint, bitumen, and
                         scrap metals. Traffic and pedestrian safety will be a key issue due to the works being carried out
                         within densely populated urban areas. All of the described impacts are mitigeable with a standard set
                         of readily available, tested mitigation measures, largely related to good housekeeping during
                         construction works.

                         As the activity will be carried out within the existing right of way (ROW) the social impacts (and any
                         resettlement costs) are also expected to be limited, but it has not yet been possible to estimate their
                         exact scope (as the degree of encroachment is yet unknown). However, as livelihoods and properties
                         may be temporarily be impacted (e.g. kiosks of roadside vendors, access to residences or businesses
                         along the road), OP4.12 will be triggered and a RPF (resettlement policy framework) would be
                         produced in anticipation of potential compensation requirements. Physical cultural resources are not
                         likely to be affected, as the road upgrading will not involve widening or re-routing of roads, and no
                         existing structures would need to be demolished.

                         The proposed safeguards instruments would be an ESMP, which, considering the simple nature of
                         the project works and impacts, could be in a simplified “checklist format” for clarity and ease of use
                         by Client, Engineers and Contractors, as well as an RPF to prepare for the expected compensation
                         procedures for anticipated temporary impacts on adjacent residents’ and businesses’ livelihood.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Proposed Safeguards Category

                         The project mostly involves rehabilitation and upgrading of existing facilities. While some
                         components have substantial environmental and social impacts, these can be mitigated. The project
                         is, therefore classified as Category B. Given the potential sensitivities around water supply and waste
                         management, but also the complex social fabric in Somaliland, the team would closely accompany
                         and advise the planning process, as well as the stakeholder dialogue and consultations.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The institutional environment pertaining to the proposed project needs comprises two key levels. At
                         the national/regional level, there are three national/regional government entities, each of which has
                         its own constitution and institutional and legal structure, although only one of these is formally
                         recognized internationally: the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS), the Government of Puntland,
                         and the Government of Somaliland. Within each of these governmental structures, one or more
                         agencies (Ministries) have a potential key role in respect of the project. In the case of the FGS, this
                         is likely to be the Ministry of Public Works; in the case of Somaliland, the Ministry of National
                         Planning and Development; and in the case of Puntland, the Ministry of National Planning and
                         Development.

                         At the local/sectoral level city governments are also of direct relevance. In fact, given the functional
                           powers and capacities of these agencies it is likely that they will be directly involved in project
                           implementation. Various activities will be focused on strengthening these agencies as part of the
                           broader effort of the project to improve institutional systems of urban service delivery. The cities of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Mogadishu, Hargeisa and Garowe are all managed by municipal administrations, or structures which
                           approximate such administrations. In general these entities are fairly weakly capacitated and have
                           very limited financial resources with which to carry out their mandates.

                           In Somaliland, where the project activities with the most significant anticipated impacts would be
                           carried out, the regulatory framework includes an environmental policy, a law on the protection of
                           the environment, and by-laws and regulations to implement the legislation in projects and activities.
                           By law the Ministry of Environment (MoE) would have to be consulted for all major activities that
                           other line Ministries prepare and implement. However, in practice there is neither the enforcement
                           and inter-ministerial coordination and cooperation, nor enough capacity in MoE to regulate, monitor
                           and enforce the existing legislation.

                           For the project it would be important to focus capacity building on those sections and aspects of the
                           environmental legislation that would apply to (i) the environmental and social impact assessment
                           process; (ii) the integration of environmental and social findings, and management procedures into
                           planning, design, construction and operation of public infrastructure projects. Specifically it would
                           be crucial to identify administrative and regulatory nodes and decision points in the planning and
                           preparation process, where reviews and opinions / clearances from environmental agencies and
                           regulators are required by law, and ensure that studies, assessments, instruments would be used to
                           leverage environmental criteria into the design and operation of projects.

                           Considering time constraints and the low capacity of the Borrower the Bank team will request the
                           deferral of the preparation of the safeguards instruments into the project implementation phase.when
                           more resources and time will be available for the Borrower to comply with the Bank’s environmental
                           and social requirements.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Abdoul Wahabi Seini (AFTSG)
                           Wolfhart Pohl (AFTSG)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Several environmental and social safeguards
                           BP 4.01                                               instruments (e.g. ESIAs, EMPs) will be
                                                                                 prepared during project implementation, once
                                                                                 sites and works are finalized. Impacts range
                                                                                 from moderate to substantial, but they can be
                                                                                 mitigated through comprehensive environmental
                                                                                 and social management plans.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               The project will not affect natural habitats.

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No               The project does not affect or involve forests.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           TBD                           The project may involve pest management
                                                                                                                                 measures for the landfill sites. This will be
                                                                                                                                 determined at appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   Yes                           The project will affect and involve at least one
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         cultural site, which will be refurbished through
                                                                                                                                 the project. The ESIA/ESMP will include
                                                                                                                                 measures for managing impacts. Other sites and
                                                                                                                                 works may affect PCR, and the safeguards
                                                                                                                                 instruments will include mitigation measures.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                                                                                 area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The project may involve land acquisition
                                 4.12                                                                                            leading to involuntary resettlement and/or
                                                                                                                                 restrictions of access to resources or livelihoods.
                                                                                                                                 RAPs will be prepared as and when necessary
                                                                                                                                 during project implementation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project does not involve dams.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 19-Jan-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The team will request the deferral of safeguards instruments from the project preparation phase
                                      into the implementation phase, evoking the special considerations for situations of urgent need of
                                      assistance and capacity constraints under paragraph 11 of OP10.00. In lieu of safeguards
                                      instruments the team will, in accordance with the Guidance Note on Investment Project Financing
                                      Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints” (August 2013) prepare a
                                      safeguards action plan before project appraisal. This action plan will address applicable
                                      environmental and social policies during project preparation individually for each territorial entity
                                      and component, and will be annexed to the PAD.

                                      During the first phase of project implementation draft TOR for the proposed safeguards
                                      instruments will be prepared by the Recipient and submitted for review by the Bank. Once cleared,
                                      the consultancy will be tendered and a firm selected to carry out the required assessments and
                                      produce the respective reports and instruments for all project locations. The duration of the
                                      assignment until delivery of finalized, consulted instruments is expected to be 4-6 months. No
                                      actual physical works or footprints occur during the project implementation phase, before the
                                      required safeguards instruments have been duly finalized.
                         IV. APPROVALS




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Roland White

                         Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)    Date: 20-Jun-2014
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Rosemary Mukami Kariuki (SM)   Date: 23-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
