                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                      Report No.: ISDSA1113

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Jan-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Honduras                          Project ID:    P152266
                                                        Parent         P115592
                                                        Project ID:
   Project Name:      HN AF Social Protection (P152266)
   Parent Project     Social Protection (P115592)
   Name:
   Task Team          Pablo Ariel Acosta
   Leader(s):
   Estimated          23-Jan-2015                       Estimated   31-Mar-2015
   Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
   Managing Unit:     GSPDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                        Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Public administration- Other social services (22%), Other social services (78%)
   Theme(s):         Social safety nets (100%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:          25.00               Total Bank Financing:         25.00
   Financing Gap:                0.00
     Financing Source                                                                        Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                               25.00
     Total                                                                                     25.00
   Environmental C - Not Required
   Category:
   Is this a          No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)



                                              Page 1 of 7
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The Project'sdevelopment objectives are to (a) strengthen the institutional capacity of the MoP
   and PRAF to administer and manage the Bono 10.000 Program (the "Program"), through the
   development of transparent mechanisms and instruments for targeting Program beneficiaries,
   monitoring compliance with Program co-responsibilities, and making payments to Program
   beneficiaries; and (b) increase: (i) school attendance among students in grades 1 to 6; and (ii) the
   use of preventive health services among families participating inthe Program.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The objectives of the Project are to: (a) improve the institutional capacity of Recipient’s
   institutions to manage the ConditionalCash Transfer (CCT) Program, by strengthening transparent
   mechanisms and instruments for targeting Program beneficiaries, monitoring compliance with
   Program co-responsibilities, and making payments to Program beneficiaries; (b) provide income
   support to Eligible Beneficiaries; (c) increase the use of preventive health services and school
   attendance in grades 1 to 6 among Program beneficiariesin rural areas; and (d) improve the
   Recipient’s capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an Eligible Emergency.
   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   The proposed revised PDO is to: (a) improve the institutional capacity of Recipient’s institutions
   to manage the CCT Program, by strengthening transparent mechanisms and instruments for
   targeting Program beneficiaries, monitoring compliance with Program co-responsibilities, and
   making payments to Program beneficiaries; (b) provide income support to eligible beneficiaries;
   (c) increase the use of preventive health services and school attendance in grades 1 to 9 among
   Program beneficiaries in rural areas; and (d) improve the Recipient’s capacity to respond
   promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency.
3. Project Description
The proposed AF would be in the amount of SDR17.5 million (approximately US$25 million), and
would follow the same structure of components and activities as the parent Project, with exception of
Subcomponent 1.1 that would not receive additional funds, since the Secretary of Presidency no
longer plays a role in the Program:

a) Component 1 (increased by SDR2.7 million, about US$3.9 million): The allocation of this
component will be increased to include new activities related to strengthening the Program’s
operation in the Secretary of Development and Social Inclusion SEDIS, including finalization of the
MIS upgrading including the grievance and complaints module; improved beneficiary support at the
local level; a new communication campaign for awareness of changes in Program rules, benefits, and
eligibility criteria, rights and responsibilities, and payment methods; a new social audit; and the
activities agreed under the Indigenous and Afro-Hondurans Peoples Plan (IAPP). This revised
component will also finance the data collection process to update information of existing
beneficiaries (already covered in the parent Project, but now expanded to cover additional areas), and
register new beneficiaries in areas not previously covered by the Program. These areas include those:
(a) with high extreme poverty, as identified by the latest poverty map from the National Statistical
Institute (INE); (b) remote areas with a high incidence of indigenous population; and (c) areas prone
to severe draught, such as Corredor Seco; and (d) areas with high incidence of migration (in response
to the surge in 2014 of undocumented and unaccompanied child migrants into the US). It will also
finance the piloting and evaluation of card or account based and electronic payment mechanisms and
use of non-bank agents in the delivery, as well as support for the full redesign of the payment
mechanisms. It will also comprise the designing and implementation of modules for financial


                                              Page 2 of 7
literacy, and options for linking Program beneficiaries to existing productive inclusion interventions
in their communities. Finally, it will support the continuous upgrading of the information technology
platform of Unique Registry of Participants (RUP) of social programs and its linkages with existing
social programs.

b) Component 2 (increased by SDR14.8 million, about US$ 21.1 million): The allocation for this
component will be increased to extend financing of cash transfers until end of 2016, in current
Project areas (rural areas in Atlántida, Colon, Copan, and Cortes Departments), and in newly
expanded Program areas, as well as financial commissions.


c)      Component 3. Immediate Response Mechanism (SDR 0; US$ 0): The component which will
continue to have a zero allocation, only to be activated in the event of an eligible disaster.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project is national in scope, though only finances transfers in rural areas. The AF will expand
Project activities to areas that are prone to drought.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (GSURR)

 6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment No                 The proposed AF Project does not finance any civil
 OP/BP 4.01                                  works or other investments that have environmental
                                             implications. The operation therefore is rated as an
                                             environmental risk category C, and no environmental
                                             safeguard instrument is required.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP       No             The proposed AF Project will not finance any activities
 4.04                                        which affect natural habitats.
 Forests OP/BP 4.36           No             The proposed AF Project will not finance any activity
                                             which affects the use, management or status of any
                                             forest areas.
 Pest Management OP 4.09      No             The proposed AF Project will not finance any activities
                                             which require the use or procurement of pesticides.
 Physical Cultural Resources No              The proposed AF Project will not finance any activities
 OP/BP 4.11                                  which could affect physical or cultural resources as
                                             defined under the policy.
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP Yes                Given the presence of indigenous peoples in the Project
 4.10                                        area, the Project triggers the Indigenous Peoples
                                             safeguards (OP/BP 4.10). In May 2010, an Indigenous
                                             and Afro-Honduran Peoples Plan (IAPP) was prepared
                                             by the Recipient to seek broad community support for
                                             the Project, and to ensure the services rendered by the
                                             Project fully respect the dignity, human rights, and
                                             culture of indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples. This
                                             IAPP was revised in December 2010 together with



                                             Page 3 of 7
                                representatives of 9 ethnic groups represented at the
                                Intercultural Bilingual Education Program
                                (PRONEEAAH) at the Secretary of Education. The
                                revised IAPP was published in Honduras and the World
                                Bank Infoshop.

                                For the Additional Financing, the above IAPP was
                                updated to reflect new institutional arrangements in the
                                Program (as per the revised Operational Rules, the new
                                Program implementing agency is the Secretary of
                                Development and Social Inclusion, SEDIS) and the
                                expansion of coverage in remote areas with high
                                presence of indigenous population (e.g., Gracias a Dios
                                Department) where approximately 90 percent are
                                Miskitos, and the remainder population is: Pech,
                                Tahwaka, Garifuna, English-speaking Black, and
                                mestizos. The revised IAPP was publicly disclosed in
                                Honduras on December 11, 2014 through SEDIS
                                website, and in the Bank’s InfoShop on December 30,
                                2014.

                                For the Additional Financing operation, the Protocol for
                                Entering Ethnic communities and Implementing the
                                Bono Vida Mejor Program in those communities,
                                previously approved by the Government in 2010 is
                                being revised and should be approved by Government
                                prior to implementation The inclusion of the ethnicity
                                variable in the information systems (previously done)
                                and RUP has been key for the disaggregation of data
                                regarding coverage of ethnic groups by the Program and
                                it will continue to be maintained in the systems and
                                Registration forms. Previous coordination with the
                                Programs dealing with the Indigenous and Afro-
                                Honduran peoples at the Secretaries of Education
                                (presently DIGEIM – Directorate of Intercultural
                                Multilingual Education) and Health (presently Office of
                                Intercultural Health) resumed at the end of 2014.

                                Given that the implementation of the IAPP has been
                                only intermittently implemented in the past 10 months,
                                the social safeguards rating is downgraded to
                                Moderately Satisfactory (MS).
Involuntary Resettlement   No   The proposed AF Project will not finance any activities
OP/BP 4.12                      requiring the acquisition of land or involuntary
                                resettlement.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No    The proposed AF Project will not finance any dams nor
                                will any activity of the project rely on the performance


                                Page 4 of 7
                                                of an existing dam.

   Projects on International     No             The proposed AF Project will not finance activities
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                         which affect international waterways as defined under
                                                the policy.
   Projects in Disputed Areas    No             No Project activities are located in Disputed Areas as
   OP/BP 7.60                                   defined under the policy.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     OP 4.10 in Indigenous Peoples is triggered, since many of the proposed Project's beneficiaries
     self-identify as indigenous or afro-Honduran.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     The Project is expected to have positive impact on the Indigenous and Afro-Honduran
     participants, as it will allow them to go to school and have the health controls needed to be eligible
     for the CCT. The Program is targeted to households in extreme poverty, particularly to children 0
     to 18 years of age, pregnant and lactating women. It is expected that the majority of Indigenous
     and Afro-Honduran peoples with those characteristics will be potential beneficiaries of the
     program. The IAPP has been designed to ensure access of Indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples
     to the benefits of the Program.
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.
     Not relevant as this AF will continue activities identified under the parent project.
   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
     assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     The following measures have been taken by the borrower:
     1.       The Ethnic “variables” have been included in the Information system and the registration
     forms, to ensure all eligible Indigenous and Afro-Honduran peoples are included.
     2.       A Protocol for entering ethnic communities and for implementation of the Program in
     ethnic communities (approved under the previous Government) will be revised for implementation
     given recent Program changes.
     3.       Inter-institutional coordination is being formalized between SEDIS and the Secretaries of
     Education (Directorate of Intercultural Multilingual Education- DIGEIM), Health (Office of
     Intercultural Health), National Registration of Persons (RUP), the National Directorate of
     Indigenous and Afro-Honduran Peoples (DINAFROH), and the Indigenous Federations for the
     implementation of the Program with Indigenous and Afro-Honduran families.
     4.       Socialization Workshops of the Bono Vida Mejor with the institutional partners mentioned
     above is included in the IAPP.
     5.       A culturally and linguistically-adequate communication strategy will be implemented for
     the program.
     6.       An Indigenous and Afro-Honduran Peoples Roundtable is being planned, to include all the
     federations’ representatives in key decisions regarding the Program. The Committee will be
     chaired by the Vice-Minister of SEDIS.


                                                Page 5 of 7
  7.      A Grievance and Redress Mechanism consistent with the Operational Norms, is part of the
  Protocol mentioned above.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Key stakeholders are:

  The Secretary of Development and Social Inclusion (SEDIS), the Directorate of Intercultural
  Multilingual Education (DIGEIM), the Office of Intercultural Health, the National Information
  Center for Social Sectors (CENISS), the National Directorate of Indigenous and Afro-Honduran
  Peoples (DINAFROH), and the Indigenous Federations.

  The original IAPP of 2010 was consulted with 12 Indigenous Federations representing the Lencas,
  Chortí, Tolupán, Garífuna, Miskitu, Negros de Habla Inglesa, Pech, Nahoas and Tawahkas. The
  revised IAPP was consulted with representatives of 8 ethnic groups at the DINAFROH on
  December 12, 2014, and with the representatives of 9 ethnic groups representing the Indigenous
  Federations at the DIGEIM (Secretary of Education) on the same date but in a different Assembly.

  Permanent Consultations: Consultations with representatives of the Ethnic Federations will be
  done through the Indigenous and Afro-Honduran Peoples Roundtable. At the personal level of the
  beneficiaries, the first consultation takes place at registration in the Program, through the
  Socioeconomic survey. At the community level, the first Informed Consultation takes place
  through the first Assembly, where the community is consulted about their living conditions, access
  to education and health facilities, etc. A Committee gets established to represent the community.

  The Committee is responsible at the local level to receive the existing grievances about the
  Program, and to report those to the accompanying promoters.
B. Disclosure Requirements
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      11-Dec-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   30-Dec-2014
"In country" Disclosure
  Honduras                                                         11-Dec-2014
  Comments: First date of disclosure
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
N/A
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework         Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [   ]
 (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
 Indigenous Peoples?



                                            Page 6 of 7
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Practice Manager review the plan?
    If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
    Development Unit or Practice Manager?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Pablo Ariel Acosta
   Approved By
   Practice Manager/    Name: Margaret Ellen Grosh (PMGR)                      Date: 20-Jan-2015
   Manager:




                                               Page 7 of 7
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
