                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                        Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSR1064
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Pakistan                                     Project ID:           P126833
                            Project Name:     FATA Rural Livelihoods and Community Infrastructure Project (RLCIP)
                                              (P126833)
                            Task Team         Kamran Akbar
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                                      Estimated   30-Apr-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                                Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GFADR                                           Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                           Instrument:
                            Sector:           General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%), Sub-national
                                              government administration (20%), Other social services (20 %), Irrigation and
                                              drainage (20%)
                            Theme:            Participation and civic engagement (50%), Conflict prevention and post-conflict
                                              reconstruction (20%), Rural services and infrastruct ure (20%), Other rural
                                              development (10%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        12.00           Total Bank Financing:                                           0.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                 Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                             0.00
                              MDTF for Crisi Affected Areas of NWFP/FATA/Balochistan                                              12.00
                              Total                                                                                               12.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives

                                                                                Page 1 of 7
                          3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Proposed changes. Component A: Community Development And Social Organization: Sub
                         Component A1: Social Mobilization. This sub-component in revised form would include
                         consultations with local communities for village mapping with development needs in general that can
                         be supported through the project. Further, as noted in MTR, consultations with beneficiaries have
                         revealed that they have started establishing trust in the State of Pakistan, though with a concern of
                         reverting to old system after closure of the project. RLCIP’s original mandate restricts it to SOs 2&3
                         of the PCNA , however it is giving an indirect benefit in reference to SO-1 as well. Post
                         restructuring, social mobilization strategy will be cognizant of SO-1 and thus will be adjusted
                         accordingly whereas at some stage its contribution to SO4 will also be analyzed.
                         Component B: Community Infrastructure And Services: This component will continue to focus on
                         community physical infrastructure prioritized by the communities through their organizations. Post
                         restructuring, two or more communities may pool up resources, if they desire so, for larger/ clustered
                         infrastructure projects.
                         Component C-Livelihoods Support: The project design provides for livelihood development through
                         agriculture and livestock only. FATA RLCIP Operational Manual, while quoting various sources
                         informs, “Approximately, 24.4% of the employed population of FATA works outside the country,
                         29.5 % in other provinces and 10.3% in other districts of KP… Land use data from 2003-04 shows
                         that 7% of the total geographic area of FATA is cultivated and more than 82% of the land is not
                         available for cultivation”.
                         During MTR consultation process, the beneficiaries from all the three agencies were of the view that
                         80% of the working age bracket (15-64 years) FATA residents work outside FATA. Implications are
                         that FATA has largely remittances based economy with subsistence level agriculture. Even if the
                         country’s overall dependency ratio of 61.8% is applied to FATA, need for diversified income
                         enhancements and livelihood improvement becomes conspicuous, especially when over 51 %
                         population falls in age bracket of 0-24 years.
                         It is proposed to open up the livelihood menu so that the project undertakes context based
Public Disclosure Copy




                         interventions for livelihood development which may include: skills training, support for
                         apprenticeship, microenterprise development or any other intervention based on contextual needs
                         including agriculture and livestock. Post-restructuring, RLCIP’s contribution to and impact with
                         regards to SOs 1 will also be measured in short term whereas in the long-term its contribution to SO
                         4 will be gauged.
                         Inclusion of North Waziristan Agency. In pursuance of PCNA objectives, it is proposed that the
                         FATA RLCIP may start undertaking development activities including restoration of livelihoods as
                         well as rehabilitation and reconstruction in North Waziristan Agency in areas that are cleared by the
                         Pakistan Army, subject to availability of resources.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will be implemented in the crisis-affected rural areas of Federally Administered Tribal
                         Areas (FATA), a semi-autonomous tribal region in the northwest of Pakistan lying between the
                         provinces of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Baluchistan and neighboring country Afghanistan. The
                         insurgency and counter insurgency action s in 2009 led to a displacement of approximately 3 million
                         people in FATA and the neighboring Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) regions, have long-term effects on
                         their socio-economic growth, with high unemployment and large scale internal migration. The
                         situation is further exacerbated by the long-standing social inequities and sense of deprivation among
                         the masses resulting from decades of weak governance and the inadequacy of social, economic and


                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         physical infrastructure and service delivery systems. FATA region has historically remained amongst
                         the poorest and underdeveloped parts of Pakistan with over 60% of its population living below
                         national poverty line. Though livelihood of majority of people depend on subsistence agriculture and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         livestock, however, support to these sectors through infrastructure development, institutional
                         strengthening, and community participation has remained minimal. FATA also lags behind other
                         provinces across a wide range of social and economic indicators, with a lag even more pronounced
                         when viewed through a gender lens.
                         FATA region is basically a hilly terrain with dominant dry barren mountains. Figures for forest cover
                         in FATA are unreliable, ranging from 1% to 8% of the total reported area (FATA Directorate of
                         Forest, 2005) and is declining rapidly due to uncontrolled grazing and timber extraction for
                         commercial usage and fuel wo od. The inability of barren hills to retain soil and water is not only
                         causing soil erosion in the area but affecting the quality and quantity of fodder for livestock, drawing
                         down of water table, besides increasing incidences of flash floods. Quality of fresh water resources
                         is also under stress due to over exploitation and inappropriate disposal of wastes.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Salma Omar (GSURR)
                         Javaid Afzal (GENDR)
                         Mohammad Omar Khalid (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project activities under its component B and
                         BP 4.01                                               C can potentially have localized and moderately
                                                                               significant negative impacts. Hence OP 4.01 is
                                                                               triggered
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               The project schemes will be implemented within
                                                                               the communities where the natural habitat has
                                                                               long been modified.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No               Same as above. No forests are exists at or near
                                                                               the places where the schemes will be
                                                                               implemented.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09              No               The small livelihood schemes though include
                                                                               agricultural schemes are unlikely to cause any
                                                                               increased usage of agro-chemicals.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No               No PCR have been identified in the project area.
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No               No IPs exist in the area.

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No               Schemes requiring land/asset acquisition are
                         4.12                                                  excluded from the project.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No               No dams are involved in the project.

                         Projects on International        No                   No schemes are located in any international
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                  waterway.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   No disputed areas exist at or near the project
                         7.60                                                  location.


                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                a. The interventions under Components B and C could potentially cause adverse environmental
                              and social impacts triggering Bank’s environment policy OP 4.01. Most of the environmental
                              impacts are likely to occur during the rehabilitation and reconstruction of basic productive and or
                              social infrastructure and may include water and soil contamination, higher dust and noise levels,
                              health and safety hazards for the construction workers as well as nearby communities, and
                              temporary odor issues. Some of the operations related impacts are health related and may result
                              due to the inadequate source for water supply schemes, water contamination due to inadequate
                              water distribution system, and localized water logging due to poorly maintained irrigation
                              channels. Most of these impacts are expected to be temporary and confined to local environment
                              and would be direct, reversible and of short duration. RLCIP has therefore been rated as
                              Environment Category B project.
                              b.       The project restructuring does not involve any significant changes in the Components B
                              and C hence the potentially negative impacts and environmental category of the project remain the
                              same.
                              c.       There are no indigenous people residing in the project area so none of the Bank’s social
                              safeguard policies will trigger. All land acquisition for community infrastructure and livelihood
                              schemes is acquired through voluntary land donation (VLD). The procedures for these have been
                              finalized in detail and the Project is currently implementing them. VLD procedures have been
                              designed in accordance with Bank guidance and ensure that there are no impacts on the poor or
                              marginalized groups and are truly voluntary in nature. These procedures will continue for North
                              Waziristan and Frontier Regions. However, given the large scale displacement of people from
                              North Waziristan and the resultant hardship that people have faced due to the security situation, it
                              is important that the Project does not exacerbate poverty through land donation. The Project will
Public Disclosure Copy




                              also use third part validation of VLD to ensure that project interventions are truly voluntary in
                              nature and do not place additional burden on impoverished and relocated communities.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                No indirect or long term adverse environmental impacts are expected to be associated with the
                              project interventions, primarily because of the extent and nature of the small infrastructure
                              schemes being undertaken under the project. On the other hand, the social and productive
                              infrastructure schemes will have long lasting positive impacts on the beneficiary communities.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                a.     The only other alternative is ‘no-project’ option, which could have detrimental effects by
                              denying basic services to the rural population of the project areas. In addition the restoration of
                              such services is linked with enhancing confidence of the local populace in the State and will
                              contribute towards peace building efforts. The ‘no-project’ alternative would though avoid the
                              insignificant, minor and temporary adverse environmental impacts associated with the
                              rehabilitation, expansion and/or up-gradation and construction of the community infrastructure and
                              services; however, would also result in continued environmental degradation; health hazards for
                              the population associated with non- or poorly-functioning services such as water supply and waste
                              management; and less opportunities for livelihood strengthening.


                                                                        Page 4 of 7
                           b.       At preliminary stage of every sub-project technical design, different design options will be
                           considered to avoid resettlement impacts and minimize other social and environment impacts.
                           However, all identified and selected sub-projects will be subject to environmental and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (including resettlement) impact screening in accordance with the ESIA and detailed procedures for
                           these will be included in the project’s Operations Manual. The PMU, line directorates and local
                           community groups in consultation with tribal elders/Jirga and Political Administration will be
                           responsible for following the procedures described in the Operations Manual, in a transparent
                           manner without duress. Those sites will be selected which involve minimum loss of productive
                           land and other resources from the construction and operations of infrastructure.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             a.     The original project was processed as an Emergency Operation under OP 8.0 and was
                           guided by the overall Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF)
                           prepared for all projects under MDTF. The ESSAF defined the environmental and social impact
                           assessment requirements, the planning approach and requirements for assessing and mitigating
                           adverse environmental and social impacts. In pursuance of the ESSAF requirements, the project
                           conducted an environmental and social assessment (ESA). The ESA that included an ESMP also
                           identifies potentially negative environmental impacts associated with the activities under
                           Components B and C of the RLCIP and proposes appropriate mitigation measures to mitigate if
                           not totally eliminate these impacts. The ESA also describes institutional arrangements for
                           safeguards management, monitoring mechanism, training needs, and reporting protocols – in order
                           to ensure that the mitigation measures identified in the ESA are adequately implemented and
                           documented/reported.
                           b.       The borrower has limited prior experience of safeguard implementation therefore the ESA
                           prepared for the project includes capacity building and trainings to be conducted for the PMU as
                           well as district staff. Close monitoring and oversight by the Bank’s safeguard team is also
                           essentially needed to ensure satisfactory safeguard compliance.
                           c.       To address the proposed inclusion of the North Waziristan Agency in the project area, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           PMU will prepare a brief Addendum to the existing ESA (including ESMP) and obtain clearance
                           from the Bank, before any physical interventions can be initiated in the new area. The Addendum
                           will also include lessons learned so far with respect to ESMP implementation. Since the Project
                           will extend its activities into an area that has one of the largest displaced people in FATA,
                           safeguard procedures will be carefully reviewed to ensure their alignment with the local social
                           conditions.
                           d.       Current status of ESA implementation. The ESA is under implementation for the original
                           project and the safeguard performance is moderately satisfactory, as identified during MTR as
                           well. The institutional setup for safeguard implementation is in place and a fulltime safeguard
                           specialist exists in PMU. Through this specialist, the PMU is preparing mitigation checklists
                           before implementing the infrastructure schemes under Components B and C, as required by the
                           ESA; the PMU is also carrying out safeguard monitoring of the under-implementation schemes;
                           and the PMU is preparing ESMP QPRs as per the formats provided by the Bank’s safeguard team
                           for this purpose. The PMU needs to ensure that the mitigation checklists filled before
                           implementing the schemes are included in the construction contracts.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             a.     Despite the fact that the project is a low-risk category B project, the client has been
                           undertaking public consultations to assess the perceived environmental and social risks associated
                           with the project and to suggest and recommend grievance redressal mechanism. Stakeholders of

                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                           this project involve Directorate of Projects-FATA Secretariat, line directorates, political
                           administration, beneficiary population, local/indigenous structures including agency development
                           councils, peace (aman) committees, tribal elder (Maliks), Jirga (council of elders), existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                           community organizations, and other formally or informally organized community groups. The
                           Directorate of Projects has established the Project Management Unit (PMU) which will ensure that
                           all relevant stakeholders are fully informed of ESSAF, ESA and the World Bank Safeguard Policy
                           requirements. Consultations will be mainstreamed in the preparation of new sub-projects under
                           this project. Before the preliminary technical design of each sub-project, the IA and line agencies
                           will consult the potentially affected groups on the potential environmental and social issues, and
                           will take their views into account. The IA will initiate these consultations right after the
                           identification of sub-projects. For the initial consultation, the IAs will provide a summary of the
                           proposed sub-project's objectives, description, and potential impacts.
                           b.       The ESSAF has been shared with the FATA Secretariat and Directorate of Projects. It has
                           been disclosed locally by the FATA Secretariat on December 15, 2010 on its website and also will
                           be disclosed at the project specific InfoShop after the decision meeting. The project-specific ESA
                           will also be disclosed locally and copies will also be sent to InfoShop for its disclosure. The
                           executive summary of ESA has been disclosed in Urdu and English to the general public and
                           locally to project beneficiary communities, local organizations and shared with all relevant
                           agencies, line directorates, and made available at the websites of FATA Secretariat.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      13-Dec-2010
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Dec-2010
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      10-Jan-2011
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Pakistan                                                         15-Dec-2010
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?

                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Kamran Akbar
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                       Date: 14-Nov-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Practice Manager/   Name:                                                Date:
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
