                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA9228
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Feb-2014, 02-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Panama                            Project ID:    P145621
                            Project Name:     Sustainable Production Systems and Conservation of Biodiversity (P145621)
                            Task Team         Teresa M. Roncal
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         31-Mar-2014                       Estimated   24-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    LCSAR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              Biodiversity
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%), Public administration-
                                              Agriculture, fishing and forestry (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Biodiversity (40%), Rural non-farm income generation (20%), Micro, Small and
                                              Medium Enterprise support (20%), Participation and civi c engagement (10%),
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              Decentralization (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      28.97           Total Bank Financing:                0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                10.16
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                        9.59
                              Municipalities of Borrowing Country                                                      0.09
                              LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                                      0.63
                              Foreign Private Commercial Sources (identified)                                          8.50
                              Total                                                                                   28.97
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:




                                                                     Page 1 of 12
                         Is this a           No
                         Repeater
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project?

                         2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                         The proposed global environmental objective is to conserve globally significant biodiversity through
                         improved management effectiveness of the project protected areas and biodiversity mainstreaming in
                         their buffer zones.
                         3. Project Description
                         The project would be organized into four components:
                         Component 1 - Sustainable Management of Protected Areas (US$15.16 million, GEF financing US
                         $4.68 million). The objective of this component is to improve the management effectiveness and
                         long-term sustainability of selected protected areas with a focus on financial sustainability and the
                         monitoring of biodiversity in the selected PAs. This goal will rest on three interdependent pillars:
                         (a)      Alliances for participatory management. The proposed project would support ANAM in
                         carrying out of activities to facilitate and promote concessions and co-management with NGOs,
                         municipalities, traditional authorities and other entities, for the administration of PAs. It would also
                         support carrying out of a study of a system of payment for environmental services (PES), including a
                         review of relevant regional experiences of implementation of such a system.
                         (b)      Identification of a baseline of the existing biodiversity information of project PAs, and
                         monitoring of variations in the biological situation of such areas annually to make available reliable
                         scientific information for decision-making and for substantiating financing from partners and
                         sponsors. As part of the support to the SNIMDB, biological information will be collected for at least
                         eight PAs.
                         (c)      Endowment fund. Establishment and operation of a unified mechanism for the financing of
                         the implementation of Operational Plans of PAs (the endowment fund) in the first year of the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Once the endowment fund is established and meets all national and WB requirements, $1.5 million
                         from the GEF will be allocated as a start-up endowment. The GOP and a private sector company
                         have also committed funds for the start-up of $2.0 million and 1.5 million. Other groups, including
                         donors, NGOs, and the private sector, have also expressed strong interest in contributing to the
                         endowment. The initial capital will total $5.0 million. It is expected in the long run that financial
                         returns of the endowment fund would be used for activities of the PA operations plans, reducing the
                         financing gap, as well as for the administration cost of the endowment fund. The design and
                         operating arrangements of the endowment fund are being informed by best practices from GEF and
                         from within and outside the Bank to provide transparency, maximize synergies, and improve social
                         and financial accountability.

                         Component 2 - Biodiversity and Sustainable Productive Landscapes (US$6.81 million, GEF
                         financing US$3.25 million). This component focuses on activities to mainstream biodiversity and
                         sustainable production landscapes in production areas in the buffer zones of selected PAs. It focuses
                         on three areas of intervention:
                         (a)     Biodiversity-friendly production systems. Provision of sub-grants to beneficiary CBOs
                         operating in the buffer zones for the carrying out of activities to scale up their operations and
                         implement biodiversity-friendly and climate-smart production and management practices with a
                         focus on gaining or increasing access to markets for their products so that biodiversity-friendly
                         practices become economically sustainable. Subprojects to be developed may include adoption of


                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                         practices for biodiversity-friendly and climate-smart production in agro-forestry and nature-tourism
                         activities. Participation of local communities and citizen engagement and inter-sector alliances will
                         be promoted from the beginning. A detailed list of potential activities is incorporated in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subproject chapter of the Operational Manual. Subproject grants would range from US$50,000 to
                         100,000 for which producer organizations, communities and municipalities will contribute at least 10
                         percent (in cash or in kind) of total subproject cost.
                         (b)      Strengthening of CBOs. Development and implementation of a capacity building and
                         training strategy to strengthen the technical and business management skills of CBOs, including
                         customized training to indigenous communities in their native languages.
                         (c)      Municipal environmental subprojects. Provision of sub-grants to municipalities for priority
                         activities identified in environmental municipal plans developed under CBMAP II.

                         Component 3 - Knowledge Management and Communications (US$5.17 million, GEF financing US
                         $1.19 million). Development and implementation of a communication and outreach strategy for
                         dissemination of information on the project and promotion of partnerships for the management of
                         PAs; an awareness and fundraising campaign for the endowment fund; and an educational campaign
                         addressed to consumers on biodiversity-friendly products and the economic value of biodiversity. It
                         will focus on the following three areas of intervention:
                         (a)      Knowledge management. Activities include (i) capacity-building activities with key project
                         stakeholders of both genders on good practices and knowledge management at local and regional
                         levels to support biodiversity mainstreaming and develop ownership for the realization of long-term
                         goals and sustainability; (ii) promotion of citizen engagement to ensure effective conservation (iii)
                         on-the-ground training and professional certification of park guards by qualified universities; (iv)
                         strengthening ANAM’s capacity to carry out environmental economic analysis as needed to inform
                         decision and policy makers in Panama of the economic value of biodiversity; (v) dissemination of
                         information and promotion of PAs biodiversity; and (vi) carrying out of a communications and
                         fundraising strategy for the endowment fund.
                         (b)      South-South cooperation and promotion of partnerships. Implementation of a regional
                         program for training and technology transfer related to sustainable production in coordination with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the National Commission for the Knowledge and Use of Biodiversity (CONABIO) in Mexico, the
                         development of biodiversity standards and/or market labels, and certification of biodiversity-friendly
                         products and sharing of experiences on private reserves and the connectivity of biological corridors.
                         Actions will be oriented to have an impact on capacity building in Panama.
                         (c)      Strategic communication and outreach. Development and implementation of
                         communications and educational campaigns to raise awareness among citizens, businesses, and
                         producers to influence production and consumption of bio-labeled goods and to promote fundraising
                         and contributions from private companies, donors, government agencies and citizens.
                         Communications and sharing knowledge through networks and communities is perceived as a
                         catalyst for change across the NPAS.

                         Component 4 - Project Management (US$1.83 million, GEF financing US$0.47 million). TThis
                         component will strengthen ANAM’s capacity for project implementation by supporting the technical
                         and administrative coordination of the project. Consulting services, office equipment, and operational
                         costs for activities to be undertaken by the Project Implementing Unit (PIU) for project management
                         and supervision will be financed.

                         The project implementation period will be five years. The Recipient will be the Republic of Panama
                         represented by the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF), and the implementing agency will be
                         ANAM, in particular the Department of Protected Areas and Wildlife (DAPVS), in charge of the

                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                         NPAS.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project will be implemented in twelve protected areas (PA) and respective buffer zones
                         geographically located in the Atlantic and central-eastern part of the country within the Panamanian
                         MBC. Ten of these twelve PAs correspond to the ones that have been supported under the CBMAP
                         II, and two are new. Project activities will take place in seven provinces: Bocas del Toro, Coclé,
                         Colón, Chiriquí, Los Santos, Panamá and Veraguas; two comarcas: Guna Yala and Ngäbe-Buglé;
                         and two indigenous peoples territories: Bribri and Naso-Teribe. Environmental and socio-economic
                         criteria were applied in targeting these areas.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Mary Lisbeth Gonzalez (LCSSO)
                         Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (LCSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes            The proposed project is expected to generate
                          BP 4.01                                           overall positive environmental impacts given its
                                                                            objective to mainstream biodiversity management
                                                                            into commercially viable production systems in
                                                                            buffer zones and to promote participatory
                                                                            management of Panama’s protectedareas. OP/BP
                                                                            4.01 is triggered and the project has been
                                                                            categorized as B, requiring a partial assessment
                                                                            considering the social and Environmental context
                                                                            of the interventions. As specific sites and exact
                                                                            activities are not known at this stage, an
                                                                            environmental and social management framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            (ESMF) was prepared to screen, assess, and
                                                                            mitigate environmental impacts related to
                                                                            proposed subprojects that may involve
                                                                            investments in productive activities and
                                                                            construction or rehabilitation of small
                                                                            infrastructure. The ESMF outlines the process to
                                                                            prepare the necessary Environmental and social
                                                                            safeguards instruments for each investment
                                                                            activity that may be required to mitigate and
                                                                            manage potential environmental impacts. The
                                                                            ESMF also provides specific guidelines to avoid
                                                                            or minimize risks and manage potential
                                                                            environmental impacts. Any subprojects
                                                                            considered as Category A will not be eligible for
                                                                            funding by the project.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        Yes            The proposed project is on protected areas,
                                                                            including their buffer zones or influence areas,
                                                                            which are all important critical natural habitats
                                                                            within high priority ecosystems in Panama.


                                                                    Page 4 of 12
                                                                         The project activities will promote
                                                                         environmentally sound agricultural practices in
                                                                         protected areas, which may include payment for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         environmental services, and other innovative
                                                                         ideas to protect environmentally sensitive
                                                                         habitats. Human activity in the buffer zones
                                                                         induced by the project may indirectly impact
                                                                         natural habitats. But the project will not finance
                                                                         any activity that could potentially cause
                                                                         significant conversion or degradation of natural
                                                                         habitats.
                                                                         The ESMF outlines the procedures and
                                                                         mechanisms for screening out activities that may
                                                                         cause degradation or contemplate any significant
                                                                         conversion of natural habitats. The ESMF also
                                                                         includes criteria and procedures to avoid and
                                                                         minimize these risks and manage potential
                                                                         negative impacts on natural habitat.
                                                                         The ESMF includes provisions to assess possible
                                                                         impacts prior to any actions being undertaken on
                                                                         the ground. Monitoring activities will be
                                                                         established during implementation to ensure that
                                                                         critical natural habitats are not adversely affected.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes           The proposed project will be developed in natural
                                                                         forest areas of importance for biodiversity. Yet it
                                                                         is too early to know at this stage whether
                                                                         interventions could affect the rights and welfare
                                                                         of people dependent on forests and if this would
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         bring changes in the management, protection, and
                                                                         utilization of natural forests. OP/BP 4.36 is
                                                                         triggered as a precautionary measure, and also to
                                                                         improve forest conservation.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           The work on a production system may involve
                                                                         pest management and the use of agro-chemicals
                                                                         in subproject activities. The ESMF includes
                                                                         screening procedures for pest management and
                                                                         pesticide use. A Pest Management Plan will be
                                                                         prepared for subprojects likely to procure
                                                                         pesticides or envisage changes in pest
                                                                         management practices. The ESMF adequately
                                                                         describes the risks associated with pesticide use
                                                                         and the proposed measures for managing these
                                                                         risks.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The policy on Physical Cultural Resources (OP
                         BP 4.11                                         4.11) applies given the uncertainty regarding the
                                                                         exact locations of activities to be carried out
                                                                         under the project. Some forests or landscapes


                                                                 Page 5 of 12
                                                                       concerned by the project might be considered to
                                                                       have historical or cultural significance such as
                                                                       spirit forests, sacred valleys or other features of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       the natural landscape. The ESMF includes
                                                                       specific provisions to assess the potential impacts
                                                                       on forests, sacred valleys or landscapes
                                                                       considered to have historical or cultural
                                                                       significance prior to any activities being
                                                                       undertaken on the ground. The ESMF also
                                                                       includes provisions for the treatment of physical
                                                                       cultural resources that may be discovered during
                                                                       project implementation (chance finds).
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10   Yes           A Social Assessment (SA) was carried out and
                                                                       will be updated during the life of the Project to
                                                                       gather the cultural characteristics and socio-
                                                                       economic profile of the wide-range of
                                                                       stakeholders. The objective was to help design
                                                                       and implement differentiated mechanisms and
                                                                       services to meet the specific characteristics of
                                                                       different local contexts and beneficiaries by
                                                                       ethnic and socioeconomic groups. Grievance
                                                                       redress mechanism and conflict resolution
                                                                       strategies were included.

                                                                       An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) was prepared
                                                                       to ensure that indigenous peoples are informed
                                                                       and consulted and their participation is
                                                                       encouraged and promoted during the life of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       project. The project builds upon the experience of
                                                                       CBMAP-II. It continued working with indigenous
                                                                       authorities to ensure that Congress and
                                                                       governance structures are respected, consulted
                                                                       and have the opportunity to actively participate in
                                                                       the decision-making process that might concern
                                                                       or affect their interests. Action Plan details
                                                                       activities to ensure that IP of both genders will
                                                                       have access to the economic benefits of the
                                                                       Project. This operation promoted culturally
                                                                       adequate, free, prior, and informed consultations
                                                                       with indigenous peoples.

                                                                       The CBMAP-II has successfully engaged
                                                                       indigenous peoples Congresses and authorities in
                                                                       the identification, preparation and implementation
                                                                       of subprojects, with their broad participation in
                                                                       biodiversity conservation. The Project build up on
                                                                       the lessons learned from CBMAP-II and other



                                                               Page 6 of 12
                                                                        projects to improve indigenous peoples’
                                                                        participation and it also improved the consultation
                                                                        mechanisms to obtain broad community support.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        Based on the experience of the previous projects,
                                                                        this operation will have a detailed communication
                                                                        strategy to ensure that indigenous peoples, mainly
                                                                        those who are monolingual are well-informed and
                                                                        consulted about the objectives and activities of
                                                                        the project, and benefit from its development
                                                                        objective. The ultimate objective of the
                                                                        communication strategy is to ensure indigenous
                                                                        peoples and stakeholders engagement project took
                                                                        into account the following principles: (a) cultural
                                                                        heritage and identity as assets; (b) free, prior and
                                                                        informed consultation and participation process;
                                                                        (c) community-driven development; (d) land
                                                                        assessment and biodiversity conservation; (e)
                                                                        indigenous peoples’ knowledge in natural
                                                                        resources management; (f) environmental issues
                                                                        and indigenous peoples views on climate change;
                                                                        (g) access to markets; and (h) gender equality
                                                                        particularly promoting participation of women in
                                                                        subprojects, strategic alliances and in community-
                                                                        based innovation processes. This later issue will
                                                                        be supported by the preparation of an action plan,
                                                                        as part of the IPDP that will specify clear
                                                                        mechanisms to promote the inclusion of women
                                                                        and youth.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        The IPDP also identified specific actions to
                                                                        support and mainstream biodiversity and
                                                                        sustainable production in production units of the
                                                                        buffer zones of selected PAs seeking to balance
                                                                        peoples’ livelihood with conservation. This
                                                                        component will enable producers to implement
                                                                        management systems to improve profitability
                                                                        while addressing sustainability challenges and
                                                                        biodiversity conservation.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           A Process Framework (PF) was prepared to
                         4.12                                           ensure that procedures are in place to mitigate any
                                                                        potential restrictions in access to protected areas
                                                                        and ensure consultations with potential
                                                                        beneficiaries on resource management activities
                                                                        in and around protected areas as part of the
                                                                        management plans. The PF identified a clear
                                                                        protocol to ensure that activities supported by the
                                                                        project within indigenous territories have broad
                                                                        participation and consultation and will not incur



                                                                Page 7 of 12
                                                                               in any type of restriction of access to resources.

                                                                               One of the main lessons learned from CBMAP-II
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               is the integration of biodiversity conservation and
                                                                               livelihoods with local governance. The CBMAP-
                                                                               II worked to harmonize social issues with
                                                                               biodiversity conservation. The goal is to achieve a
                                                                               better integration of rural communities—
                                                                               including indigenous peoples and peasants—to
                                                                               harmonize people’s livelihoods, biodiversity
                                                                               conservation and local governance to develop
                                                                               more sustainable conservation practices,
                                                                               including agriculture that will facilitate access to
                                                                               markets for the producers.

                                                                               This operation is not supporting the expansion of
                                                                               protected areas or expropriation of land for
                                                                               productive projects.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No              This policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                                                               support the construction or rehabilitation of dams
                                                                               nor will it support other investments which rely
                                                                               on the services of existing dams.
                            Projects on International          No              This policy is not triggered as any subproject
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               activities that may affect International Waterways
                                                                               will not be eligible.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                This policy is not triggered as there will be no
                            7.60                                               subprojects in disputed areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed project builds on the experience and lessons learned from the CBMAP I and II.
                              This, combined with the activities under the proposed project, should have a strong overall
                              positive environmental impact and advance global biodiversity goals by (i) strengthening
                              management of Protected Areas and natural habitats and (ii) fostering environmentally sustainable
                              productive activities in rural areas that encourage preservation of natural resources. Potential
                              negative environmental impacts from productive activities and small public works are expected to
                              be minimal and are adequately addressed through a solid identification, evaluation, and mitigation
                              framework. No potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are expected.
                              Considering the minimal environmental impacts, the project was assigned a category B requiring a
                              partial assessment.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Considering the nature of the activities proposed by the project, no potential and/or indirect
                              impacts are anticipated in the project area.


                                                                       Page 8 of 12
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Since the proposed project activities relate to conservation, they should have a strong overall
Public Disclosure Copy




                           positive environmental impact and advance global biodiversity goals, no alternatives were
                           contemplated.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The preparation of safeguard-related instruments adopted a phased approach. As specific sites and
                           exact activities are not known at this stage, an environmental and social management framework
                           (ESMF as Volume 1) was prepared to screen, assess environmental and social impacts related to
                           the proposed project. The ESMF outlines the process to prepare the necessary environmental and
                           social safeguards instruments for each investment activity. An environmental management
                           framework (EMF as Volume 2) was prepared to provide specific guidelines to avoid or minimize
                           risks and to assess and manage potential environmental impacts associated with subproject
                           activities. An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP as Volume 3) was prepared to ensure that indigenous
                           peoples have been informed and consulted and their participation has been encouraged and
                           promoted during the life of the project. A Process Framework (PF as Volume 4) was prepared to
                           ensure that procedures are in place to mitigate any potential restrictions in access to protected
                           areas and ensure consultations with potential beneficiaries on resource management activities in
                           and around protected areas as part of the management plans.
                           Preparation of these instruments has been done in close collaboration with the respective Bank’s
                           specialists; have been adequately consulted, duly reviewed and cleared for disclosure.
                           ANAM, as implementing agency, has gained experience addressing social and environmental
                           safeguard issues, most recently in the Rural Productivity Project (Loan 7439-PA), which is being
                           implemented partially blended with a GEF Project for Rural Productivity and Consolidation of the
                           Atlantic Mesoamerican Biological Project (TF056628). The Project has a social specialist and an
                           environmental specialist. These projects were successful in developing organizational,
                           administrative and technical capacity in rural and indigenous communities in extreme poverty.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Both projects complied with all social and environmental safeguards policies in a satisfactory
                           manner. While the national team has a good grasp of safeguard policies and their respective
                           disciplines, there is a need for training on social and environmental issues at the various
                           implementation sites. The Bank´s respective specialists will facilitate the delivery and monitoring
                           of these training activities.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           During the process of preparing the Environmental and Social Safeguards documents, public
                           Consultation workshops were conducted with community leaders, representatives of civil society,
                           field staff of CBMAP and ANAM in the regions of Kuna Yala, Campana National Park, Azuero
                           Peninsula , Santiago , Cocle , Chiriquí, Ngöbe Buglé and Bocas del Toro. The workshops were
                           held in Rio Hato CEDESAM (Cocle ) , in the City of Santiago ( Veraguas) and the City of David
                           ( Chiriquí). Using a participatory methodology, participants assessed the current environmental
                           situation in the areas of interventions of the proposed project and the priorities of the new project
                           intervention within the framework of national environmental policies and social and
                           environmental safeguards of the World Bank.

                           In the case of the Environmental Management Framework, preparation work included extensive
                           consultations with community leaders from all geographic areas of the project, with experts in the


                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                           field of environmental conservation and sustainable development. In all consultations, participants
                           identified the lack of management capacity of local and national efforts to safeguard ecosystems
                           and the goods and services provided by authorities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        07-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     14-Jan-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Panama                                                             06-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        05-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     14-Jan-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Panama                                                             06-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        10-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     14-Jan-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Panama                                                             18-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     NA
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         N/A
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          report?


                                                                    Page 10 of 12
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?




                                                                     Page 11 of 12
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Teresa M. Roncal
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Sector Manager:        Name: Holger A. Kray (SM)                         Date: 02-Jun-2014




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
