                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA6516
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Gabon                             Project ID:    P143914
                            Project Name:     GABON - SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF CRITICAL WETLANDS
                                              ECOSYSTEMS (P143914)
                            Task Team         Salimata D. Follea
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       10-Feb-2014                         Estimated   27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTN1                                Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              Biodiversity
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Biodiversity (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          8.47                 Total Bank Financing:   0.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                0.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                       8.47
                              Total                                                                                   8.47
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The Development Objective of the proposed operation is to improve management of selected critical
                           wetlands ecosystems, through knowledge creation and capacity building of national entities.


                                                                     Page 1 of 11
                         3. Project Description
                         1.       The project is designed around five components, the collective aim of which is to help the
                         Government of Gabon implement the recommendations of the Ramsar Convention and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         resolutions of the Conference of the Parties to:
                         (a)      improve the level of knowledge of Gabon’s WII;
                         (b)      establish a system for monitoring ecological characteristics of wetland ecosystems;
                         (c)      establish the conditions necessary for managing an effective WII network in Gabon; and,
                         (d)      undertake an economic valuation of wetlands ecosystem services.

                         2.       Component 1 addresses wetland knowledge acquisition (including economic valuation), and
                         establishes a monitoring system for Gabon’s WII. Component 2 strengthens capacity for local
                         management of WII. Cmponent 3 furthers the Nagoya Protocol on Access to genetic resources and
                         the fair and equitable Sharing of Benefits arising from their utilization (ABS). Component 4
                         establishes the conditions for national level WII management and component 5 focuses on project
                         management. Summaries of these four components plus the fifth management component are
                         presented below.

                         A.      Project Components

                         Component 1: Improvement of Knowledge and Monitoring of Selected Critical Wetland Ecosystems
                         (GEF – US$0.550 million).
                         3. This component will generate knowledge on wetlands in Gabon and set up a reliable monitoring
                         system that can produce early warnings on potential alterations of wetland ecosystems. The
                         component is divided into two sub-components.

                         4. Sub-Component 1.1: Knowledge creation on wetland ecosystems. This sub-component will
                         support research work on the biological wealth and socioeconomic dimensions of Gabon’s wetland
                         ecosystems. This research will identify and quantify the multiple ecosystem services delivered by
Public Disclosure Copy




                         wetlands. The ultimate goal of this information is to help decision-makers better understand the
                         importance of wetlands and the potential trade-offs with other competing activities in the wetlands
                         (with a specific focus on forested wetlands).

                         5. Targeted research will focus on three selected Ramsar WII sites: Petit Loango/Setté-Cama, Monts
                         Birougou, and Bas Ogooué. The research program will compile existing information, and identify
                         research needed for priority issues. With guidance from the Ramsar Handbooks, a Research
                         Coordinator located in the National Directorate of Environment and Nature Protection (DGEPN) - in
                         consultation with the National Agency for National Parks (ANPN) - will prioritize and oversee
                         environmental and socioeconomic research in the selected three WII sites. Research activities,
                         conducted jointly between national and international research entities, will involve: (i) diagnostic
                         studies; (ii) economic valuation of services delivered by wetlands ecosystems; and (iii) research on
                         traditional uses of natural resources (including medicinal plants).

                         6.       Sub-Component 1.2: Monitoring system for wetland ecosystems. The objectives of this sub-
                         component are to define and operationalize the most appropriate monitoring system for ecological,
                         physicochemical, and socioeconomic characteristics of the wetlands in Gabon. The ANPN has
                         developed management plans, which include monitoring strategies, for the national park areas that
                         are close to or within this project’s selected Ramsar sites. Accordingly, this project will build on the
                         monitoring system work already done by ANPN in Petit Loango and Birougou national parks. It will


                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                         also benefit from monitoring system development work being done through the French Development
                         Agency (AFD) project in the Pongara and Akanda Ramsar sites.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         8. Component 2: Support to Sustainable Management of Selected Critical Wetland Ecosystems (GEF
                         amount – US$3.110 million). The priority under this component is to promote sustainable
                         management of critical mangrove ecosystems through the following three sub-components:

                         9. Sub-Component 2.1: Planning for sustainable management of selected sites. The situations of the
                         Ramsar sites in Gabon are quite varied in terms of legal status, geographical and hydrological
                         features, and typology of pressures. As of today, there is no management plan (or any planning tool)
                         that appropriately defines the modalities to support sustainable management of the wetland
                         ecosystems. Therefore, these tools need to be developed, but in a targeted manner to ensure that the
                         specific challenges and threats of the different wetland areas are addressed appropriately. To that
                         end, guided by the Ramsar Handbooks, and in consultation with other government agencies and
                         development partners active in the sites, this sub-component will prepare management plans for the
                         selected Ramsar sites, based on extensive consultative work in those sites, and the results of the
                         research activities undertaken in Component 1.

                         10.      Sub-Component 2.2: Strengthening surveillance capacities in the selected sites. Unless they
                         are included in a national park, most of the existing Ramsar sites do not have adequate monitoring
                         activities, mostly because of insufficient staff on the ground and lack of equipment. The goal of this
                         sub-component is to reinforce the capacity of local people in the three selected WII sites to monitor
                         wetland activities through:

                         (a)     Provision of appropriate equipment and infrastructure to reinforce capacities of local staff to
                         properly implement monitoring activities in the selected sites, which would include, for example,
                         vehicles, boats, camping equipment, and the construction of staff quarters;
                         (b)     Training of local staff in monitoring activities, such as that delivered to ecoguards in the
                         national parks under the previous GEF-financed project and including conservation software systems
Public Disclosure Copy




                         such as MIST/SMART already used by the ANPN for the monitoring of the national parks;
                         (c)     Engagement of local communities in wetland monitoring, through regular consultation with
                         the local community management committees, technical assistance (on fisheries, for example), and
                         other education and awareness raising activities.

                         11. Sub-Component 2.3: Environmentally friendly, community-driven activities in wetlands.
                         The objective of this sub-component is to help communities adjacent to the selected Ramsar sites
                         develop income-generating activities for sustainable wetland management. As appropriate, this will
                         be done in partnership with local NGOs and CSOs; and in collaboration with other government
                         entities, notably those responsible for tourism development, forestry, fisheries, and agriculture.
                         Tourism activities could include, for example, infrastructure (access roads, campsites, docks, boat
                         ramps, watch towers); and community or private enterprises (restaurants and concession stands,
                         lodges, nature guides, transportation services). Apart from tourism, other sustainable economic
                         activities eligible for project financing could include fisheries development, fiber harvesting,
                         apiculture, plant nurseries, horticulture, transformation of agricultural products, NTPF and medicinal
                         herb product development, and small livestock production.

                         11. Component 3: Implementation of the Nagoya Protocol (GEF – US$1 million). Gabon has clearly
                         led the way in the Africa region, being the first country to ratify the Nagoya Protocol in May 2011
                         (Gabon was the twenty-second signatory of the Protocol). Moreover, Gabon has already completed a

                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                         draft national strategy and plan of action to implement the Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit
                         Sharing (ABS). The objective of this component is, therefore, to consolidate and implement the
                         measures contained in the strategy document, and thereby operationalize the Nagoya Protocol. Led
Public Disclosure Copy




                         by the National Focal Point for the Nagoya Protocol located in the DGEPN, this component will: (i)
                         strengthen the capacity of key Government actors and local communities on ABS procedures; (ii)
                         develop and validate legislative and administrative measures; and (iii) implement the institutional
                         framework for the protocol.

                         12. Component 4: Strengthen Institutional Framework to support Wetlands Management (GEF – US
                         $3.326 million). Th is Component will establish an institutional framework favorable to the
                         sustainable management of the WII in Gabon at both the national and local levels. The project will
                         establish an MOU with the Ramsar Convention to provide technical assistance to DGEPN for the
                         development and implementation of a national institutional framework for the management of
                         Gabon’s network of Ramsar sites. With guidance from the Ramsar Handbooks, analyses will be
                         undertaken to (i) assess the existing policy framework for wetland protection in Gabon; and (ii)
                         assess the institutional structures currently governing each WII site. The studies will propose
                         recommendations to strengthen the policy and institutional frameworks to better achieve wetland
                         protection objectives. With support from the Ramsar Convention, and based on the data analysis and
                         information obtained in Component 1, and the priority setting and resource use planning work of
                         Component 2, this component will also develop a national wetlands strategy, in consultation as
                         appropriate, with other government DGs.
                         13. Mapping capacity in DGEPN will also be strengthened to generate wetland maps geocoded with
                         environmental and socioeconomic data. As a basic modality for integrated natural resource
                         management, this component will conduct environmental audits of industrial operations (mining,
                         forestry) operating in and around the three WII sites. To that end, the component will finance
                         technical assistance to strengthen DGEPN capacity by the provision of specialists in environment,
                         fisheries, and social development. These specialists will provide expertise to both DGEPN and
                         ANPN, and it is expected that they will be absorbed by in the DGEPN structure at the end of the
                         project, depending on national budget availability.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         14. Component 5: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (GEF – US$0.485 million). This
                         component supports the overall daily administration of the project, to ensure that regular monitoring
                         and evaluation is carried out, and the results are fed back into decision making on project
                         implementation. As the DGEPN is responsible for the overall administration, coordination, and
                         implementation of the project, Component 5 will support the DGEPN with the recruitment of the
                         following personnel: (i) a specialist/assistant in procurement; (ii) a financial management specialist/
                         assistant; (iii) a specialist/assistant in monitoring and evaluation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will focus on three Ramsar sites: Bas Ogooué, Monts Birougou, and Petit Loango/Setté-
                         Cama. These sites were selected by the Government based on: (i) the importance of wetland
                         ecosystem services for local populations, and for climate change adaptation and mitigation; (ii) the
                         threats to the wetland ecosystems from competing land uses; and (iii) initiatives already undertaken
                         in theareas.
                         15.      The selection process also prioritized a diverse representation of marine and terrestrial
                         biodiversity. Thus, the three sites chosen represent coastal, alluvial plain, and high interior, heavily
                         forested wetland habitats.



                                                                       Page 4 of 11
                         a) Bas Ogooué ((862,700 ha) is a large alluvial plain in the west of the country, with lakes, rivers,
                         riparian marshes, savanna, and dense forest. It constitutes the interior delta of the river Ogooué where
                         rivers and lakes combine to provide a navigable waterway, for goods and people, between the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         interior towns of Ndjolé, Lambaréné, and Port-Gentil on the coast. The flood plains and the high
                         level of vegetation of the area also provide flood protection to downstream areas. The site is habitat
                         for primates (gorilla, chimpanzee, mandrill), large mammals (hippopotamus, buffalo, elephant,
                         manatee), migrant bird populations, turtles, reptiles (black and Nile crocodiles), and many fish
                         species. Of the three selected sites, Bas Ogooué is the most densely populated, which leads to
                         varying pressures on the wetland areas from fishing, hunting, tourism; and competing land uses such
                         as slash and burn agriculture, and forestry. In collaboration with the Ministry of Water and Forests
                         and the Ministry of Fisheries, WWF has conducted various research, education and awareness
                         activities at this site.

                         b) Monts Birougou (536,800 ha) is a high elevation (800-900 m) forested wetland area interspersed
                         with swamps and savanna. It is an important water tower for Gabon, as it is the source of the Nyanga
                         and Ngounié rivers and their main tributaries. The site is an important breeding and feeding site for
                         different species of freshwater fish. Local people use its ecosystem products for construction, food,
                         and clothing; and the area has cultural and religious value to the country as a whole. The site contains
                         20 species of primates including gorilla and chimpanzee; other large mammals include both the
                         forest and savanna elephants. Population density is low, but the site is threatened by forestry and
                         mining activities, and destructive (chemical) fishing practices. Some research and planning has been
                         undertaken in this site because the Monts Birougou WII site contains within its boundaries the
                         Birougou National Park, for which the ANPN has prepared a management plan.
                         d) Petit Loango + Setté-Cama. (480,000 + 220,000 ha) These are in fact two linked Ramsar sites that
                         are treated as one site for the purpose of this project. Both are coastal plain wetlands. Petit Loango is
                         set in a mangrove and rainforest environment important for flood control, sediment capture, and bank
                         stabilization. Setté-Cama is a sand plain important for its fish spawning, feeding, and breeding
                         grounds; and water supply to nearby town of Gamba. The sites are important habitat for large
                         mammals (hippopotamus, elephant, manatee), turtles, birds, amphibians, and reptiles. Both sites
Public Disclosure Copy




                         benefit from tourism. Both sites have low population density, but both are threatened by nearby oil
                         exploitation. Some research and planning has been done in this site by ANPN, which prepared a
                         management plan for the Loango National Park. The Petit Loango WII site is within the boundary of
                         the Loango National Park, and the Setté Cama WII site falls in its buffer zone.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
                         Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTN1)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              As per its nature, the project is not expected to
                         BP 4.01                                               generate large scale adverse social or
                                                                               environmental impacts. The operation will not
                                                                               finance any major investments on the ground.
                                                                               Under sub component 2.2, the project will build
                                                                               necessary infrastructure to reinforce capacities of
                                                                               local staff to properly implement monitoring
                                                                               activities in the selected sites. Under sub
                                                                               component 2.3, the project expects to develop


                                                                       Page 5 of 11
                                                                            tourism activities. All these activities may have
                                                                            environmental impacts even at a very limited
                                                                            scale. An Environmental and Social Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            Framework has been prepared and has been
                                                                            disclosed at the Infoshop on February 7, 2014.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           The wetlands ecosystems are undoubtedly critical
                                                                            ecosystems, the project will enhance the quality
                                                                            of the management of these critical ecosystems
                                                                            and reduce risks associated with potential
                                                                            economic development.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes           This is triggered because some of the project sites
                                                                            have important mangrove forests. These areas
                                                                            will be subject to adequate management plans
                                                                            during the project implementation.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project does not involve pest management.

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The project activities will not involve or affect
                            BP 4.11                                         physical cultural resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           There are no indigenous people in the project
                                                                            sites that will be affected by project interventions.
                                                                            This policy is triggered for precautionary
                                                                            measures, because Gabon belongs to the Congo
                                                                            Basin countries where there are pygmies
                                                                            (Cameroon and Congo). An Indigenous Peoples
                                                                            Plan has been prepared and has been disclosed in-
                                                                            country on 06/06/2014 and at the Infoshop on
                                                                            02/07/2014.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           No physical displacement of people is expected.
                            4.12                                            However the project expects to prepare
                                                                            management plans of selected RAMSAR sites. To
                                                                            ensure appropriate involvement of local
                                                                            communities, in the event of restriction of access
                                                                            of the aforementioned sites, a ProcessFramework
                                                                            has been prepared and was disclosed in country
                                                                            on 11/24/2013 and in the Infoshop on 02/07/2014
                                                                            although no involuntary resettlement or limitation
                                                                            of access is anticipated.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No            This policy is not triggered, as there will be no
                                                                            dam construction or rehabilitation of dams that
                                                                            will necessitate dam safety status report.
                            Projects on International        No             This policy is not triggered, for there are no
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            international waterways in the project sites.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No             This policy is not triggered because project
                            7.60                                            intervention sites are not within disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management


                                                                    Page 6 of 11
                         A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           The overall impact of the project is expected to be positive as the project would finance
                           interventions in biodiversity conservation with control and surveillance to help reduce poaching
                           and human pressure on on the selected sites. By investing in community income generating and
                           sustainable livelihood micro-projects selected through a continued and strengthened consultative
                           and participatory approach, most of the activities are expected to have positive impacts on the
                           quality of life of inhabitants and local communities. Potential adverse environmental impacts
                           associated with implementation of the wetlands management plans are minimal if any, comprising
                           principally those associated with construction of park rangers surveillance posts.

                           It is anticipated that project activities will not lead to land acquisition, nor to major restriction of
                           access to parks and related sources of livelihood. Nevertheless, a Process Framework has been
                           prepared for the project for the (unlikely) event that access to legally designated parks would be
                           restricted..

                           It is not expected that project activities will affect indigenous people, as there are none in the
                           project areas. However given that Gabon belongs to the Congo Basin where there minority
                           pygmies groups (in Cameroon and Congo), OP. 4.10 has been triggered mainly for precautionary
                           measures in the event of migration within the Basin, thereby creating a potential impact of this
                           minority population. An IPPF will has been prepared by the Government and has been disclosed
                           on 2/6/2014.

                           An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has also been prepared by the
                           Government and disclosed on 11/24/2013.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                           The project will result in improved quality of life for the community members bordering the
                           selected wetlands sites as the project will develop revenue generating activities, including potential
                           viable tourism products in selected wetlands. Activities for tourismdevelopment could include, for
                           example, infrastructure (access roads, campsites, docks, boat ramps, watch towers); and
                           community or private enterprise (concession stands, lodges, nature guides). Apart from tourism,
                           other sustainable economic activities in the WII area could include, for example, the development
                           of pisciculture in lagoons, fiber harvesting, apiculture, and plant nurseries. This would lead to
                           increased employment and income for skilled and unskilled community members, and indirect
                           employment opportunities from provision of services to construction workers such as sale of food
                           and beverages. Further, the interventions in particular for biodiversity conservation would lead to
                           reduced poaching and human pressure on the fragile wetlands resources. There will be no long
                           term adverse impacts as a result of project activities.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           No significant adverse impacts are expected.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Government prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a


                                                                        Page 7 of 11
                          Process Framework (PF) to cover rehabilitation of wetlands sites infrastructures and the
                          community micro-enterprises, and to address potential restriction to wetlands resources. These
                          two instruments were disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Mitigation Measures: The ESMF recommends mitigating measures aimed at ensuring that civil
                          works are executed in an environmentally sound manner; such as sprinkling construction sites with
                          water and limiting construction activities to normal working hours, and notifying the local
                          community in advance if construction activities have to be performed outside these hours. For the
                          construction of park rangers’s lodges, the ESMF and PF also provide guidance on (i) the sourcing
                          of construction materials and the disposal of construction-related wastes; and (ii) generic rules for
                          contractors and construction workers to follow, including prohibitions on hunting, fishing, wildlife
                          capture, illegal bush-meat purchases, burning of vegetation, washing vehicles or changing
                          lubricants in or near waterways or wetlands, and any inappropriate interactions with local
                          residents, along with transparent penalties for non-compliance. The Process Framework describes
                          the participatory process by which to measures will be identified to assist displaced persons in the
                          event of restriction of access to parks.

                          The safeguards instruments were prepared after consultation with key stakeholders both at the
                          national and local levels. The proposal in the process framework to establish committees to
                          manage compensation process in the event of conflicts and possible claims was perceived by the
                          populations as an indication that the project might lead to actual resettlement. The objective of the
                          process framework was therefore better clarified during the consultations and in the revised
                          process framework to clear up any possible misunderstanding of its content. The stakeholders also
                          expressed interest in participating in the project annual work plans elaboration process, as well in
                          trainings provided by the project. These concerns were all noted and recommendations were
                          incorporated in the revised safeguard documents accordingly.

                          The Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework: an IPPF has been prepared given the project
                          location, although it is not expected that project activities will negatively impact indigenous
Public Disclosure Copy




                          people.

                           Capacity for Safeguard Implementation: The DGE will recruit an environmental and social
                           specialist or consultant that will be responsible for following up safeguards issues during project
                           implementation. The specialist or consultant will be responsible for (i) preparing the TORs for the
                           EMPs and RAP if needed and (ii) ensuring that the contractors comply with the recommendations
                           of these studies and environmental and social management clauses (inserted into their contract)
                           during the construction phase. The Bank will provide guidance on the elaboration of the TORs and
                           DGE will be responsible for providing overall quality control through the review and clearance of
                           the EMPs and RAPs. Specific capacity building on environmental management and environmental
                           assessment will be provide d to the technical services departments of the DGE and ANPN and
                           other implementing focal points. The World Bank safeguards specialists will provide regular
                           support to the PIU's environmental and social staff during the project support missions.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders of the project are the local communities of the three project sites: Bas-
                           Ogoue, Monts Birougou and Petit Loango-Sette Cama. The ESMF and Process Framework have
                           been developed in a participatory manner with these communities. Furthermore, wetlands
                           management plans and annual work plans will be prepared in a consultative and participatory


                                                                     Page 8 of 11
                           approach, with full involvement of these communities at project implementation stage. The three
                           safeguard instruments have been disclosed in the country on 11/24/2013 and 2/6/2014 (for the
                           IPPF) and at the Bank Infoshop on 02/07/2014.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        11-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     06-Feb-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Gabon                                                              24-Nov-2013
                           Comments: Available at the Ministry of Water and Forestry (Services de la Direction Generale
                                         de l'Environnement et de la Protection de la Nature - 5eme etage).
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        24-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     06-Feb-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Gabon                                                              24-Nov-2013
                           Comments: Available at the Ministry of Water and Forestry (Services de la Direction Generale
                                         de l'Environnement et de la Protection de la Nature - 5eme etage).
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        31-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     06-Feb-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Gabon                                                              06-Feb-2014
                           Comments: Available at the Ministry of Water and Forestry (Services de la Direction Generale
                                         de l'Environnement et de la Protection de la Nature - 5eme etage).
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector       Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats


                                                                   Page 9 of 11
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?




                                                                    Page 10 of 11
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Salimata D. Follea
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                    Date: 12-Feb-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Benoit Bosquet (SM)                          Date: 12-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 11 of 11
