                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA8504
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Jul-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Dominican Republic                Project ID:    P146831
                            Project Name:     Support to the National Education Pact Project (P146831)
                            Task Team         Peter Anthony Holland
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         11-Jul-2014                       Estimated   06-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEDDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General education sector (70%), Public administration- Education (20%), Pre-
                                              primary education (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        50.00           Total Bank Financing:  50.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   50.00
                              Total                                                                                   50.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective is to improve the management of the education system,
                           particularly in the areas of teacher management, evaluation, quality assurance of ECD centers, and
                           school management.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 7
                         A.      Project Components

                         The Project would consist of two components. The first component would be results-based, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         would disburse against Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) consisting of implementation
                         progress and performance targets agreed with the government and related to the four priority areas.
                         DLI targets would be in line with the existing national education policy documents (including the
                         Pacto Educativo), with clear responsibilities for achieving them, and precise verification
                         requirements and procedures. The number of DLIs achieved annually would determine the amount to
                         be disbursed, and disbursements would be scheduled twice a year. Component 2 would disburse
                         according to traditional methods, and would finance goods, consultant services, and non-consultant
                         services relating to the carrying out of the requisite technical cooperation for each priority policy
                         area.

                         Component 1: Supporting the Implementation of the National Education Pact. (Total: US$48 million;
                         Bank: US$48 million). The objective of this component would be to improve the management of the
                         education system by (i) improving teacher policies; (ii) developing a comprehensive evaluation
                         system; (iii) strengthening the quality assurance of ECD systems; and (iv) enhancing the
                         administrative capacity of MINERD. This section presents the Disbursement-Linked Indicators and
                         accompanying technical cooperation, as well as the expected outcomes, for each of the priority
                         policy areas.

                         Subcomponent 1.1: Improving teacher policies. This subcomponent would support a comprehensive
                         revision of the teaching career, focusing on a) pre-service training and induction, b) in-service
                         training, and c) evaluation and certification.

                         Pre-service training and induction: The Project would support the implementation of a scholarship
                         program to attract high-performing secondary students to ISFODOSU pre-service degrees, as well as
                         a revised remedial program for admitted students that have skill gaps. It would also support the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         design and implementation of a competitive induction exam and selection process for public sector
                         teachers, administrators and staff.

                         In-service training: It would support the development, piloting and implementation of an in-service
                         training program for specialized teachers in INAFOCAM (expected to train 3,500 teachers in the
                         2014-2016 period), a wide-ranging evaluation of in-training programs in Dominican universities, and
                         the piloting and expansion of a school-based training program, informed by student assessment
                         outcomes and implemented by universities and district specialists.

                         Evaluation and certification: It would support the design, and implementation of a revised teacher
                         evaluation system by IDEICE. IDEICE is currently implementing a teacher evaluation program
                         based on the current teacher profile. Building on this experience, an evaluation model based on the
                         revised competence-based teacher profile designed by MINERD would be designed and piloted.

                         Subcomponent 1.2: Developing a comprehensive evaluation system. This would support the
                         strengthening of the evaluation system concentrated in three areas: a) student assessment, b) school
                         assessment, and c) institutional and technical capacity strengthening. This subcomponent would
                         include a cross-cutting focus on improving the use of data generated to inform educational practices,
                         for example, by determining school improvement plans, the design of training programs (pre and in-
                         service), and the content of education materials.


                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         Student assessment: It would support the implementation of i) a national census 4th grade student
                         assessment, and ii) the application of the PISA and TERCE international student assessments.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         School assessment: This would support the design and implementation of a revised school report
                         system informed by student assessment results.

                         Institutional and technical capacity strengthening: It would support the design and implementation of
                         a national evaluation strategy for MINERD, including the institutional strengthening of the Quality
                         and Evaluation Office of MINERD. The Project would support training in evaluation methods and an
                         increase in staff

                         Subcomponent 1.3: Strengthening the quality assurance of ECD institutions. This would support: a)
                         the design of a pre-service training program for caregivers under the Quisqueya Empieza Contigo
                         program, b) the design and implementation of a quality certification system for ECD centers and
                         teachers, c) the development of an information and communications strategy to both increase public
                         understanding of the program and improve parenting practices, and d) the organizational design and
                         institutional strengthening of the National Institute of Comprehensive Care for Early Childhood
                         (Instituto Nacional de Atención Integral a la Primera Infancia - INAIPI).

                         Pre-service training: The Project would support the design and implementation of competence-based
                         standards and profiles for caregivers, educators, nutritionists, and other staff of the Quisqueya
                         Empieza Contigo program.

                         Institutional strengthening of INAIPI and quality certification: It would support the drafting,
                         approval, and implementation of the strategic plan for INAIPI.

                         Communications strategy: The communications strategy would aim to increase the participation of
                         disadvantaged populations in the Quisqueya Empieza Contigo Program, as well as raising awareness
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and providing information on parenting practices.

                         Subcomponent 1.4: Enhancing the institutional capacity of MINERD. This would support: a) the
                         modernization of the financial management systems of autonomous agencies; b) the decentralization
                         of Ministry functions and resources by increasing the number of School Management Committees
                         which are legally established and able to receive financial transfers directly from MINERD for
                         pedagogical, school infrastructure and administrative purposes, based on their School Development
                         Projects and Annual Operational Plans; and c) the strengthening of MINERD’s human resources
                         management system (both teaching and administrative staff) through updating and digitization of all
                         personnel files as well as a web-enabled MIS system for human resource management.

                         Component 2: Technical Cooperation: The objective of this component would be to provide
                         technical assistance to MINERD and the rest of agencies involved for the implementation of
                         activities under component 1. It would disburse according to traditional methods, and would finance
                         goods, consultant services, and non-consultant services relating to the carrying out of the requisite
                         technical cooperation for each priority policy area.

                         B.       Project Financing

                         The proposed loan instrument would be a Specific Investment Loan, in the amount of US$50 million.

                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                         Project Cost and Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Total Project financing requirements are estimated at US$50 million (see Table 1).

                         Table 1: Project Cost and Financing

                         Components
                         1. Supporting the Implementation of the National Education Pact: US$ 48 million(100 percent Bank
                         financing)
                         2. Technical Cooperation: US$2 million (100 percent Bank financing)
                         Total Project Costs: US$ 50 million (100 percent Bank financing)


                         C. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design

                         The Project design is informed by lessons learned from other Bank projects, namely the three phases
                         of the PASS Development Policy Loan (P116972), and the Dominican Republic Early Childhood
                         Development Project (P079566). The Project has also incorporated experiences from other DLI-
                         based Projects such as the Second Sindh Education Sector Project (P125952). The main lessons
                         learned regarding (1) project ownership, (2) coordination with donors, (3) financial instrument
                         design, and (4) implementation arrangements are shown below.

                         Project ownership: Political economy is a key determinant of the outcome of a project. The three
                         phases of the PASS DPL were successful due to the high level of Government ownership of the
                         policy reforms supported by the program. This high-level political mandate and sustained support in
                         the context of an economic crisis helped counteract interest group resistance to reforms. Based on
                         that experience, the Project has focused on an agenda that supports, and is directly linked to the
                         policy reforms and activities endorsed by Government, teacher unions, and civil society in the Pacto
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Educativo. Also, given effectiveness delays registered in the Dominican Republic Early Childhood
                         Development Project, due to a 15-month delay in Project approval by Congress, the Bank has made a
                         concerted effort to reach out to all agencies involved in implementation and approval. There is
                         widespread support and political backing for the Project and the calendar is expected to align with
                         the Congressional session, thereby reducing the risk of delays in declaring effectiveness.

                         Coordination with donors: The PASS DPL series has shown the importance of coordinating with
                         other interventions, especially when the approach targets several themes. The Bank has maintained
                         an ongoing dialogue with AECID, UNICEF, and the IDB, among other partners, to avoid
                         duplications, explore synergies and design a program of intervention that is highly complementary to
                         other donors’ efforts currently underway.

                         Financial instrument design: The DLI-based Project design seeks to align interests of all parties
                         around national results, while simplifying fiduciary procedures governing Bank financing. As per
                         experiences elsewhere, disbursements would occur twice a year, with a flat amount to be disbursed
                         each year, in order to provide sustained and predictable financing to the sector. As in the Second
                         Sindh Education Sector Project (P125952, Loan No. 52180), project disbursements under
                         Component 1 would occur on a reimbursement basis, with assessment of DLIs occurring well ahead
                         of planned disbursements, in order to provide maximum budget planning for the MINERD and the
                         Ministry of Finance.

                                                                     Page 4 of 7
                         Implementation arrangements: During the implementation of the Early Childhood Development
                         Project, personnel rotation and excessive red tape in the institutional structure of OCI caused
Public Disclosure Copy




                         significant delays in implementation. This is reflected in a higher risk rating for this Project. The OCI
                         is currently undergoing a reform of its institutional structures, which would help streamline processes
                         by decreasing dependency on MINERD bureaucracy and increasing the autonomy of the OCI.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Nationwide.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Glenn S. Morgan (OPSOR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No               The Project team proposes an environmental
                          BP 4.01                                              category of C per OP/BP 4.01 since the nature
                                                                               and scope of Project activities are not expected to
                                                                               cause adverse environmental impacts.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               The Project will not affect any natural habitats.
                                                                               The Project will not support actions linked to the
                                                                               construction or rehabilitation of schools and/or
                                                                               other civil works that could adversely degrade or
                                                                               convert critical natural habitats.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               The Project does not involve the management or
                                                                               use of forest resources. The Project will not
                                                                               support actions linked to the construction or
                                                                               rehabilitation of schools and/or other civil works
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               that could adversely degrade or convert critical
                                                                               forest areas.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No               The Project will not involve the purchase or use
                                                                               of any significant quantities of pesticides.
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               The Project will not result in any impacts on
                          BP 4.11                                              physical cultural resources. The project will not
                                                                               support activities that will impact the quality or
                                                                               management of physical cultural resources as
                                                                               defined under the policy.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No               There are no indigenous groups in the DR that
                                                                               meet the characteristics as specified in the policy.
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               The Project will not support construction or other
                          4.12                                                 activities that would lead to involuntary
                                                                               resettlement or land acquisition.
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               The Project will not support the construction or
                                                                               rehabilitation of dams nor will it support
                                                                               investments which rely on the operation of
                                                                               existing dams.



                                                                       Page 5 of 7
                            Projects on International        No                  The Project will not affect any international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 waterways as defined under the policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The Project will not be implemented in areas
                            7.60                                                 known to be disputed or affect disputed areas as
                                                                                 defined under the policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              There are no large scale significant and/or irreversible impacts. The Project is expected to have a
                              positive impact on students from vulnerable groups attending schools affected by the Project.

                              The team is preparing a social assessment to analyze potential negative social impacts on
                              vulnerable populations by using existing data from standardized student assessments and the 2010
                              census. This will be important to identify whether parts of the design of the evaluation system and/
                              or the teacher training (i.e. additional support for poor performing students or schools) would have
                              to be tailored to students. These measures will help prevent any potential adverse distributional
                              impacts the Project might have.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              To ensure that the Project does not have any negative social impacts and is sensitive to the needs
                              of ethnic minorities, assessment information at the individual level will be confidential and new
                              assessments will be included as diagnostic tools and not used for student promotion purposes.
                              These measures in the Project will (a) avoid potentially adverse effects on the ethnic minorities;
                              and (b) ensure that the ethnic minorities benefit from the project in a culturally appropriate and
                              gender and intergenerationally inclusive manner.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              N/A
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level


                                                                         Page 6 of 7
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Peter Anthony Holland
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager:      Name: Janet K. Entwistle (PMGR)                   Date: 11-Jul-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
