                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC6916

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Oct-2013, 09-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Azerbaijan                       Project ID:      P144700
                            Project Name:       Judicial Services and Smart Infrastructure Project (P144700)
                            Task Team           Amitabha Mukherjee
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           13-Jan-2014                      Estimated        27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSP4                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Law and justice (60%), Public administration- Information and communications
                                                (20%), General public administration sector (20%)
                            Theme(s):           Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms (50%), e-Government (30%),
                                                Access to law and justice (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    495.00                      Total Bank Financing:        200.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      295.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         200.00
                              Total                                                                         495.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objectives are to improve (a) access to justice for all and (b) the
                           efficiency of judicial services.
                           C. Project Description
                           The JSSIP is envisaged to have three components:
                         A: Judicial Service Delivery Improvements (estimated cost $80 million) including improving legal
                         aid for the vulnerable and marginalized; e-filing of cases; e-notarial services; enforcement of judicial
Public Disclosure Copy




                         decisions; automated case and document management systems; business registry and business
                         inspection modernization. This will also finance technical assistance and analytics on access to
                         justice for vulnerable groups, examination of gender issues in legal aid and judicial employment and
                         options for introducing mobile courts in remote areas. In order to provide these services, the justice
                         system ICT infrastructure is proposed to be strengthened through (i) the installation of Wide Area
                         Networks and a Network Operations/ICT Management System and (ii) the construction of one Data
                         Center and one Disaster Recovery Center (the estimated cost of civil works is $15 million) - these
                         will help the system to deal with increasing data flows arising from progressively higher case inflows
                         and an increased number of courts across the country.

                         B: Smart Infrastructure (estimated cost $375 million) including ‘smart courts’ and related ICT
                         infrastructure in 10-13 locations across the country. The "smart courts" involve construction of
                         functionally innovative courthouses and court complexes integrating IT applications and services in
                         different cities and towns in Azerbaijan. The following new court construction activities are
                         envisaged (these may change as preparation progresses): court complexes in six locations with each
                         complex housing between 3-5 courts (two in Baku City and one each in the cities of Gandja,
                         Sumgait, Sheki and Shirvan), district-level courts in four outlying locations (Absheron, Masalli,
                         Gusar and Zardab), three high-volume district courts in Baku City (Baku City Narimanov district,
                         Baku City Surakhani district and Baku City Khatai district) - for a total of 13 locations for
                         construction of courts and court complexes (estimated civil works cost $370 million at this stage).
                         The MOJ’s proposed courthouse/court complex locations are based on the following criteria: (i)
                         regional court complexes in the 5 largest cities; (ii) courts in Masalli and Gusar to serve areas with
                         the largest number of ethnic minorities (Talysh and Lezghin); (iii) a court in Absheron to serve
                         Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) who have practically no access to judicial services; (iv) three
                         urban locations in Baku (Narimanov, Surakhani and Khatai) with very high case volumes. Overall,
                         the MOJ has taken care to adopt a strategic approach to infrastructure modernization. This
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component is also envisaged to include capacity-strengthening for facility design, supervision and
                         operations.

                         C: Capacity Building, Project Management and Sustainability (estimated cost $40 million) including
                         (a) strengthening IT management and operational capacity, (b) M&E and statistical capacity, (c)
                         policy and budget analysis capacity and change management, (d) training, knowledge sharing and
                         operational capacity augmentation, (e) project management and results reporting. The MOJ is
                         responsible for preparing and executing the budget for the Ministry and for the courts of first
                         instance. The Supreme Court, appellate courts and the Judicial Legal Council prepare and execute
                         their own budgets. This component, besides strengthening institutional capacity of the above budget
                         holders for all stages of the budget cycle, will also support the development of a more coherent and
                         coordinated vision and strategy for sector policy, sector investment, public expenditures and
                         performance monitoring.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented country-wide. Construction of court complexes and courthouses is
                         currently proposed at Baku City (5 locations), Gandja, Sumgait, Sheki, Shirvan, Absheron, Masalli,
                         Gusar and Zardab. In addition the locations of the Data Center and Disaster Recovery Center are
                         being finalized. The final list of locations may differ from this initial list. The new construction is
                           planned to be mostly undertaken in already developed urban areas with municipal services. In some
                           cases (in the outlying areas, e.g. Masalli) municipal services may not be well-developed.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           An EMP was developed for the ongoing Judicial Modernization Project (JMP) and updated in 2011
                           (at Additional Financing) and 2012 (restructuring). The Borrower has demonstrated its capacity to
                           deal successfully with environmental and social safeguards aspects of project implementation. The
                           PIU has designated consultants responsible for regular environmental monitoring and coordination of
                           environmental matters with designers, technical experts and contractors. A Resettlement Policy
                           Framework (RPF) was also prepared by the Borrower for the JMP, approved by the World Bank and
                           disclosed in-country and in the Infoshop.

                           For the JSSIP the Borrower has updated the EMP and the RPF. The EMP has been approved by the
                           Bank and disclosed in-country on November 19, 2013 and in the Infoshop on December 2, 2013.
                           The RPF has been disclosed in-country on November 19, 2013 and in the Infoshop on December 3,
                           2013.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSEN)
                           Aly Zulficar Rahim (ECSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) will be
                           BP 4.01                                            triggered. The environmental impacts are
                                                                              associated with the proposed construction of
                                                                              courthouses, court complexes, a Data Center
                                                                              and a Disaster Recovery Center. These will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              similar to those already addressed in the updated
                                                                              Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the
                                                                              on-going JMP. For the purposes of the proposed
                                                                              project the EMP has been updated to reflect the
                                                                              most recent changes in the description of project
                                                                              activities and geographical coverage.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/    Yes             OP 4.11 ‘Physical Cultural Resources’ will be
                           BP 4.11                                            triggered as civil works could occur in historical
                                                                              urban areas which may be subject to potential
                                                                              chance finds. The EMP will include proactive
                                                                              measures to carry out preliminary surveys/
                                                                              assessments of relevant sites prior to beginning
                                                                              works, to determine there are historically
                                                                              valuable assets or artifacts which require
                                                                                                                                 protection. The EMP will also incorporate the
                                                                                                                                 procedures to be followed by the contractor and
                                                                                                                                 client in case of chance finds at project sites.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 There are no cases involving renovation of
                                                                                                                                 known historical buildings.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           No land acquisition or physical displacement of
                                 4.12                                                                                            residents is expected. However, experience from
                                                                                                                                 ongoing Bank-financed projects shows that
                                                                                                                                 minor land acquisition could be needed to
                                                                                                                                 improve construction design and provide access
                                                                                                                                 space. In addition, land acquisition may be
                                                                                                                                 required due to unforeseen events, in which case
                                                                                                                                 the works may require more land.

                                                                                                                                 OP 4.12 ‘Involuntary Resettlement’ will be
                                                                                                                                 triggered as a precaution. An RPF has already
                                                                                                                                 been prepared by the MOJ, approved by the
                                                                                                                                 Bank and disclosed during the restructuring of
                                                                                                                                 the Judicial Modernization Project (JMP). This
                                                                                                                                 RPF has been updated to apply to the proposed
                                                                                                                                 project. Site-specific RAPs will be developed -
                                                                                                                                 if and as necessary – during implementation.
                                                                                                                                 The RPF and RAPs will ensure proper
                                                                                                                                 calculation and recording of the land area to be
                                                                                                                                 acquired and identify and mitigate the impacts
                                                                                                                                 of land acquisition for the affected persons to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 ensure that there is no adverse effect on living
                                                                                                                                 conditions and livelihoods. The Bank and client
                                                                                                                                 will jointly monitor compliance with social
                                                                                                                                 safeguards.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 08-Jan-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Other than updating the EMP and the RPF by appraisal, no other safeguard-related studies are
                                      envisaged to be needed. If any are needed, the studies and their timing will be specified in the
                                      PAD-stage ISDS.




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:   Name: Amitabha Mukherjee
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)   Date: 09-Dec-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Adrian Fozzard (SM)   Date: 09-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
