                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA6588
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Colombia                           Project ID:    P145732
                            Project Name:      AF - CO Mainstreaming Sust. Cattle Ranching Project (P145732)
                            Task Team          Carole Megevand
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          09-Dec-2013                        Estimated   12-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSAR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), Agricultural extension
                                              and research (30%), Animal production (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Environmental policies and institutions (30%), Other environment and natural
                                              resources management (30%), Climate change (20%), Biodi versity (10%),
                                              Participation and civic engagement (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      21.67           Total Bank Financing:                  0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   0.00
                              Single Purpose Trust Fund                                                                 21.67
                              Total                                                                                     21.67
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective would remain unchanged, i.e. “to promote the adoption of
                           environment-friendly Silvopastoral Production Systems (SPS) for cattle ranching in Colombia´s



                                                                       Page 1 of 12
                         Project areas, to improve natural resource management, enhance the provision of environmental
                         services (biodiversity, land, carbon, and water), and raise the productivity in participating farms”.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed Additional Financing would expand the project activities into two additional areas (in
                         La Guajira and El Meta). Both are national deforestation hotspots: they have significant degrees of
                         ecosystem fragmentation, but with high potential for increasing ecological connectivity between
                         remnant riparian vegetation. It would also pilot a new scheme to support carbon sequestration
                         (PES-2) in small and medium farms, through the adoption of intensive silvopastoral systems. The
                         Additional Financing has also been designed to address the major challenges identified during the
                         first three years of implementation of the project, particularly the much high needs in terms of
                         technical Assistance than anticipated during the preparation of the Parent project and the limited
                         availability of high quality planting materials.

                         The structure of the project would remain unchanged and the activities under the Additional
                         Financing would be implemented under the existing components and sub-components.
                         Component 1. Improving productivity in participating cattle ranching farms in Project areas, through
                         SPS would pursue the institutional capacity building on SPS at the national and local levels to
                         provide technical assistance to farmers on silvopastoral systems and cover the selection process for
                         the additional 300 beneficiaries in the two “hotspot of deforestation” areas.

                         Component 2. Increasing connectivity and reducing land degradation in participating cattle ranching
                         farms would provide support under the PES-1 scheme to 700 additional farmers, would support the
                         production of high-quality planting material and would pilot a new scheme to promote the adoption
                         of intensive silvopoastoral systems in about 1,250 farms.

                         Component 3. Institutional strengthening, Dissemination and M&E would provide policy-makers
                         with evidence-based results on the benefits (social, environmental and economic) of SPS to support
                         the transformation of the cattle ranching sector in Colombia.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 4. Project management would support the overall Project coordination.

                         It is proposed to process this Additional Financing concomitantly with a Level Two restructuring of
                         the original project, in order to (i) adjust the outcome indicators set for the original project to better
                         align with early implementation results, and (ii) include new outcome indicators on climate change
                         mitigation and poverty alleviation (two focus areas targeted by DECC). In addition, the restructuring
                         will (i) reallocate the proceeds of the original project, particularly to take into account the higher
                         needs for technical assistance and the reduced targets in terms of payments for environment services
                         (PES),and (ii) extend the closing date from September 23, 2015 to August 23, 2017, to close on the
                         same date as the Additional Financing.

                         The CMSCR project targeted 2,000 farms to be enrolled and benefit from project instruments
                         (technical assistance and/or payment for environmental services). To date, a total of 2,491 farms
                         have already been selected in the project. While the Additional Financing would provide additional
                         support to 1,500 farms, this support could benefit some of the already selected farms. In total, it is
                         expected that the project will directly benefit around 2,700 farms. In addition, a group of “farm
                         control” will be set up as part of the Impact Assessment.




                                                                       Page 2 of 12
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Additional Financing would expand the project activities into two additional areas, namely la
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Guajira and la Meta. The two additional intervention areas are part of the national deforestation
                         Hotspots, according to IDEAM: they have significant degrees of ecosystem fragmentation, but with
                         high potential for increasing ecological connectivity between relict riparian vegetation.

                         The two areas were selected based on the following criteria: (a) they represent two distinct zones of
                         ecological importance and significant biodiversity (the dry forest near the Sierra Nevada de Santa
                         Marta, which is one of the most threatened ecosystems, with only 2% of coverage remaining, and the
                         region of the Orinoco which is important for the connectivity between the Macarena mountains and
                         the Andean forests), (b) they are areas where cattle ranching has been identified as a key driver of
                         deforestation, and (c) their proximity to existing project areas, allowing the use of existing project
                         infrastructure and staffing, and thus considerably reducing costs.

                         The selected areas were approved by the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development
                         (MADS), during the Public Policy Committee Proyecto de Ganaderia Colombiana Sostenible held on
                         March 19, 2013.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Dora Patricia Andrade (C3PLA)
                         Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto (LCSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The proposed Additional Financing is classified
                          BP 4.01                                            as Environmental Category B (as was the original
                                                                             project). Positive environmental impacts are a
                                                                             basic objective of the project; there is however a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             slight chance that productive activities incur in
                                                                             negative environmental impacts. In order to help
                                                                             ensure the environmental soundness and
                                                                             sustainability of the project, and in conformity
                                                                             with Bank policy, an Environmental Assessment
                                                                             (EA) was conducted in the two additional areas to
                                                                             be covered under the Additional Financing. The
                                                                             Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
                                                                             prepared under the original project and
                                                                             implemented satisfactorily during the first three
                                                                             years of implementation, has been updated to
                                                                             reflect the changes adopted by this additional
                                                                             finance operation in terms of the spatial scope.
                                                                             The document has been submitted to the Bank in
                                                                             September, 2013. It was disclosed in country on
                                                                             December 6, 2013 and on the Bank website on
                                                                             December 6, 2013 The EA is also publicly
                                                                             available on the FEDEGAN website at http://
                                                                             www.fedegan.org.co/programas/publicaciones-



                                                                     Page 3 of 12
                                                                     ganaderia-colombiana-sostenible .Training is
                                                                     fully part of the EMP and the program for project
                                                                     management, field personnel, and stakeholders
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     include several environmental thematic areas
                                                                     including: biodiversity presentation, land-use
                                                                     planning and ecosystem connectivity, low-carbon
                                                                     cattle ranching practices and other thematic areas
                                                                     that may result from local needs during project
                                                                     implementation.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           The project seeks to increase sustainability,
                                                                     maintain and enhance habitat through biodiversity
                                                                     conservation, and enhance environmental goods
                                                                     and services in rural areas. No significant
                                                                     conversion or degradation of natural habitat is
                                                                     expected from project investments. One major
                                                                     feature under the Parent project is to enhance
                                                                     ecological connectivity in the landscape. The
                                                                     different activities under the SPS may allow,
                                                                     among other things, biodiversity conservation and
                                                                     connect fragmentized ecosystems. EA and EMP
                                                                     ensure that project activities do not perversely
                                                                     encourage further deforestation to expand the
                                                                     land area used for cattle ranching.

                                                                     The two hotspots of deforestation in La Guajira y
                                                                     El Meta represent two distinct zones of ecological
                                                                     importance and significant biodiversity (the dry
                                                                     forest near the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     which is one of the most threatened ecosystems,
                                                                     with only 2% remaining, and a region of the
                                                                     Orinoco which is important for the connectivity
                                                                     between the Macarena mountains and the Andean
                                                                     forests).

                                                                     In the intervention area in La Meta department,
                                                                     fifteen ecosystems have been reported, including
                                                                     Pastures of the helobioma Amazonia and
                                                                     Orinoquia (21,631.7 hectares), the Amazonia and
                                                                     Orinoquia Peinobioma Grassland (16,680.9
                                                                     hectares) and annual crops or transitory
                                                                     helobioma Amazonia and Orinoquia (8,096.7
                                                                     hectares) as the dominant ecosystem in terms of
                                                                     its extension. Some of them represent critical
                                                                     habitats of national importance that are scarcely
                                                                     represented in the National System of Protected
                                                                     Areas.
                                                                     The areas of intervention do not overlap with any



                                                             Page 4 of 12
                                 protected area. It is important to mention that the
                                 Guayabero District includes the Andean forest
                                 remnants that still retain some of their original
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 structure and floral composition. These
                                 ecosystems house 283 vertebrate species, of
                                 which 30% are in some level of conservation
                                 status (endemic, threatened or endangered). In
                                 terms of plant diversity, 315 vascular plants
                                 species are reported (Magnoliophyta), of which
                                 only four species have endangered category.

                                 In the intervention area in La Guajira department,
                                 fourteen ecosystems have been reported. The
                                 Tropical Dry Grassland Caribbean zonobioma
                                 (21'204, 4 hectares),Orobioma Natural Forests
                                 under the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta and
                                 Macuira (12'503, 2 hectares) and low Orobioma
                                 Pastures of the Sierra Nevada Santa Marta and
                                 Macuira (12'195, 1 ha) are the dominant
                                 ecosystems in terms of its extension, and they
                                 represent critical habitats that are scarcely
                                 represented in the National System of Protected
                                 Areas. These ecosystems house 735 vertebrate
                                 species, of which 20% are in some level of
                                 conservation status (endemic, threatened or
                                 endangered), and 115 species of vascular plants
                                 (Magnoliophyta) are also reported from which 6
                                 are registered in a threatened category.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 The intervention area covers an area of 95,752
                                 hectares, and is not overlapping with any
                                 protected area. The nearest one corresponds to the
                                 National Natural Park Sierra Nevada de Santa
                                 Marta. However, from a regional perspective, the
                                 project activities could contribute to the
                                 connectivity and consolidation of SIRAP
                                 (Regional System of Protected Areas) - Guajira.
                                 The selected area will contribute to the
                                 connectivity of the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta
                                 and the Serrania of Perijá. The high rate of
                                 deforestation in the area creates favorable
                                 conditions for the design and implementation of
                                 PES schemes (short and long term) that could
                                 contribute to the conservation and restoration of
                                 critical ecosystems, as well as the ecological
                                 connectivity at the regional level.

                                 No natural habitats have been affected so far



                         Page 5 of 12
                                                                 during project implementation. The EMP which
                                                                 provides for an environmental review framework,
                                                                 have been updated to ensure that natural habitats
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 will not be adversely affected in the two
                                                                 additional areas and positive effects will be
                                                                 maximized.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36        Yes           The two new areas under the Additional
                                                                 Financing are areas where cattle ranching have
                                                                 been identified as a key driver of deforestation.
                                                                 The activities under the Additional Financing are
                                                                 aimed to promote the development of
                                                                 silvopastoral systems through the cultivation
                                                                 (nurseries) and introduction of forage and woody
                                                                 forest species in selected farms, and secondly
                                                                 through the payment for environmental services
                                                                 and carbon sequestration, promoting forest
                                                                 conservation and benefiting small and medium
                                                                 farmers. While the project is expected to
                                                                 overwhelmingly generate positive environmental
                                                                 impacts (biodiversity, ecosystem connectivity and
                                                                 water regulation), there is a risk that increased
                                                                 productivity at farm level, following SPS
                                                                 adoption, may create incentive for an expansion
                                                                 of cattle ranching, potentially causing more
                                                                 deforestation in the project areas. Specific
                                                                 features will be included in the PES schemes
                                                                 (both PES-1 and PES-2) to reward preservation of
                                                                 natural forests. The CMSCR project is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 successfully implementing PES-1 scheme for
                                                                 forest conservation, with participant farms with
                                                                 30% of their land covered with forests agreeing to
                                                                 preserve them (the PES-1 scheme for forest
                                                                 conservation under CMSCR project recognizes a
                                                                 baseline payment of US $23 and of US $18 in the
                                                                 following years of the project). While under
                                                                 PES-2, no payment will be made for forest
                                                                 preservation, farmers involved in deforestation
                                                                 practices (based on land use monitoring) will be
                                                                 automatically withdrawn from the project and all
                                                                 PES contracts will be terminated.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09   Yes           While SSP usually reduce the use of pesticides,
                                                                 this policy is triggered (as it was in the parent
                                                                 project) as pesticides may be used in silvopastoral
                                                                 systems supported through the project. The
                                                                 project will support the use of biological or
                                                                 environmental pest control methods and to
                                                                 diminish reliance on synthetic chemical


                                                         Page 6 of 12
                                                                        pesticides. The project will support technical
                                                                        assistance for the adoption of proven,
                                                                        economically and environmentally sustainable
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        Integrated Pest Management practices (IPM), an
                                                                        approach designed to increase farmer productivity
                                                                        (yields) while reducing input costs, human health
                                                                        risk and adverse environmental impacts through
                                                                        the virtual elimination of pesticide use.

                                                                        The IPM approach further increases sustainability
                                                                        of cattle ranching farms by focusing on improving
                                                                        the knowledge and skills of farmers to enable
                                                                        better management of resources. The information
                                                                        related to pest management has been incorporated
                                                                        in the Environmental Assessment and the
                                                                        dedicated chapter “Pest Management” of the
                                                                        EMP has been adjusted to reflect the extended
                                                                        scope under the Additional Financing, and
                                                                        particularly the support to the on-farm nurseries
                                                                        for the production of seeds and seedlings .
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No           This policy is not triggered as no physical cultural
                         BP 4.11                                        resources have been identified in the two project
                                                                        areas and project activities will have no impact on
                                                                        physical cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No           The majority of the population in the el Meta-
                                                                        hotspot area is mestizo (mixed). There is no
                                                                        presence of indigenous reservations in the project
                                                                        area. The Guajira department has an important
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        cultural diversity with the presence of indigenous
                                                                        ethnic groups such as Wayuu, Wiwa and Kogis.
                                                                        Nevertheless, the social assessment conducted in
                                                                        the project area in la Guajira clarified that: (i)
                                                                        there is no overlap between legally-constituted
                                                                        reguardos and the project intervention areas; (ii)
                                                                        within the project intervention areas there are two
                                                                        zones where Wayuu family groups live in a
                                                                        traditional way (but not legally constituted as
                                                                        resguardos). During one of the field visit, guided
                                                                        by a technician from Fedegan who is a member of
                                                                        the Wayuu ethnic group, the team visited one of
                                                                        the two zones and interacted with the leader and
                                                                        other members of the group. It was observed that
                                                                        the Wayuu group does not hold cows for cattle
                                                                        ranching activities, but only sheep and goats as a
                                                                        main livelihood. The Wayuu leader informed that
                                                                        this situation was similar in the other Wayuu
                                                                        community living inside the project area; and (iii)


                                                                Page 7 of 12
                                                                       apart from these two groups, there are Wayuu
                                                                       people within the project area who have private
                                                                       land-holding, possess their own economic
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       activity, and although they maintain certain
                                                                       traditional customs, they have chosen westernized
                                                                       lifestyles. These people do not meet the criteria
                                                                       under the IP policy. Based on the above, it was
                                                                       agreed not to trigger the Indigenous Peoples
                                                                       Policy (OP 4.10) given that the indigenous
                                                                       peoples (Wayuu) that carry out cattle ranching in
                                                                       the area do not fulfill OP 4.10 criteria as they (a)
                                                                       do not have collective attachment to the land and
                                                                       (b) do not have social or political institutions that
                                                                       are separate from those of the dominant society.

                                                                       In regards to the activities proposed to work with
                                                                       indigenous peoples communities in the
                                                                       neighboring areas and with individuals of
                                                                       indigenous descent that do not fulfill OP 4.10
                                                                       criteria but are present in the project area, a Social
                                                                       Management Plan was prepared to disseminate
                                                                       project information through education material
                                                                       translated to Wayuunaiki and information/
                                                                       education sessions through peer-to-peer
                                                                       discussions with farmers participating in the
                                                                       project to showcase the environmental benefits of
                                                                       the conversion of traditional cattle ranching
                                                                       practice activities to more sustainable ones.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       Additionally, it is envisioned under the project
                                                                       that the two Wayuu communities in the project
                                                                       area that are not cattle ranchers, and thus, are not
                                                                       affected by the project, but expressed interest in
                                                                       benefitting in terms of seeds and seedlings, could
                                                                       be considered under the “on-farm nursery”
                                                                       activity under Component 2 of the project: this is
                                                                       seen as a best practice and could strengthen the
                                                                       transfer of knowledge between the Wayuu
                                                                       communities and the project beneficiaries with a
                                                                       potential of great value added to the project.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No           In both areas, the project will not finance any
                         4.12                                          activities that involve involuntary resettlement
                                                                       including both involuntary taking of land and
                                                                       restrictions in access to protected areas. The
                                                                       screening procedures established under the Parent
                                                                       Project would be applied to ensure that farms
                                                                       benefitting from the project are under legal
                                                                       ownership.



                                                               Page 8 of 12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              This policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                                                                support the construction or rehabilitation of dams
                                                                                nor will it support other investments which rely
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                on the services of existing dams.
                            Projects on International        No                 This policy is not triggered as REDD+ activities
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                will not impact any international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 This policy is not triggered as REDD+ activities
                            7.60                                                will not be implemented in any disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed Additional Financing would scale up the parent project, through an expansion into
                              two new areas and the piloting of a new scheme to promote the adoption of intensive silvopastoral
                              systems (iSPS). While the original project only focused on biodiversity-friendly land uses (under
                              which iSPS are not eligible for payments), the Additional Financing would specifically support the
                              adoption of iSPS and enhance carbon stocks in cattle ranching farms. The two schemes are
                              expected to complement each other and to reinforce their positive environmental and economic
                              impacts.

                             Positive environmental impacts have been and remain the basic objective of the project and
                             therefore, no large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative impacts are foreseen. Some of the
                             expected direct positive impacts in the project area include: (i) enhanced preservation of
                             biodiversity, (ii) improved ecological connectivity, (iii) soil fertility; (iv) enhancement of carbon
                             stored in cattle ranching farms and reduction of associated greenhouse gases emissions and (v)
Public Disclosure Copy




                             improved water quality (both surface and ground water); and (iii) greater biodiversity within
                             riparian zones. In addition, the project is expected to generate evidence-based results on benefits of
                             the SPS that could positively influence the policy-making in favor of a transformation of the
                             livestock sector in Colombia and the scaling up of sustainable cattle ranching practices.

                             The monitoring and evaluation systems developed under the project specifically target the
                             environmental indicators: while the M&E tool for biodiversity is already up and running, specific
                             indicators on Climate Change mitigation (at the farm and landscape levels) have been developed
                             and will be specifically monitored under the Additional Financing.

                              Social and environmental assessments have been conducted in the two areas as part of the
                              preparation of the Additional Financing. In both case, the analysis concluded that the two areas
                              could significantly benefit from a broader adoption of sylvopastoral systems (including intensive
                              SPS) to tackle the most pressing environmental challenges encountered in these areas
                              (deforestation and water availability in both terms of quality and quantity). As a result of these
                              assessments, it can be concluded that the Project environmental category remains as B as well as
                              the triggered safeguard policies on which the same instruments already developed for the parent
                              project can satisfactorily be applied.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:


                                                                        Page 9 of 12
                           No indirect or long term negative impacts are foreseen as a result of anticipated future activities in
                           the project area. Long term impacts are expected to be positive, given the focus on sustainability
                           and poverty alleviation in rural areas. The design of the parent project, and the Additional
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Financing, has been guided toward long-term sustainability and demonstration potential for future
                           up-scale of SPS activities in Colombia beyond the timeframe of the project.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The additional financing will scale up what is perceived as a successful intervention model: it will
                           add an innovative scheme to further promote sustainable silvopastoral systems. An alternative
                           would have been to prepare a separate stand-alone project, which has been discarded at the
                           Concept stage as it would not have allowed generating synergies that have been generated between
                           the parent project and this additional financing. While the preparation period for the Additional
                           Financing has been almost the same as for the preparation of a new project, it has also allowed the
                           restructuring of the parent project and have hugely benefitted from the lessons learnt from this
                           process.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The implementation arrangements would remain the similar to the existing ones under the Parent
                           project. FEDEGAN would remain the lead executing Agency and would be the signatory of the
                           Grant Agreement with the World Bank: Subsidiary agreements signed between FEDEGAN and
                           CIPAV, Fondo Acción, and TNC, as “Core partner agencies” would be extended, as needed, at
                           least till the new closing date of the project.

                           All this partners has development institutional capacity to conduct the different activities of the
                           components and subcomponents of the project. In terms of Safeguards, performance of the
                           different partners has been rated satisfactory. The implemented of the safeguards instruments has
                           been deemed satisfactory under the parent project and the same instruments will thus be used
Public Disclosure Copy




                           under the Additional Financing. All partners have been fully involved in the preparation of the
                           Environmental and Social Assessments in the two new areas and the revision of the Environment
                           Management Plan and are thus considered fully ready to satisfactorily implement safeguards
                           instruments under the Additional Financing.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The parental project was consulted through regional meetings involving multiple stakeholders:
                           government agencies, regional autonomous corporations, municipalities, universities, livestock
                           producer associations, agricultural and environmental NGOs in each region, with extensive
                           participation and project feedback .

                           The primary stakeholders of the project are the cattle ranchers. The two Convocatoria conducted
                           under the parent project have been an opportunity to disseminate information on SPS practices and
                           their potential benefits (environmental and economic) at the farm level. A Communication and
                           dissemination strategy has been implemented and will further disseminate information.

                           The secondary target stakeholders of the project are the policy-makers: a specific communication
                           strategy has been drafted and will be further fine-tuned during the Additional Financing to provide
                           them with evidence-based results on benefits of SPS practices and their potential contribution to
                           the transformation of the livestock sector in Colombia.


                                                                     Page 10 of 12
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Colombia                                                         06-Dec-2013
                           Comments: http://www.fedegan.org.co/programas/publicaciones-ganaderia-colombiana-
                                         sostenible
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Colombia                                                         06-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]




                                                                   Page 11 of 12
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a               Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
Public Disclosure Copy




                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Carole Megevand
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                            Date: 21-Mar-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Victoria Stanley (SM)                            Date: 21-Mar-2014




                                                                       Page 12 of 12
