                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA3024
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          South Eastern Europe and                     P143921
                                                                            Project ID:
                                              Balkans
                            Project Name:     Croatia & Bosnia & Herzegovina GEF Adriatic Sea Environmental Pollution
                                              Control Project (I) (P143921)
                            Task Team         Manuel G. Marino
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       24-Sep-2013                         Estimated   12-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: ECSUW                                Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              International waters
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (45%), Solid waste management (35%),
                                              General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Pollution management and environmental health (60%), Environmental policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              and institutions (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      29.97           Total Bank Financing:               0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                    Amount
                              Borrower                                                                              23.20
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                      6.77
                              Municipalities of Borrowing Country                                                    0.00
                              Total                                                                                 29.97
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?


                                                                     Page 1 of 10
                         2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                         The project’s development and global environmental objectives are: (a) to reduce the discharge of
                         pollutants with transboundary importance, particularly Nitrogen, in selected hot-spots of the eastern
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Adriatic Sea; and (b) to improve the capacity in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina to prepare
                         pollution control projects in selected localities of Dalmatia and Herzegovina and to strengthen the
                         capacity to monitor environmentally sensitive areas of the sea.
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed Project would be implemented as a pilot under the broader Adriatic Sea Environment
                         Program, focusing on supporting preparation and implementation of priority pollution reduction
                         measures and strengthening the institutional framework for protection of the ecological balance in
                         target hotspots on the Eastern shore of the Adriatic, in this case mainly in Croatia. It would involve
                         implementation of selected demonstrative priority pollution control investments and regional
                         Technical Assistance, to address key issues affecting the environmental sustainability of the Adriatic
                         Sea, including: municipal wastewater and solid waste treatment; protection of karstic groundwater;
                         improvement of coastal water monitoring, and preparation of investments. The project has three
                         main components.

                         Component 1 – Demonstrative investments to reduce nutrient discharges and improve water quality
                         monitoring capacity (USD 27.85 million, of which USD 5.05 million are GEF financing): This
                         Component will finance works and equipment for:

                         (i)         Design, supply, and installation of equipment for the reduction of nutrient discharges,
                         including, inter alia, upgrading the solid waste leachate treatment lagoon in Mostar’s landfill in BiH,
                         (ii)     Design, supply and installation of equipment for upgrading the solid waste leachate
                         collection and treatment in Zadar’s landfill in Croatia, and
                         (iii)    Provision of equipment to monitor coastal water quality and strengthen regional capacity to
                         protect sensitive areas from accidental pollution discharges.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2 – Technical Assistance, TA (USD 1.98 million, of which USD 1.60 million are GEF
                         financing): This Component will finance consultant services to:

                         (i)         Prepare preliminary designs and project documentation, including preparation of
                         complementary analysis and other studies required for EU review and compliance, as well as tender
                         documentation, to access EU funds for investments in leachate and wastewater management to
                         comply with EU requirements. The Government of BiH confirmed that Trebinje and Gacko in
                         Eastern Herzegovina, Lise, Livno, Glamoc and Posusje in Western Herzegovina, and Neum, on the
                         Adriatic coast, would be eligible for this project preparation facility, upon confirmation of
                         availability of base documentation and compliance with eligibility criteria. For Croatia, the
                         Government confirmed that Zadar, Split, Ploce and Dubrovnik landfills would be eligible for this
                         project preparation facility.

                         (ii)     Carry out an assessment of sources of nutrients, including point and non-point sources in two
                         sensitive areas/hot-spots; Northern Dalmatia (Zadarska County and northern part of the Sibensko-
                         Kninska County) and Neretva Delta area, as well as to provide an analysis of the policy, legal and/or
                         institutional reforms that are needed to address related water quality problems.

                         Component 3 – Project Management and Dissemination (USD 0.14 million, of which USD 0.12


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         million are GEF financing).

                         This component will finance project coordination and management as well as monitoring and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         evaluation, including IWLearn related activities for the Project Management Team (PMT) in BiH.
                         This component will also finance BiH’s PMT office expenses related to the project management,
                         including translations, communications, local and abroad travels, banks fees, audit reports, office
                         supplies and equipment as well as repair and maintenance of office equipment.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project would impact all Eastern Adriatic Countries in the long run. However, direct
                         implications would be seen through two demonstrations sub projects in Zadar (Croatia) and Mostar
                         (BiH). In Zadar, a coastal city, it would finance upgrading the leachate treatment system for the
                         current landfill. The landfill is located in the Karstic area. In Mostar, the project will finance the
                         upgrading of the leachate treatment system for the landfill. Mostar is located on the river Neretva,
                         the largest tributary of Eastern Adriatic Sea.

                         The TA component would entail only project preparation documentation for leachate treatment
                         systems or upgrades of the waste water treatment system, in selected localities in Dalmatia and
                         Herzegovina.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Natasa Vetma (ECSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               The potential impacts are likely to be site
                          BP 4.01                                             specific, and typically focused on impacts of
                                                                              construction of investments under Component 1,
                                                                              relating to the upgrade of the landfill leachate
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              treatment plants in Zadar, Croatia, and in Mostar,
                                                                              BiH. To successfully identify and manage
                                                                              potential adverse impacts on the environment
                                                                              from project funded activities such as those
                                                                              mentioned above, the borrowers has prepared two
                                                                              separate ESMFs and demonstration EMPs for
                                                                              Zadar and Mostar leachate treatment systems.
                                                                              These documents have been disclosed in-country
                                                                              and sent to the Banks Info shop prior to project
                                                                              appraisal. For Component 2 TA, the Bank would
                                                                              finance project preparation documentation mainly
                                                                              for EU financing. This project documentation
                                                                              would include EIAs.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No




                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes              The ESMF includes provisions on chance finds
                            BP 4.11                                             as Adriatic coast is known to be area of frequent
                                                                                archaeological finds.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International           Yes               The Adriatic Sea and its tributaries, including
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                the Neretva, Krka and Cetina Rivers are
                                                                                international waterways. The project therefore
                                                                                triggers the Bank’s Policy on International
                                                                                Waters.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The partial assessment environmental category B is applicable for the Project. The Project will
                              focus on nutrient reduction to Adriatic sea, and aims to finance two demonstration upgrades of
                              leachate treatment in landfills in Adriatic Sea basin for nutrient reduction. The preparation of
                              technical documentation (intended for improving adsorption of EU funds) will focus on the same
                              type of investments and include all supporting documentation (analysis, policy, SEAs, etc.) that
Public Disclosure Copy




                              will contribute to nutrient reduction. The project will also finance monitoring equipment in Croatia
                              to improve sea water quality monitoring.

                             The Recipients in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia have prepared separate Environmental and
                             Social Management Frameworks (ESMF). ESMFs define the environmental screening and
                             assessment procedures for the project and sub projects. According to the ESMF, the municipal
                             companies will be required to carry out adequate type of environmental assessment of the
                             proposed investments according to the World Bank safeguards procedures and to obtain
                             environmental permits as prescribed by the national legislation.

                             The project triggers three safeguard policies: Environmental Assessment; Physical Cultural
                             Resources and Projects in International Waters. Issues associated with triggered policies do not
                             pose risks that are difficult to address, as they are, and will be, managed systematically, using local
                             experience, local and EU standards and guidance from the Bank. All safeguard policies triggered
                             by the project can be adequately dealt with given the established good practices and institutional
                             enforcement capacities in both Croatia and BiH.

                             OP/BP 4.01, (Environmental Assessment) is triggered. ESMFs have been prepared, following
                             World Bank policies on consultation and disclosure, in advance of project appraisal, which
                             includes Environmental Management Plans (EMP) for both demonstration investments. The


                                                                        Page 4 of 10
                         respective ESMFs along with an announcement of the public consultation workshop were
                         disclosed on June 14, 2013 on the website of the implementing agencies and hard copies are
                         available on solid waste municipal companies’ information boards in Mostar and Zadar (sites of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the two demonstration investments to be financed by the project). Public consultations were held
                         on June 27, 2013 in Sarajevo and Zagreb.

                         Only EA Category B and C investments would be eligible for TA assistance, therefore investments
                         having large scale environmental impacts (Category A) would be excluded as described in the
                         ESMFs prepared for the Project. This implies that for both the demonstration investments and
                         technical assistance documentation that will be prepared for future investments, only upgrades of
                         the existing structures will be included. The environmental due diligence procedures identified in
                         the ESMF comply with both national and WB environmental safeguards procedures. The ESMF
                         calls for preparation of EAs or updates of existing ones for all financed wastewater or leachate
                         treatment investments as well as for all TAs that will be prepared for EU financing. Specific site
                         Environmental Impact Assessments (EAs) / EMP would be prepared for the category B
                         investments for which TA would be financed.

                         For other type of TA (analysis, reports, etc.), where environmental impacts are expected to be
                         negligible, the Terms of Reference (ToRs) for each sub project would have strong emphasis on
                         improving environmental quality and sustainability of the assignment.

                         OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) is triggered as the project recognizes that the historical
                         richness of Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina creates a higher than usual likelihood of cultural
                         “chance finds? in construction activities. All investments to be supported by the Project will
                         comply with local legislation, including advance consultation with the Ministry of Culture and
                         allowing the local permitting process, which have been reviewed and found adequate. The EMSF
                         includes provisions on chance finds.

                         OP/BP/GP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways is triggered since the Adriatic Sea and its
Public Disclosure Copy




                         tributaries, including the Neretva, Krka and Cetina Rivers are international waterways.
                         Notification letters, describing the Project scope and the analysis made that confirmed its positive
                         impact and lack of potential negative effects, were sent to the Mediterranean Action Plan (MAP)
                         secretariat on April 11 and May 17, 2013 by Croatia and on June 10, 2013 by Bosnia and
                         Herzegovina, for distribution to Adriatic countries according to MAP procedures. There have been
                         no complaints or comments received by any country nor MAP within the period indicated in the
                         notification, or after that.

                         OP 17.50, (Disclosure Policy) is triggered with reference to the EMSF and EAs/EMPs for all
                         investments to be financed or for which TA support will be provided. EMPs for both Mostar and
                         Zadar leachate treatment plants have been disclosed as part of the ESMF.

                         Safeguard Policies Restrictions

                         Category A investments or technical assistance for category A projects will not be financed under
                         the project. A proposed investment is classified in this category if it is likely to have highly
                         significant, diverse, and/or long-term adverse impacts on human health and natural environment
                         the magnitude of which is difficult to determine at the sub-project identification stage. These
                         impacts may also affect an area broader than the investment sites.



                                                                   Page 5 of 10
                           OP/ BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. The project would not trigger OP 4.12. For the two
                           demonstration investments there is no land acquisition, no scavengers in the landfills, no residents,
                           and the landfill areas are properly fenced. Also, during preparation the project team confirmed that
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the ownership of these areas has not been contested. Also, no potential beneficiaries of the TA
                           Component can participate in the project if they do not comply with the ESMF requirements,
                           particularly if land acquisition would be needed for the investments for which design and project
                           documentation are requested to be supported under this Project, even if land is obtained before the
                           project effectiveness for the specific purpose of the project. Rehabilitation and reconstruction
                           (which could involve demolition of un-suitable structure and construction of a new one) of
                           existing buildings within the same footprint would be permissible. If reconstruction would exceed
                           the footprint of existing structure in any way, the respective Project Management Team (PMT) and
                           municipalities must ascertain that any additional land used is unencumbered (i.e. no squatters or
                           encroachers or not requiring the eviction of anyone resident in such property) and provide proof in
                           form of pictures and ownership titles. The PMTs should verify for each TA proposal the
                           unencumbered status of the property prior to approving any TA assistance which could raise such
                           issues.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The project is expected to generate significant environmental benefits by reducing nutrient load
                           through two demonstration investments, and preparing technical documentation for investments to
                           be financed by EU funds or different IFIs. By focusing on this region, the Project aims to have an
                           important impact on preserving the environmental resources on which the growth of tourism and
                           its capacity for employment generation is based, implying benefits beyond participating
                           municipalities.

                           No significant negative indirect or long term impacts are expected.

                           No more than two proposed demonstration investments (Zadar and Mostar) would be financed
Public Disclosure Copy




                           under the Project and these would fall under category B as the impacts are expected to be
                           beneficial for the environment and the adverse impacts are site-specific; few if any of them are
                           irreversible; and in most cases mitigation measures can be designed easily. The investment for
                           which project preparation will be financed under the TA component would only include leachate
                           treatment or rehabilitation of existing wastewater treatment plants and should comply with all
                           requirements established under the ESMF.

                           As with the operation and construction of any wastewater treatment plant or leachate treatment
                           plant, potential negative impacts include air, soil and water pollution associated with the
                           following: (a) construction/rehabilitation; (b) treatment of leachate or wastewaters; (c)
                           management of waste sludge from the treatment plants; (d) operations; and (e) decommissioning.
                           The following impacts are to be especially considered: odors, noise, spreading of insects, and
                           potential health hazards in the vicinity of discharge, exploitation of the sea and seacoast, potential
                           changes in flora and fauna due to the discharge of treated waste waters, decline in land value, and
                           disposal of sludge from the treatment plant.

                           Preparation of mitigations plans are defined through the ESMF and, as such, will be part of EIAs
                           and EMPs, mitigating the potential above mentioned impacts. Each EIA and EMP will include a
                           monitoring program for the individual sites.



                                                                      Page 6 of 10
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           During Project preparation the scope of potential investments was widened to include leachate
Public Disclosure Copy




                           treatment systems as the whole Eastern Adriatic coast is Karstic, implying contribution of
                           unregulated landfill on nutrient load.

                          The EIAs for investments supported under the TA Component will include a chapter on project
                          alternatives including “construct nothing? alternative in order to determine the environmental
                          impact for a variant without the construction of wastewater treatment plant upgrade or leachate
                          treatment system.

                          Within the EIA, proposed variants should be evaluated according to the following criteria:

                           •       environmental impact, ecological acceptability of the proposed solution,
                           •       construction, operation and maintenance costs, and
                           •       adequateness of the system in relation to local circumstances, institutional and socio-
                           economic.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Recipients in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina have formed PMTs or are using existing
                           PMTs. The PMT for implementation of the Croatian part of the Project was established in
                           Environmental Protection and Energy Efficiency Fund (EPEEF). Staff in EPEEF has previous
                           experience in implementation of WB projects thorough Energy Efficiency project and Inland
                           Waters Project. For Bosnia and Herzegovina an existing PMT for several WB projects will be
                           used. This PMT is based in the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations (MoFTER).

                          Each PMTs prepared individual ESMFs. Although two separate documents, there was a high level
                          of cooperation between the two PMTs resulting in streamlined ESMF procedures. The ESMF
Public Disclosure Copy




                          serves as a tool to screen the investments and technical assistance and based on the screening
                          guides the client on environmental due diligence. The mechanism of environmental screening,
                          review, approval, and supervision of investments, including roles and responsibilities of all
                          agencies involved in it, is described in the ESMF. According to the ESMF, the Environmental
                          Screening will be carried out by EPEEF and MoFTER at an early stage in each investment to
                          review and determine the appropriate environmental due-diligence documents required for the
                          proposed investment. Based on the outcome of screening, the scope of an Environmental
                          Assessment (EA) will be determined.

                          The municipalities/municipal company will be responsible for preparing the required EA and for
                          confirming that any clearances necessary for the proposed investment are obtained from the
                          relevant authorities as prescribed by the national legislation and that is in line with the World Bank
                          procedures as described in this document. The municipalities/municipal company will firstly
                          comply with the national legislation and then based on the gap analysis update the documents to
                          align with WB safeguards procedures described in this EMSF. Once the EA is performed, public
                          consultation done and recommendations incorporated into the design, EPEEF and or MoFTER
                          will appraise the proposed investment package and allow its financing. The EMPs will be
                          implemented by the contractor and supervised directly by municipalities/municipal company
                          supervising engineer. The implementation of the EMPs will also be monitored by EPEEF and/ or
                          MoFTER which will be in charge for review, approval, and supervision process.


                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                           In the course of an investment implementation the municipalities are responsible for carrying out
                           their daily activities in compliance with the recommendations of the environmental assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                           reports and for applying mitigation measures as prescribed by EMPs. Municipalities will be
                           expected to monitor compliance with EMPs and report to the EPEEF or MoFTER on the
                           environmental performance as an integral part of their regular reporting.

                           The Bank will assist EPEEF and MoFTER and municipalities/municipal companies in screening
                           procedures. EPEEF and MoFTER will be responsible for overall quality of environmental due-
                           diligence documents including ToRs, environmental analysis, EIAs, etc. and its compliance with
                           the WB safeguards policies.

                           EPEEF and MoFTER will inform the IBRD on the environmental due diligence applied through
                           the general reporting on the Project progress.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders include from the Ministries of Finance, MoFTER, EPEEF, participating
                           municipal companies and the municipalities, Ministries of Environmental Protection, local NGOs,
                           cantons, and the population that will benefit from the project, both directly and indirectly.

                           The ESMF in detail describes the disclosure procedures. In addition to one public consultation at
                           least one public disclosure is required of the prepared EIAs. In cases where the EIAs are required
                           by the national legislation, public consultation will be organized and overseen by the Ministries of
                           Environment. In the cases where EIAs are not required by national legislation, the public
                           disclosure and consultation will be organized by the PMTs or municipalities in question, in
                           compliance with Bank requirements.

                           The respective ESMFs along with an announcement of the public consultation workshop were
Public Disclosure Copy




                           disclosed on June 14, 2013 on the website of the EPEEF, MoFTER and hard copies are available
                           on municipal companies’ info boards in Mostar and Zadar. The draft and final documents are as
                           well disclosed on World Bank InfoShop. Both EPEEF and MoFTER called for written comments
                           and have provided both postal and email address for sending comments and suggestions. All
                           written comments and questions raised in the public consultation were addressed, then
                           summarized and attached to EMSF as annex. Only then EMSFs were considered final.

                           All documents prepared under project will as well follow the World Bank disclosure policy
                           guidelines as well OP 4.01 guidelines on consultation and will be prepared and disclosed in
                           Croatian language. ToRs, EMPs and EIA executive non technical summaries will be prepared in
                           English as well.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         11-Jun-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      27-Aug-2013
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bosnia and Herzegovina                                           14-Jun-2013
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Croatia                                                          14-Jun-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?



                                                                   Page 9 of 10
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Manuel G. Marino
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Pier Francesco Mantovani (SM)             Date: 14-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
