                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1637
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Dominican Republic                Project ID:    P131109
                            Project Name:      DO Flexible Employment System Project (FESP) (P131109)
                            Task Team          Juan Martin Moreno
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          19-Nov-2013                       Estimated   25-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSHS-DPT                         Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Vocational training (25%), Other social services (75%)
                            Theme(s):         Improving labor markets (40%), Social safety nets (20%), Social risk mitigation
                                              (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      20.00           Total Bank Financing:                 20.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     20.00
                              Total                                                                                     20.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of this project is to improve the earnings and employment rates of poor
                           unemployed persons and poor idle youth by supporting the implementation of a temporary
                           employment program and a youth training program.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         The proposed Project includes two components. The first component supports the two main
                         complementary building blocks of the National Employment System (NES): the Temporary
                         Employment Project (TEP), and the youth training program ‘Juventud y Empleo’ (PJyE). The second
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component is aimed at improving the monitoring and evaluation capacity of the Ministry of Labor
                         (MoL), which is essential both for the flexibility of the NES as well as for the implementation of a
                         progressive strategy to scale-up the TEP. The Project would support the geographical and
                         progressive expansion of the TEP to additional municipalities, which would be determined during the
                         lifetime of the project, according to dynamics of the local labor markets (high unemployment and
                         potential market growth), need and willingness to participate. Component 2 will support the
                         production and publishing of monitoring reports with statistical information on the evolution of local
                         labor markets, information resulting from the implementation of the NES programs, and the one
                         obtained from the tracking surveys that will follow up on the graduated beneficiaries. The MoL will
                         be able to determine the vacancies allocation across programs (PJyE and TEP), as well as, across
                         regions where the TEP is being implemented.

                         The Project foresees an implementation strategy in which the coverage of the TEP expands
                         progressively and the vacancies of the PJyE financed by the project progressively decreases as the
                         youth training program consolidates in INFOTEP (National Institute for Professional Technical
                         Training), and becomes a stable component of the national training policy. Nevertheless, the program
                         is designed to provide the MoL the flexibility to adjust, on a semi-annual basis, the number of
                         vacancies in each program, as well as across regions. Moreover, the geographical expansion of the
                         TEP is not determined at this stage and will be determined on a yearly basis, according to a pre-
                         established criteria supported by public information. The sequential expansion of the TEP program
                         across the territory will provide the Government capacity to provide emergency relief in times of
                         crisis, or to improve the efficiency of the labor market in times of growth. The TEP can be scaled-
                         down in times of growing labor demand to focus on those segments of the labor market that
                         experience greater difficulties to find a job, earn an income and escape from poverty. Finally, the
                         flexibility of the project will allow the MoL to expand the number of vacancies at the PJyE to ease
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the insertion of idle youth into the labor market in times of strong demand. The availability of just-in-
                         time information from the monitoring reports becomes crucial for decision makers to allocate
                         resources across programs and regions as well as to plan the geographical expansion. A rigorous
                         impact evaluation will complement the information resulting from the tracking surveys to be
                         financed under Component 2.

                         A.     Project Components
                         Each component of the project is sub-divided in two sub-components.

                         Component 1: Improving the earnings and employment rates of poor unemployed persons and poor
                         idle youth (US$17.5 million). This component would support a recently launched temporary
                         employment program and a seasoned youth training program. In the first case, the strategy to be
                         followed in this Project would be to support its geographical expansion, while in the second case, the
                         vacancies to be covered would be progressively reduced as the program consolidates as part of the
                         national training policy at INFOTEP. Both programs supported under this component present a
                         combination of similar interventions with different intensities, implementation methods, and target
                         groups. Beneficiaries from both programs receive life-skills (LS) and technical, vocational and
                         educational training (TVET). The work requirements of TEP beneficiaries are greater than for youth
                         at the training program, therefore the number of in-class trainings is larger.




                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         a.       Sub-component 1.a. Temporary Employment Program (US$15 million). The goal of this
                         sub-component would be to improve the earnings and employment rates of the most disadvantaged
                         segments of the labor market. The TEP builds on the experience of the pilot temporary employment
Public Disclosure Copy




                         program ‘Santiago Trabaja’, implemented under component 4 of the Youth Development Project
                         (YDP, Loan 7317-DO). The program provides temporary work opportunities and training courses to
                         low-skilled, poor, and unemployed job seekers that are not in the formal labor force. Participants will
                         be legally classified as contracted by the state according to the public sector labor code (41-08).
                         The program consists of providing beneficiaries with temporary employment for six months, along
                         with life-skills training (DCB, Desarrollo de Competencias Básicas) and vocational training courses.
                         The TEP is expected to create 20,000 temporary jobs through TEP sub-projects which will finance
                         wages, vocational and life-skills training. The TEP will also provide a capped share of the tools and
                         materials involved in delivering TEP sub-projects. The latter are executed by Local Organizations
                         (LOs) which are selected through competitive processes organized by the Project Coordination Unit
                         (PCU). To reduce the risk of patronage or ‘clientelistic’ abuses, beneficiaries and sub-projects are
                         selected independently. The National Employment Service (SENAE) matches selected beneficiaries
                         to approved sub-projects in a second stage.

                         The TEP has two main goals depending on the phase of the economic cycle in which it is being
                         implemented, allowing for flexible mechanisms to respond to the labor market. In times of crisis, the
                         TEP generates welfare gains to participants that receive an income in exchange for a work activity.
                         Conversely, in positive phases of the economic cycle, the program can be scaled down to avoid
                         competing with labor demand from the private sector focusing on those segments of the labor market
                         that experienced difficulties finding a job even in good times. In these cases, the motivational aspects
                         of the training course, the temporary stability of a minimum wage, the work habits and the skills
                         acquired at the technical training are aimed at improving the opportunities of people that otherwise
                         would have lagged behind

                         b.Sub-component 1.b: Youth Training Program ‘Juventud y Empleo’ (US$2.5 million). The youth
                         training program PJyE is aimed at improving the employment rates of poor idle youth. This program
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provides in-class life-skills and vocational training courses, as well as on the job-training through a
                         two-month internship in private firms. This seasoned program has been run by the MoL since 2001,
                         and the impact evaluations have shown that the program has a positive effect on the earnings,
                         employment rate and quality of employment among participants. The program has shown positive
                         indirect effects such as a reduction in teenage pregnancy and lower risky behavior among younger
                         participants. According to the impact evaluation, the life-skills training courses would be playing an
                         important role in motivating the target population of idle youth. This edition of the PJyE will also
                         introduce a wage subsidy to program participants that reach the internship stage. This design feature
                         has been introduced to improve the placement rate of graduates.

                         To make the program sustainable, the YDP introduced design features to progressively migrate the
                         implementation of the program from the MoL to INFOTEP as part of a strategy to ensure its
                         sustainability beyond the life-time of the project. INFOTEP successfully implemented 400 courses,
                         including an alternative modality to train young people on entrepreneurship in areas with no local
                         private firms or COS (‘Centros Operativos del Sistema’) willing to participate in the internship stage.
                         Under this sub-component, the Project would support 5,000 beneficiaries of the program, as part of
                         the transition strategy to consolidate this program as part of the national training strategy at
                         INFOTEP. This component will finance training courses for beneficiaries, stipends and minimum
                         wages during the internship phase in private firms.



                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         Component 2: Strengthening Government Capacity for Policy Implementation, Monitoring, and
                         Evaluation (US$2.5 million). The objective of this component is to improve the MoL’s capacity to
                         reach the target population of the supported programs through strengthened program coordination,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation, monitoring, and evaluation. The component is divided in two sub-components.

                         a.      Sub-component 2.a. Implementation Operating Costs (US$1.5 million). The goal of this sub-
                         component is to strengthen the MoL’s capacity to coordinate, implement, and supervise the
                         execution of programs under component 1. All the activities of this component will be implemented
                         by the PCU of the MoL which will be responsible for carrying out all the fiduciary processes of this
                         component. This sub-component includes financing, coordination, and supervision, as well as staff
                         costs derived from the implementation of the TEP, which is expected to progressively increase as the
                         program expands geographically.

                         b.       Sub-component 2.b. Monitoring and Evaluation (US$1 million). The main goal of this sub-
                         component is to provide just-in-time information to the decision-makers in charge of the project
                         implementation and the NES to exploit the flexibility features of its programs. Under this sub-
                         component, monitoring reports will be produced and published periodically in order to plan the
                         project’s implementation the following year. The latter will feed into decisions such as the plan to
                         geographically expand the TEP and the inter and intra program composition of vacancies.
                         Monitoring reports are expected to be based on systematic tracking surveys and statistical
                         information from regular surveys (ENFT) and administrative records (Social Security). Finally, this
                         component will also finance the design and implementation of an impact evaluation based on
                         rigorous methodology that will enable isolating the effects of the intervention from the fluctuations
                         of the economy and other factors.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The program will sequentially expand from Santiago, the city in which it was originally piloted to
                         cover additional municipalities. These additional municipalities are left undefined on purpose to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         able to adapt the delivery of the program to regions in which the economic crisis hits employment
                         hardest, where there is potential growth, and ability to implement the TEP at the local level. The
                         geographical distribution of sub-projects and beneficiaries is also left undefined to allow the MoL to
                         adjust the distribution according to the lessons learned from implementation (such as implementation
                         and financial capacity of local sub-project implementing entities), and information from monitoring
                         reports of the unemployment incidence, distribution, and evolution produced by OMLAD
                         (‘Observatorio del Mercado Laboral Dominicano’) and included in the monitoring report of the TEP.
                         The geographic distribution and the expansion schedule will be submitted for approval to the Bank
                         with each round of call for proposals.

                         The employment activities supported by the proposed Project will focus on improving communities
                         through small public works or services in urban/residential areas; they will not involve agricultural
                         work or impose potential negative impacts on forests or (other) natural habitats.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Jose Vicente Zevallos (LCSSO)
                         Tuuli Johanna Bernardini (LCSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)



                                                                      Page 4 of 9
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes             The works and services that the project will
                         BP 4.01                                         finance will focus on relatively small sub-projects
                                                                         of community interest (please see below for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         examples). The Environmental Management
                                                                         Framework (EMF) of the YDP, prepared in
                                                                         August, 2010, was revised to become the
                                                                         Environmental and Social Management
                                                                         Framework (ESMF) of the proposed P roject and
                                                                         disclosed in-country. The ESMF provides
                                                                         guidance on classifying and evaluating proposed
                                                                         employment activities according to a typology
                                                                         that forms a part of the Operational Manual for
                                                                         sub-project screening, design, approval,
                                                                         implementation, and closing. The ESMF
                                                                         describes potential negative environmental
                                                                         impacts that different types of sub-projects could
                                                                         cause and guides on respective management
                                                                         measures to prevent and mitigate them. The
                                                                         ESMF was disclosed in-country on September 20,
                                                                         2013.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              The Project would not finance activities that
                                                                         would affect natural habitats as defined in Annex
                                                                         A of OP 4.04.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              The Project would not finance activities that
                                                                         would affect forests or communities that depend
                                                                         on their services.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              The Project would not finance activities that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         would involve purchase or use of pesticides or
                                                                         other agricultural chemicals.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              The Project would not finance activities that
                         BP 4.11                                         would affect physical cultural resources as
                                                                         defined in the introduction of OP 4.11. The
                                                                         ESMF includes guidance for appropriate action to
                                                                         be taken in case any chance finds would occur
                                                                         during project implementation.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              The Project would not finance activities that
                                                                         would affect indigenous peoples.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No              The Project would not finance activities that
                         4.12                                            would imply involuntary resettlement or direct
                                                                         economic and social impacts as defined in OP
                                                                         4.12.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              The Project would not finance any type of dams
                                                                         or activities that would depend on existing dams.
                         Projects on International         No              The Project would not finance activities that
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            would affect international waterways.



                                                                 Page 5 of 9
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                    There are no disputed areas within the Project
                            7.60                                                  area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed Project is classified as Category B given the small-scale, temporary, and reversible
                              impacts that could result from construction sub-projects carried out primarily by up to 25 manual
                              laborers. Afforestation of stream banks and construction of gabions to prevent landslides are
                              examples of typical eligible works under the project. Overall, the sub-projects will most likely fall
                              under Category C as defined under OP/BP 4.01. No works or activities that would meet the criteria
                              for Category A will be financed under this project and none are envisioned. All sub-projects will
                              fall under category D of minor impacts under the national EA legislation that do not require
                              specific environmental assessments.

                              Beyond potential oversight by national/local government, the Project’s environmental specialist
                              will secure appropriate supervision in the field. All category A, B or C projects of potential greater
                              impacts based on the national categorization will be excluded as detailed in the ESMF. These
                              include e.g. water and sanitation projects, projects impacting protected areas, and solid waste
                              management. The project will not support the construction of new roads, road extensions or other
                              infrastructure. Road works, subject to proposal approval, will be limited to repair and
                              rehabilitation of existing infrastructure. Positive potential impacts will be expected from
                              environmental sub-projects aimed at promoting conservation and sustainable use of natural
                              resources and improving environmental conditions of the population.

                              In order to comply with the OP 4.01, the Project has an Environmental and Social Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Framework (ESMF). The ESMF describes the relevant legal and institutional framework as well
                              as the institutional arrangements for project implementation and its socio-environmental
                              management in particular. Further, it provides guidance on classifying and evaluating proposed
                              employment activities according to a typology that forms part of the OM for sub-project screening,
                              design, approval, implementation, and closing. The ESMF describes potential negative
                              environmental impacts that different types of eligible sub-projects could cause and provides
                              guidance on respective management measures to prevent and mitigate them.

                              The principal aspects taken into account within the ESMF are:
                              A.      Sub-projects’ eligibility criteria: Given the project characteristics with regard to the profile
                              of the beneficiaries and the objectives of contributing to the improvement of their employability,
                              the sub-projects must meet the following basic criteria:
                              1.      Be of community interest.
                              2.      Generate public benefits.
                              3.      Full implement ability within six months.
                              4.      Activities of a scale that imply a maximum of 25 beneficiary workers of the TEP.
                              5.      Be of low complexity: (i) no need for special technical/structural designs; (ii) not need for
                              specialized studies such as on soil, seismology, etc.; (iii) no category A or B activities as per the
                              national legislation; and (iv) no need for sophisticated implementation mechanisms which would
                              exclude participation of the beneficiaries.


                                                                          Page 6 of 9
                          6.       Sub-projects that require intensive use of unskilled labor.

                          The eligibility criteria ensure that only sub-projects with low negative impacts will be supported.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Further, sub-project preparation activities include consultation mechanisms to ensure
                          responsiveness to local considerations and inputs.

                          The sub-projects’ cycle, in regard to environmental and social management, evolves as follows:

                          1.       Orientation and support to local groups that plan to prepare sub-project proposal(s)
                          involve an environmental and a social specialist that guide sub-project proponents in identifying
                          potential environmental and social impacts and incorporate pertinent prevention and mitigation
                          measures as needed. At this stage, any potential involuntary resettlement would be reviewed and
                          screened out. In addition to a checklist for sub-project review by environmental and construction
                          specialists, consultation mechanisms will be included into the sub-project design phase to consider
                          local community and beneficiary perspectives.
                          2.       Sub-project proposal review and approval includes environmental and social aspects.
                          Proposals must consider potential licensing requirements and include costs for adequate equipment
                          and management measures.
                          3.       During sub-project implementation, workers will receive proper equipment and training
                          provided by the designated team members of the Territorial Support Units (UTAs) prior to start of
                          implementation. These specialists will also supervise project implementation and recommend
                          measures as appropriate to ensure adequate environmental and health and safety management.
                          4.       Closure phase: The environmental and social specialists from the UTAs will ensure that
                          the measures to clean up sub-project sites have been performed adequately.

                           Particular emphasis will be given to workers’ safety, which will be ensured through use of
                           adequate personal protection equipment and training in health and safety measures and procedures
                           during the induction phase of work teams. The health and safety standards of the World Bank/IFC
                           as well as national regulations will be considered as reflected in the ESMF and OM.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The Project is not expected to have any potential large scale issues or irreversible impacts as no
                           major works will be financed. Typical works anticipated will relate to improvements to existing
                           infrastructure on a small scale. Screening processes and management measures to assure proper
                           application of safeguard considerations are detailed in the ESMF and included in the OM as
                           described above.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           To avoid or minimize potential adverse socio-environmental impacts of sub-projects, the project
                           applies a negative list that restricts the nature and scope of proposals to be presented in
                           competitive selection processes.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Beyond the ESMF, four basic aspects comprise the borrower’s strategy to address proper socio-
                           environmental management of sub-project implementation: 1) the PCU includes an experienced
                           environmental specialist who has the primary responsibility of adequate environmental monitoring
                           of project activities. The Project would also engage and support municipal environmental units


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                           (UGAM) to participate in its environmental management; 2) a detailed OM provides guidelines
                           based on the ESMF to be followed during the sub-projects’ cycle; 3) provision of induction
                           courses for sub-project implementing entities (LOs) to train them in the process of presenting sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project proposals and ensure inclusion/use of adequate socio-environmental and health and safety
                           measures and/or equipment; and 4) provision of training for teams of workers regarding
                           environmental management and health and safety. The Project’s environmental risks are
                           considered low.

                           The induction course for LOs will provide a detailed training to level the capacities of different
                           institutions to present proposals that will be competitively selected. The induction course will be
                           provided by the project environmental and social specialists to leave capacities installed both at
                           the institutional level (UTAs), as well as at the local level. The course will provide an overview of
                           the institutional and legal framework that regulates the activities to be undertaken in the sub-
                           projects as described in the ESMF, which will guide the evaluation of the proposals. In the case of
                           presentation of proposals with potential adverse impacts, they will be highlighted and special
                           attention will be paid to the complementary pieces of information to be attached to the
                           presentation, such as suggested mitigation measures by the implementing institution. Each UTA
                           that is supporting and supervising sub-projects includes a team specialist that will have specific
                           environmental functions and capacities included in his/her Terms of Reference (ToR).
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The main stakeholders are the non-profit seeking institutions such as municipalities, non-
                           governmental organizations and other civil society organizations responsible for presenting sub-
                           project proposals to develop community-oriented works or services. The LOs in particular will be
                           key stakeholders for which the above mentioned induction courses will be designed for. Sub-
                           projects will be consulted during their design phase with the beneficiaries of local communities
                           and governments. This will ensure that local conditions, potential nuisances, and other
                           environmental and social impacts will be communicated effectively and considered in sub-project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           design and respective environmental management plans, as applicable. The induction course plus
                           the public availability of the ESMF attribute to make the applicable safeguard aspects readily
                           available for stakeholders. The ESMF was disclosed in-country on September 20, 2013 and
                           through the World Bank InfoShop on October 9, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         11-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      09-Oct-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Juan Martin Moreno
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Theresa Jones (SM)                          Date: 07-Nov-2013




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
