INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 180
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Apr-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Zambia                      Project ID:  P149091
Project Name: Lusaka Sanitation Project (P149091)
Task Team       Michael John Webster
Leader(s):
Estimated        17-Mar-2015                Estimated    22-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWADR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Health (10%), Sanitation (90%)
Theme(s):       Urban services and housing for the poor (40%), Municipal finance (15%), City-
wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (15%), Polluti on management and
environmental health (30%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      78.90             Total Bank Financing:    65.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           13.90
International Development Association (IDA)                                  65.00
Total                                                                        78.90
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective it to increase access to sanitation services in selected areas of
Lusaka and strengthen LWSC's capacity to manage sanitation services.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 11


﻿The project will have the following three components:
Component 1: Sewerage improvements (US$ 38 million). The objective of this component is to
upgrade and expand sewerage collection system in the Ngwerere and Manchinchi sewersheds located
within the Lusaka Province and which connects to the Ngwerere sewage ponds before discharging
into the tributaries of the Zambezi River. A sequenced (phased) approach will be used in
implementing this component starting with upgrading and expanding selected sewage collection
system as prioritized in the Lusaka Sanitation Master Plan. These prioritized investments, which will
*         be implemented during the first year of the project implementation phase, were selected based on the
following criteria: (i) number of people serviced by the project closing date (access to sanitation); (ii)
environmental impact (mitigation of groundwater and surface water pollution); (iii) compliance with
social safeguards (resettlement and land acquisition completed); and (iv) frequent flooding/lack of
drainage in target areas (makes on-site sanitation solutions impossible).
Year 1 investments will include:
*      CSE-23: Collection System Expansion Kafue Road, Manchinchi Sewershed. The 112 ha area
is located in the south-west of Lusaka and extends from the roundabout at the southern end of Cairo
Road to the junction of Kafue Road with Chifundo Road. It is a growing commercial area including a
large shopping center in the north, having currently on-site sanitation systems. The geology of the
area is unfavorable for on-site solutions with a shallow rock layer, a high groundwater table and the
area is prone to flooding. The proposed sewer system will not only serve this industrial area but in
future receive sewerage from the Kuomboka sewer service area (SCE-25), being another priority
sub-project identified in the Master Plan. Additional individual water supply connections will be
provided in parallel to sewerage (but not financed out of the project). The sub-project includes
construction of 7.6 km of sewers of dia. 300 to 600 mm and provides 132 commercial enterprises
access to sanitation. One collector on each side of the road is planned with the eastern one being able
to take up the future flows from Kuomboka. Two pumping stations will be constructed with
capacities of 11 1/s and 58 1/s lifting the sewage without the need of force mains. The collected
0
Q)       wastewater will discharge into the existing Manchinchi main collector ending at the Manchinchi
wastewater treatment plant. The collector (CSU-09) as well as the treatment plant will be upgraded
under the EIB project.
*      CSE-08: Collection System Expansion Emmasdale and Chaisa, Ngwerere Sewershed. Part of
Emmasdale is already sewered and the project will connect the remaining area of 156 ha. The
residential and commercial facilities existing in the area are currently served by pit latrines and septic
tanks. The area is moderately flood prone and population density is medium. The number of people
in the service area is about 12,900 plus 23 commercial connections, and it is assumed, within the life
of the project, that half of these households will connect to the sewer. This assumption is based on
estimates by LWSC which is based on the enquiries for connections that have been made by
residents. The sub-project includes construction of 15.1 km of gravity sewers of dia. 200 to 400, as
well as a pumping station for 8 1/s and 10 m plus a 350 m long force main of dia. 200 mm. The
collected sewage will be discharged into the Ngwerere West Interceptor which will be upgraded
under this project (CSU-05) which is followed by the Ngwerere Downstream collector to be
upgraded under CSU-07 which ends at the Ngwerere Sewage Ponds.
*      CSU-05: Upgrade of Ngwerere West Interceptor, Ngwerere Sewershed. This existing
interceptor starts 700 m west of the Great North Road and runs east till it discharges into the
Page 2 of 11


﻿Ngwerere Downstream collector. It follows a stream which is part of the Bombay Drainage system
and runs within the stream in Chaisa and Mutambe (Marapodi) locations. The collector is asbestos
cement which is 40 years old and has inadequate capacity. A significant amount of the wastewater
collected gets lost, polluting the stream which is a raw water supply source for Chongwe Town. Its
)         intake faces serious problems of algae and aquatic weeds. The project includes a railway crossing
and proposes partly realigning and upgrading of 2.8 km of the collector of dia. 600 and 700 mm due
to informal settlements.
Year 2 to 5 investments will be network expansion in Chawama, Kuomboka and Garden, upgrade of
Ngwerere Downstream Collector and upgrade and extension of Ngwerere Sewage Ponds, to be
confirmed during implementation.
Component 2: On-site sanitation (US$ 13 million). The objective of this component is to develop a
comprehensive response to the on-site sanitation challenge facing Lusaka and support on-site
sanitation services and systems in priority areas. This component will focus on priority peri-urban
areas that will not be sewered in the medium- to long-term due to technical and financial
considerations. Investments will include a support fund for on-site sanitation facilities, support to the
development of FSM infrastructure and service providers, construction of a number of DEWATS
systems and sanitation and hygiene promotion. The areas to be covered under this component will
be selected after the completion of the feasibility study.
Component 3: Institutional strengthening (US$ 9 million). This component will provide technical
assistance (TA) to enhance LWSC's capacity to implement the project, operate and maintain the
facilities going forward, and to support the reforms needed to deliver sanitation services effectively
and efficiently and to respond better to customer demand. This will include: (i) project management
support to LWSC to implement the project, (ii) TA to strengthen the capacity of LWSC to provide
sanitation services and preparation funds for future investments and equipment for sewer
maintenance and labs, and (iii) building capacity for monitoring program implementation and
impacts in LWSC, LCC, MCDMCH and MoH.
O
U         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
O
The project's area of influence covers the Manchinchi and Ngwerere sewersheds which are located in
the western part of Lusaka city within the Lusaka Province and within the Chongwe River watershed.
The Chongwe River is a tributary of the Zambezi River, which has been categorized as an
international waterway for purposes of the policy. The Chongwe River is a source of water supply to
a small portion of the Zambian population, and one that is at risk of increased pollution from various
forms of pollution including fecal discharge, and marks the western boundary of the Lower Zambia
National Park before it discharges into the Zambezi. The Chunga River drains into the Kafue River
while the Ngwerere River drains into the Chongwe River, both of which eventually drain into the
Zambezi River. The surface water quality within the Ngwerere and Chunga River is negatively
impacted by the effluent discharges from households. Monitoring by the Zambia Water Resource's
Authority indicates that the ground water quality has been negatively affected by fecal waste from
on-site sanitation (especially from high density areas as evidenced by fecal coliforms and high
nitrates associated with pit latrines within the project area). The project area is low lying and has
poor drainage, making some areas, like Kanyama, prone to flooding and therefore not appropriate for
on-site generic sanitation interventions
Year 1 investments will include sewer network expansion in Emmasdale and Chaisa neighborhoods
Page 3 of 11


﻿and Kafue Road Interceptor and sewer network upgrade of Ngwerere Western Interceptor. Year 2 to
5 investments will involve expansion of the sewer network in Chawama-Kuomboko and Garden,
upgrade of Ngwerere Downstream Collector and upgrade and extension of Ngwerere Sewage Ponds.
O
)         The project is also likely to result in minimal involuntary resettlement and disruption of sources of
livelihood. Some vendors on road reserve may be forced to relocate to new area, but within the same
vicinity. A total of 1 vendor market center with an average of 120 people may be encountered by
sewer pipeline per subproject, though the relocation will be temporary. Experiences from other
projects in related areas are that there will be pit latrines and wells which may complicate excavation
for sewers. Pit latrine contents tend to affect the area around the toilet making excavations around a
health risk as often in such areas hand excavation becomes the most appropriate approach due to
limited space. Occupational safety and health of the employees working on the sewer system and the
community are also important aspects. Negative environment and social impacts may include: (i)
water pollution (contamination of both ground and surface waters); (ii) issues relating to informal
settlements; (iii) temporary disruption of livelihood activities; (iv) occupational safety and health;
and (v) public safety and health.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Paula F. Lytle (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The project will largely generate positive impacts
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                contributing to better public health through increased
access to sanitation facilities, reduced incidences of water
borne diseases and awareness on good hygiene practices.
The Project is classified as environment Category B,
requiring a partial environmental assessment. The
potential negative impacts associated with the project
Q)                                             activities will occur during the construction and
operational phases of the project. During the construction
phase, the likely temporary impacts will largely be
associated with civil works emanating from digging of
trenches to install the sewer pipes. . The anticipated
negative impacts will be localized, site-specific and small-
scale. These may include erosion and sediment control,
generation of construction related solid waste (spoil), dust
and noise, limited and reversible vegetation clearing due
to trenching and oil spillage from construction equipment
and machinery.
During the operational phase, the principal environmental
risks are largely related to environmental and human
health effects from effluent discharges. Preliminary
assessment of the likely impacts of the effluent to the
water quality of the Zambezi River indicates long term
improvement in the water quality of the effluent
discharged into the Zambezi River. Incremental
Page 4 of 11


﻿wastewater to be collected will be treated in the newly
rehabilitated wastewater treatment plants to comply with
the national BOD5 standard of 50mg/L before discharging
into the Ngwerere River which discharges into the
Chongwe River and finally into the Zambezi River.
Given that the nature, scope and location of activities
related to on-site sanitation will be determined during
implementation of the project, as well as the exact paths
for laying the sewer pipes, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared,
consulted upon and has been disclosed in-country and at
the InfoShop before appraisal. In addition, Environmental
and Social Management Plan (ESMP) with appropriate
mitigation measures has been prepared for all year 1
investments. Other future sub-projects will be screened,
assessed and site-specific environmental assessment
carried out during the implementation stage of the project
according to the procedures described in the ESMF.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No           A review of the critical natural habitat within the Lusaka
4.04                                  Province, indicates that all listed significant natural
habitats are not located within the footprint (area of
influence) of the project, and that the project activities
will not result in any significant conversion or
degradation of critical natural habitats including wetlands.
The project design includes infrastructure design
measures to ensure that impacts to these areas are
minimized.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No           The project areas do not include any forested areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No            The scope of the project will not involve the use of
pesticides.
Physical Cultural        No           The project activities will have no impacts on Physical
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  Cultural Resources. The project areas show that they are
already impacted with the construction of existing sewers,
road network and residential areas such that the chances
of coming across physical cultural resources are remote.
However, the project ESMF has incorporated chance find
procedures for construction contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes          The project areas are densely populated, possibly
OP/BP 4.12                            including informal settlements, existing infrastructure like
tarred roads, vendor markets, electricity and
communication network. The project is expected to
disturb settlements, requiring temporary or permanent
Page 5 of 11


﻿resettlement, requiring land acquisition, and is likely to
disrupt livelihood activities and needs to coexist with
existing infrastructure. A Resettlement Policy Framework
has been prepared, consulted upon and will be publicly
disclosed in Zambia and in the Bank InfoShop. A
Resettlement Action Plan was prepared for two sections
of the year 1 investments and has been disclosed in
Zambia and the Bank's Infoshop. One of the year 1
investments has not yet been finalized in terms of design
details; when finalized, an abbreviated RAP will be
prepared for that section. Preliminary possible impacts
have been identified. Future subprojects including year
2-5 investments will be screened, assessed, consulted
upon and disclosed before beginning civil works in the
project.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project will not support the construction of new dams
4.37                                 or entail rehabilitation of existing dams.
Projects on International  Yes       OP 7.50 is triggered because the project areas lie within
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 the Chongwe River Watershed. The Chongwe River is a
tributary of the Zambezi River, which has been
categorized as an international waterway for purposes of
the policy. The Chongwe River is a source of water
supply to a small portion of the Zambian population, and
one that is at risk of increased pollution from various
forms of pollution including fecal discharge. The
Chongwe River marks the western boundary of the Lower
Zambia National Park before it discharges into the
Zambezi.
The proposed project will finance: (i) additional 82km of
sewer lines and collectors to the existing sewage
collection system; (ii) construction of three pumping
stations with capacities of 11 1/s, 581/s, and 81/s
respectively; and (iii) upgrading and expansion of the
Ngwerere sewage ponds from a current capacity of 8.3
ML to 16.6 ML. This scenario is considered minor since
it does not exceed the design capacity of the upgraded
wastewater treatment plant in terms of the volume of the
hydraulic load.
Preliminary assessment of the likely impacts of the
effluent to the water quality of the Zambezi River
indicates improvement in the water quality of the effluent
discharged into the Zambezi River. Incremental
wastewater to be collected will be treated in the newly
rehabilitated wastewater treatment plants to comply with
the national BOD5 standard of 50mg/L before discharging
Page 6 of 11


﻿into the Ngwerere River which discharges into the
Chongwe River and finally into the Zambezi River.
Therefore, the exception to the riparian notification
applies as the upgraded wastewater treatment plant,
receiving less than the design capacity will meet the
national BOD5 standard of 50mg/L indicating that the
water quality in the Zambezi River will not be adversely
affected.
LWSC has sought exemption for the requirement for
notification of riparian states prior to appraisal and this
has been communicated to the RVP for approval.
Projects in Disputed     No           The project location is not within a disputed area.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is classified as Category B, and triggers Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01). The
construction of (i) additional 82km of sewer lines and collectors to the existing sewage collection
system; (ii) construction of three pumping stations with capacities of 11 1/s, 581/s, and 81/s
respectively; and (iii) upgrading and expansion of the Ngwerere sewage ponds from a current
capacity of 8.3 ML to 16.6 ML will not generate any potential large scale, significant and/or
irreversible impacts.
The potential negative impacts associated with the project activities will occur during the
construction and operational phases of the project. During the construction phase, the likely
temporary impacts will largely be associated with civil works emanating from digging of trenches
to install the sewer pipes. The anticipated negative impacts will be localized, site-specific and
small-scale. These may include erosion and sediment control, generation of construction related
solid waste (spoil), dust and noise, limited and reversible vegetation clearing due to trenching and
oil spillage from construction equipment and machinery.
During the operational phase, the principal environmental risks are largely related to
environmental and human health effects from effluent discharges. Preliminary assessment of the
likely impacts of the effluent to the water quality of the Zambezi River indicates long term
improvement in the water quality of the effluent discharged into the Zambezi River. Incremental
wastewater to be collected will be treated in the newly rehabilitated wastewater treatment plants to
comply with the national BOD5 standard of 50mg/L before discharging into the Ngwerere River
which discharges into the Chongwe River and finally into the Zambezi River.
The safeguards issues relate to major road cuttings, temporary vendor markets disruptions, co-
existing or restoration of infrastructure, temporary disruptions of gate entrances and trenching on
road reserve greens. Household trees, gardens and some boundary fences may be affected,
especially those that are in encroached areas. In the unforeseen event, there may be some house
demolitions in unplanned areas. Road cuttings will have an effect of traffic congestions during
Page 7 of 11


﻿traffic diversions. General indications are that there will not be interference with electricity and
communication network though about billboards will need temporary relocation and reinstatement
afterwards. The negative impacts from this project are temporary, site specific and reversible.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The potential negative long-term impact from sewer network expansion is the increase effluent
generation by about 7 mega liters, which will in turn increase surface water pollution load from the
sewage treatment systems. This is expected to be counter balanced by the expected positive long-
term impact of such sewer network on groundwater quality and public health considering that all
waste associated with such discharge was being directed to the groundwater resources through
soak away and pit latrines. Considering that it is more difficult to rectify ground water
contamination as compared to surface water, the net impact from the sewer network expansion is
expected to be positive.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
For major road cuttings, the alternative is to use underground tunnel across the major roads as
compared to road cuttings. Consultation between LWSC and RDA will arrive at the final most
sustainable option. Consultation between LWSC, RDA, ZAMTEL and ZESCO will avoid
relocation of communication and electricity infrastructure by efficiently using the available road
reserve. This will leave LWSC to deal with billboards, which are expected to be a better relocation
option. In residential and restricted areas, manual trenching will be employed as compared to
mechanical trenching, thereby reducing the impact zone.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project will be implemented by the Lusaka Water and Sanitation Corporation (LWSC). An
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and an Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP) have been prepared, consulted upon and publicly disclosed according
to the Zambia EIA regulations and the World Bank's Safeguard policies. The instruments spell
out the institutional roles and responsibilities for implementing the mitigation measures described
in the ESMP. With regard to resettlement, the project areas are densely populated, possibly
including informal settlements, existing infrastructure like tarred roads, vendor markets, electricity
and communication network. The project is expected to disturb settlements, requiring temporary
or permanent resettlement, requiring land acquisition, and is likely to disrupt livelihood activities
and needs to coexist with existing infrastructure. A Resettlement Policy Framework has been
prepared, consulted upon and publicly disclosed in Zambia and in the Bank InfoShop. A
Resettlement Action Plan was prepared for two sections of the year 1 investments and has been
disclosed in Zambia and the Bank's Infoshop. One of the year 1 investments has not yet been
finalized in terms of design details; when finalized, an abbreviated RAP will be prepared for that
section. Future subprojects including year 2-5 investments will be screened, assessed, consulted
upon and disclosed before beginning civil works in the project.LWSC will have the overall
responsibility to implement, monitor and report on the provisions contained in the safeguards
instruments. The country's legal and institutional framework for environmental and social
management is relatively good. The Government has committed itself to support environmental
management in the country and has instituted a structure for this purpose. The Zambia
Environment Management Agency (ZEMA) is responsible for supervising, managing and
monitoring environmental issues in the country. LWSC undertook the preparation of safeguards
instruments itself, demonstrating commitment and ownership of the necessary measures for
Page 8 of 11


﻿mitigation. However, LWSC's capacity to handle safeguard issues is generally weak, although
commitment to implementing safeguard provisions is notable. The project will seek to address
this constrain by making provision in the project to strengthen the safeguard capacity through the
recruitment of safeguard specialist. All contractors will be required to follow site-specific
O
Q)         management plans agreed and incorporated into all construction contracts. Mitigation for
construction works will be guided by method statements for general environmental issues such as
sediment and erosion control, noise and duct control, as well as safety and health of workers.
During preparation, LWSC was directly responsible for preparation of the abbreviated RAP and
the hands-on process has been an initial step in capacity building.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
As part of the project preparation process as well as during the preparation of the ESMF and RPF,
stakeholder consultations were carried out using formal and informal channels. The local
leadership and community were consulted through meetings at the Donchi Kubeba market and
vending areas along the Kafue Road. Community meetings were also held in the Ngwerere area.
The Government departments, business representatives, community leaders and NGOs were
consulted through a stakeholder meeting at Mulungushi Conference Centre. A targeted Kafue
Road business cluster meeting was conducted at the LWSC offices. Newspapers were used to
provide information on the project and its components. Focus groups were held with project
beneficiaries.
The documents were disclosed in Lusaka in the Times of Zambia on March 26, 2015, and in the
Bank's InfoShop on March 27, 2015.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              27-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           26-Mar-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Zambia                                                   26-Mar-2015
Comments: Disclosed to public press, published in Times of Zambia on March 26.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              27-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           26-Mar-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Zambia                                                   26-Mar-2015
Comments: Disclosed to public press, published in Times of Zambia on March 26.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Page 9 of 11


﻿C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?   Yes [  ]  No [  ]   NA [ X ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA [    ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                  Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA [    ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Michael John Webster
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (SA)           Date: 06-Apr-2015
Page 10 of 1I


﻿Practice Manager/     Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (PMGR)      Date: 08-Apr-2015
Manager:
P
Pae10f1


